THE METHOD OF Salvation.

In TWO PARTS.

I. A Sinner's Conversion to Saving Faith in God through Christ.

II. The Progress of a Believer from his Conversion to his Perfection, under
the Work of Sanctification.

By JOHN WARREN, M. A. Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Hatfield Broad-Oak in
Essex.

LONDON: Printed for T. C. and are to be Sold by Richard Simpson, at the Three
Trouts in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVI.

THE METHOD OF SALVATION.

THE Method of Salvation.
THE Way and Method of God's working upon Men to save them eternally, is to be
attended according to the dependence which one part of that Blessed Undertaking
has upon another, as the Holy Scripture sets it forth; and that partly in the
Account which it gives of the nature of the several impressions made upon the
Soul in order to its Ultimate Happiness; and partly in the Examples of Persons
whose Converson to God, and Progress toward Heaven is therein reported. And
though it pleases God to glorify his manifold Wisdom as to Circumstances, Time,
and Measures, in this, as in all his Works, yet usually he observes the same
Order in his Saving Operations on the Souls of men; as Mar. 4.28, 29. And
hereunto the ordinary Experiences of the People of God bear witness.

In handling this Method, we may observe,

1. The Degrees or Steps by which a Soul is brought into the estate of
Salvation, i. e. till he believes in Jesus Christ.

2. The Moments of his Progress in Grace till he comes to Glory.

1. Of the former.

The First Step or Degree, is,

A serious and solemn Consideration which the Sinner takes of his own Estate in
reference to God. When it pleases God in his great mercy to take hold on a
Sinner that he may bring him home to himself, he makes choice of some fit time
and means to press him upon a sad and serious thoughtfulness of his Eternal
Condition, and the present state of his Soul in reference to it. Ezekiel. 18.14,
28. He considers, and turns -- This is the first good tidings we hear of a
Sinner, He considers. Sinners of themselves are wild and careless Creatures,
forgetting God and their own Souls; Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that
forget God, etc. And so God complains of the Israelites, Isa. 1.4. My people
does not consider. They are rash and heady in their ways, not thinking soberly
what they do, nor what is like to be the end of it, Jer. 8.6. But when God
undertakes the saving of a Soul, he takes him aside, and makes him lay his hand
as it were upon his heart, and bethink himself where-about he is, which way he
is a-going, and what is like to be his latter end.

Here observe, 1. How the Sinner is brought to this Consideration: And 2. How
he proceeds in it.

1. That which puts the Soul upon this Consideration, is first and principally
the Word of God, the grand Instrument and Engine in the whole work of
Salvation, whereby he calls all men everywhere, and commands them to repent.
Thus says the Lord, Consider your ways. And by thus saying, he makes men
consider them. It is the Word, that awakens the sleepy Souls of secure Sinners,
and makes them look about them. It is the Word, that makes them remember God
and themselves, and enquire how the Case stands between him and them; and
without its admonition they never go about this Work to any purpose. The
Nations that have not the Word made known to them, forget God, and forgetting
him, can never take any effectual cognizance of their own Estate in reference
to him.

2. Secondarily, and under the Word, there are diverse things that God uses as
means to induce men to this Consideration of their Spiritual Estate, according
to his own good pleasure. Sometimes a sharp Affliction makes the Patient
consider, how he has offended God, and how unable he is to bear his
displeasure, but in those touches of his Hand which he now feels; and
consequently how miserable he must needs be, if all his Wrath should break out
upon him. Thus God seals Instruction to the Sinner by his afflictive
Providence, J^b 33.16. and makes him when bound in those Cords, to study and
ponder those things, which while he was well, he little regarded. -- Sometimes
the Sinner is put upon this Consideration by observing the Complaints which
others make, and the Fears which they express about the Estate of their Souls.
For, thinks he, if these men be in such danger, it is good for me to look about
me; -- Sometimes, yea very often, the Care and Diligence of Godly men to work
out their Salvation, induces Sinners that observe it, to remember themselves,
and take their own Estate into consideration. If so much care and pains be
necessary to the saving of a Soul, then sure it concerns me to be careful for
my self. I have a Soul to save as well as others; and if the saving of a Soul
requires so much attendance, it will be ill for me to neglect it, says the
hitherto-secure and inconsiderate Sinner: Thus Parents, Masters, Neighbors, by
following closely the Work of their own Salvation, may do much toward the
Conversion of their Children, Servants, and Neighbors. And there are some
Remarkable Instances of this kind that might be here inserted, but for the
study of brevity.

2. Now for the manner and order of the Soul's proceeding in this
Consideration, it admits of much variety. But according to the Condition of the
Subject Matter, and the End whereto such Consideration serves, it may be
briefly thus stated:

1. The Soul considers what the Law of God requires of Man, and how he has
transgrest and broken it; what exact Holiness and Purity God demands of him,
and how far he has fallen short of it in thought, word, and deed. Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn. In order to a true Conversion, the
Sinner must examine his ways, and consider where, and how they have been
faulty; which he can never do, but by comparing them with that Rule which God
has given men to walk by: He must enquire by the direction of the Law what he
has not done that he should have done; and what he has done contrary to it:
There is no returning to God till a man be duly informed of his departing from
him, nor any clear understanding of that, but by a serious and severe comparing
of his Life with the Law. For by the Law is the knowledge of Sin. Thus men come
to know themselves to be Offenders, and to have displeased and provoked God.
But here usually the Sinner's thoughts are very much confined to some one sin
or other, in which he apprehends himself especially to have offended: As the
Jews in Acts 2. had their Eye especially upon that sin of their Crucifying the
Lord of Life, as indeed well they might, it being beyond expression heinous.
And the Jailor, Acts 16. was doubtless especially mindful of his Cruelty to the
Apostles the evening before his Conversion. -- Yea, it is observed yet farther,
that many times the Sin that mostly takes up the thoughts of such a Soul at
first, is some sin that has less of malignity against God in it, than many
other which the Party has been guilty of, as Lying, Sabbath-breaking,
Disobedience to Parents, or some external act of Sin in which he has been more
carried by his sensual inclination, than maliciously wicked.

2. He considers the severe Judgment of God denounced against Sinners, and his
own concernment in it. The Word says, The soul that sins shall dye, and makes
Eternal death the wages of every sin, Romans 6. Yea, the Word declares all men by
Nature dead in trespasses and sins, and children of wrath; and hereupon the
Sinner reasons thus with himself, Is there not a reality in these Threatening
words? And do they not take effect upon Sinners according to the plain sense
and import of them? What may I think then of my self? Am I liable to all this
danger, or have I any fence against it? If I should now dye, as I know not how
soon I may, what were like to come of me? If I be under the force of these
Threatenings, woe unto me! And what have I to plead against them? If I was by
Nature a Child of wrath, how got I out of that condition, or am I yet in the
gall of bitterness and bands of iniquity? Thus the Soul studies and examines
his own estate. And this is the First step toward Conversion; Consideration.

The Second step or degree of this work is, a strong Conviction of a miserable
and perishing Estate. But before we come directly to consider that work, we
must take notice of some hindrances or diversions, by reason of which many men
are taken off, even at the first step, and never come to a sound Conviction at
all, and others are long e're they come at it.

1. Some grow weary of the unpleasant work of Self-Consideration, and let it
fall before ever they have brought it to any Convincing issue. This is very
ordinary with Persons a little shaken under a Sermon, or griped by Conscience
under an Affliction, or scared with the thoughts of Death, to ask the Question,
What estate they are in? But the Subject being very ungrateful to Nature, they
never stay their Studies upon it, to bring it to any determinate conclusion: As
Pilate asked, What is truth? But would not stay to hear the Answer. They
translate their thoughts to other matters, as being loath to endure the pains
of a thorough Examination of themselves.

2. From the Consideration of themselves, some turn aside to the survey of
others whom they think to be as great, or greater Sinners, and so content
themselves in hope to speed as well as they. They observe many as bad as they,
or worse, who yet are confident of a safe estate; yea, they are knowing
Persons, and likely to understand their own condition as well as any; they are
Learned men, it may be, Ministers, that of all others should see if there be
any danger in their way; and besides they are well thought of generally by
their Neighbors, and few or none seem to question their estate: Why then (says
the a-little-startled Sinner) should I further disquiet my self with sad and
doubtful apprehensions of my condition? I see no probability but I may speed as
well as thousands that are round about me; I Will even take up and run the common
hazard of my Neighbors, and of Mankind in general. Thus Consideration is many
times obstructed and falls short of a sound Conviction.

But where God goes on with the design of Saving a Soul, he holds the Mind
close, and keeps it from the vain study of other things and Persons, till he
has made the Sinner plainly see himself Wretched, Miserable, and Perishing; and
that is the second degree of this work, which comes now to be considered.

This Conviction is the proper effect of a well prosecuted Self-consideration,
and the conclusion naturally issuing from these two premises well attended; 1.
The demands of the Law from every man. 2. The Judgment of God against every
Offender (of which before). He that well considers these, and duly applies to
himself as his own concernment, must needs understand himself to be in a
perishing estate, without the use of some proper and sufficient Remedy. Thus
the Prodigal was kept pondering his condition till he perceived himself
perishing for hunger, Luke 15.17. When he came to himself, -- he had been
ranging abroad from himself as well as from his Father's house, and unmindful
of his greatest concernments; where he was, which way he was going, and what
was like to come of him, was none of his study all this while: But now at
length he returned home to himself, and took his own estate into a sober
consideration; upon which he found plainly that he was like to dye for want of
Bread, I perish for hunger. -- So the Jews, Acts 2. were held under the sad
thoughts of what they had done and deserved, till they were pierced at the
heart; that is, they found themselves dead men, as a man that is stabb d to the
heart, for whom there is, as we use to say, but one way. -- This account also
the Apostle gives of himself, Romans 7.4. That when the commandment came, sin
revived, and he died; he perceived that vigor and Soul-destroying power of sin
in himself, which he was not aware of before, and plainly saw himself a dying
man, Spiritually undone and perishing. -- The like work we also see in the
Jailor, Acts 16. What must I do to be saved? That word (to be Saved) plainly
implies a sense and deep Conviction of a lost estate, that he was at present an
undone man. Thus the poor Sinner hangs, as it were, over the mouth of Hell in
his own apprehension, and sees nothing more likely than that he should
presently fall into it; he plainly hears the Law threatening him with Death
Eternal, sees God frowning upon him, and destruction ready to swallow him up;
he that a few days ago thought himself as safe and as much in favor with God
as any in the world, and it may be, was secure of Soul-concernments, never
troubled himself with thoughts of Eternity, and took it for a point of folly,
and a beginning of madness in other men, to disturb their minds with fear of
Hell and Condemnation, is now become a miserable and perishing man in his own
Judgment, and of all men alive the most likely to be Damned Eternally.

The Third step or degree of this work is, a Soul-Afflicting Humiliation, a
work made up of terror and sorrow under the apprehension of the wrath of God,
and the sense of a perishing estate. A deep sorrow and anguish of Spirit,
seizing upon the Sinner under the Conviction before spoken of. This work is
commonly called Legal Repentance, because it is a deep sorrow and trouble about
sin, depending upon that sense which a man has of his condemnation under the
Law: But though it be not that sorrow which is called Godly sorrow, yet no man
attains the true Spirit of Godliness, till first he has had a taste of this
sorrow.

This is so natural and necessary a product of Conviction, that no man can
totally escape it, that has once known what it is to be convinced of Sin and
Misery. -- And yet there is one way that Persons strongly convinced of the evil
and danger of their estate have to divert themselves from that pressing trouble
and anguish which is usually the effect of a sound Conviction, and that is, an
hope of being brought over into a better estate hereafter, though they are now
in such a condition as wherein to dye, were certainly to go to Hell, yet they
hope they shall have the Grace at one time or other e're they dye, to return to
God, and make their Peace with him. -- The Example of Foelix is very apposite,
who being convinced of his bad estate so far, as that he fell a trembling under
Paul's Doctrine, yet shifted off his trouble by adjourning his cares to another
time, and stopped the mouth of his Conscience by promising the Apostle a
further Audience, Acts 24.25. Some Persons are so much convinced that they are
in an evil and perishing estate, that they will not stick to say, They think
verily if they should dye as they are, they should be damned, and perish
without remedy: And yet they are very little troubled at the matter, because
they hope they shall turn to God, and get Peace with him yet in time to come.

But where God undertakes the great work of Salvation, Conviction is always
attended with a deep Humiliation, and Contrition of Spirit; as the Jews in Acts
2. were pierced to the very heart, wounded, though not to death, yet to
extremity of pain; a wounded spirit who can bear? And the Terrors of God fell
so vehemently upon the Jailor, Acts 16. that he could not forbear trembling
(though a man of a Spirit sturdy and rugged enough) till he had received some
information about the way and means of obtaining Life eternal. I perish for
hunger, said the poor Prodigal; O sad and doleful speech! the language of an
aching heart you may be sure. Yea, Judas himself proceeded thus far toward
Conversion, when he was Convicted, he repented with a Legal Repentance, as it is
commonly distinguished; a Repentance wherein the Soul is troubled and tormented
about Sin, under apprehension of the wrath of God.

This Humiliation and Anguish of Spirit does proceed especially upon:

1. The apparent danger of the Wrath to come: The Poor Sinner looks upon
himself as already Sentenced for Hell, and it torments him beforehand, to
think how soon he may be thrust into it, so that he is always crying, Woe, woe,
to himself, in thoughts of dying in that estate.

2. The Remembrance of the sins whereby he has brought himself into that
estate: It Is a torment to him to consider, that for so vile and base a thing as
Sin is, he should make himself so miserable; as the Jews in Lam. 5.16. Woe unto
us that we have sinned. And the more pleasing any sin has been to him, the
greater pain it is to him to reflect upon it; he is out of all patience with
himself, to think how foolish, how brutish, and how like a beast he has been
before God, even in those things he thought a little while ago he did
gallantly, and wondered at those that run not with him into the same excess.

3. Conscience of his refusing Counsel, and neglecting Opportunity to take a
better course; now he remembers what warnings he has had, and how he has often
been called upon and earnestly entreated by God and man to fly from the wrath
to come, and avoid the misery into which he sees himself now falling, and still
refused to be persuaded, and was as the deaf Adder that stops her ears against
the voice of the Charmer, etc. The calling over of these things makes the poor
Sinner a burden and a terror to himself. See how Solomon represents it in
Prove. 5.11, 12, 13, 14.

This then is the Third step of this great work, a Soul-Afflicting Humiliation.
This is the state of men weary and heavy laden, as Mat. 11. This is that Spirit
of bondage of which the Apostle speaks Romans 8. That Spiritual sickness which
makes men feel their need of a Physician; that wound at the heart, which puts
men upon enquiry What they shall do to be saved: Which is next to be attended.

The Fourth Step or Degree of this work is, a studious Consultation, about a
Recovery. When a man is thoroughly convinced of his misery, and affected with
sorrow for it, it is proper for him to enquire what course he may take, to get
out of the evil estate which he is in, and escape the misery which he expects.

But yet some Convicted Persons, and Persons deeply affected with a Legal
Humiliation, fall short of this Step toward Conversion, and never come to any
serious Enquiry after the way and means of Salvation. Such are they, who seeing
themselves undone, and apprehending the wrath of God ready to come forth
against them, immediately fall into a despairing sorrow, and conclude
peremptorily against themselves, that there is no help for them -- Thus Cain,
when he heard his judgment, fell presently into a sad and sorrowful
consideration of the evil that was now invading him, till he had made it, in
his own opinion impossible for his wound to be healed, his iniquity to be
forgiven; never enquiring in the least how he might get out of the unhappy
estate into which he was fallen, but sinking in his Sorrows without any further
question.

But where God proceeds in a design of saving a poor Soul, when once he has
brought him to an humbling Conviction of his sin and misery, he puts him upon a
serious enquiry after the way and means of his recovery: So the Jews, Acts 2.
Men and Brethren what shall we do? and the Jailor, Acts 16. Being deeply
sensible of the evil of their present estate, they search diligently for some
way and means to get out of it; as the Unjust Steward, when he saw that he
should be turned out of his Office, fell presently a considering what course
was to be taken, that he might not perish as he was now like to do, for want of
house and harbor, Luke 16.3. What shall I do? This Consultation is managed
with some variety; Sometimes the affrighted Soul confines his terror to
himself, and takes counsel with his own heart, as Psalm. 13.2. which is never
like to come to any good conclusion; sometimes he sets to reading Scripture,
and other good Books. And though this be indeed the way to get information, yet
many there are, who in this distress, for want of skill to understand what they
read, perplex themselves more, instead of finding out the proper cure for their
disease. But, generally, where the work goes on to good effect, it pleases God
to direct such Souls to some able Ministers, or experienced Christians, to
whom, though shame and fear may for a time restrain them, they at length open
their griefs, and state the case of their Souls, earnestly pursuing the great
Question, What shall we do?

The Fifth Step or Degree of this Work is, An heedful and humble Attendance on
the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ contained in the Gospel; as it is said
of Lydia, she attended to the things that were spoken by Paul. And what was the
Sum of his Doctrine every where, we know, viz. That which alone gives a
satisfying Answer to the Question, What must I do to be saved?

This is the next Step toward Conversion and Salvation, after Consultation had
about the way to escape the wrath of God. But as there are many considering
Souls that never come to any full Conviction, and some convinced, who yet are
never soundly humbled; yea, many proceed as far as a Legal Repentance and
Humiliation, and yet never come to any serious Enquiry: So there are many that
consult with themselves, and may be with others, for and about a Remedy for
their bad Estate, and yet never attain so far as to give any heedful Attention
to the Doctrine of the Gospel, as that which propounds the only way of life for
dying Souls.

1. Some pitch upon false Remedies, and heal the Wound slightly, as the Prophet
speaks, being deceived by their own hearts, or misled by erroneous and
unskilful Teachers. And the Rock that men here usually split upon, is an
opinion that they may satisfy God, and save themselves by their own works, by
amending their Lives, breaking off from former Sins, and taking up neglected
Duties, emancipating themselves to the Law, as the Prodigal hired himself to
the Citizen, in hope to recover favor with God, and escape his Judgment, by
reformation of their Lives. Now they fall to praying, hearing of Sermons,
reading of Scripture, and other good Books; they forsake their bad company, and
leave off their licentious courses, and so pacify their Consciences, choke
their Convictions, and drain up their Sorrows, till at length all their trouble
being suppressed, they grow secure again, and by degrees return to their old
course; or else (which makes their case less hopeful) having accustomed
themselves to a form of godliness, take up with that, and run the stage of
Hypocrites. -- It is indeed their Duty to reform their Lives, and high time,
When they see themselves perishing for Sin: But to rest in that Reformation as
the price of their Acceptance with God, is that wherein they seduce themselves
to their own ruin, if God do not graciously seize upon them, and give them
another shaking, to bring them back into the way.

2. Others, after some Consultation had with themselves, and sometimes with
others also, fall into incurable Despair. They can devise no Remedy for
themselves, and therefore they verily think there is none; or they have good
counsel offered them by those they advise with, but understand it not aright;
or they ask advice of those that are unable to direct them, or careless of
their sad condition; which was the case of Judas, he considered his estate, was
convinced of his sin, and the deserved punishment of it; he was deeply humbled,
and proceeded to consultation. But this was his unhappiness, he opened his case
to those that had no compassion for him, no, not when he professed himself
tormented in Conscience with the pains of that sin into which they had hired
him, Mat. 27.4. What is that to us? see thou to that. Poor Judas! He had
betrayed his Lord, and could not go to him for comfort; he had forsaken the
Disciples, and could not look them in the face: To whom should he betake
himself for advice in so great a distress, when he saw the wrath of God smoking
against him, and ready to consume him, but to the Priests, whose office it was
to instruct the People, to have compassion on the ignorant, and those that are
out of the way, Hebr. 5.1, 2. and who were so greatly concerned in his sin? but
they rejected him, and left him perishing in his despair. Unhappy Souls, who
under the Terrors of the Almighty fall into the Hands of such hard-hearted
Confessors!

But where the work of Salvation goes on, the Enquiry spoken of before, never
ceases till the Soul sets it self down under the teaching of the Gospel, as God
some way or other provides it for him, and hearkens diligently to the proposals
therein made to Sinners for Salvation; see Acts 11.14. with Acts 10.33. Now he
hears the Gospel after another manner, and reads it with another attention than
heretofore; watches and observes every word that falls from the mouth of God,
as Benhadad's Servants watched the words of the King of Israel; that if any
argument of hope were offered, they might be sure to lay hold on it. O how
still were the Jews, and how closely attentive to Peter's discourse! Acts 2.
while he was preaching the Gospel to them, after they had propounded to him
that weighty question, What shall we do? Now the Sinner will not miss a Sermon
that he may hear, nor lose a Sentence for want of heed taking, that he may see
if there be any hope for such a one as he is: Every one (says our Savior) that
has heard and learned of the Father, comes to me, John 6.45. Now is the Soul
of whom we are speaking, hearing the Father, what offers he makes of his Son to
poor Sinners, and what encouragement he gives them, to come to him and trust in
him. And if he do but understand and learn what he hears, it will be well with
him.

The Sixth step or degree of this work is, Belief of the Gospel, an hearty
Assent to the word of Salvation. Attention to the Gospel serves properly to
bring the Soul to a belief of it, there being such evidence of a Divine
Authority and Majesty in it, as strongly demands the credit of him that
seriously attends it. But even in this place also, there is danger of
obstruction or diversion to be heedfully observed: Men that do attentively
consider the Gospel, are yet in danger to be turned aside. First,

By Disbelief. The Gospel is so great a Mystery, and Salvation by Jesus Christ
so strange, and so unlikely a thing to the judgment of Flesh and Blood, that
the poor affrighted Sinner cannot bring himself to believe, that there is any
such way and means of Life as the Word propounds, tho it may be he never
doubted of it before; while as yet he never understood the evil of his own
estate, nor what an hateful thing a Sinner is. That which he never questioned
before, he now looks upon as hard to be believed: That Jesus Christ is ready
and willing to save Sinners, especially so great a Sinner as he accounts
himself to be; and this incredulity will be his destruction, if help come not
in from Heaven against it.

2. By Misbelief. A man may attentively hear or read the Gospel, and yet be far
from understanding it; As the Eunuch said, How can I understand, except I have
some one to guide me? Some take Redemption to be more extensive than it is, and
think it enough to entitle them to Salvation, that they are Sinners, because
Christ died to save Sinners. Thus many make no more doubt of calling Christ
their Savior, than of calling him the Savior. -- Others again mistake the
other way, and think some Sinners to be excluded from Salvation (especially
such as they take themselves to be) though they come never so heartily to Jesus
Christ to seek it. And indeed there are many such Souls, as have been hitherto
described, that fall into this Error, and by it into despair; mistaking such
places as that in Luke 13.24. Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. -- That in Matthew. 12. Whosoever shall speak a word against the Holy
Ghost, it shall never be forgiven. And so that in Heb. 6. -- etc. As if these
and such like Scriptures were Exceptions to the offer and promise of Salvation.
So all the former work of Conviction, Terror, Consultation, etc. is lost by
reason of such like misapprehensions. How sadly Judas miscarried in the point
of consultation, was showed before. And probably that took him very much off
from studying what he knew of the Gospel. But yet it is very likely he might
stumble also at this Stone, though he was not ignorant of the Doctrine of
Salvation by Jesus Christ; yea, had often preached it to others; yet he might
think himself excluded from the Grace of the Gospel, though it be never so
freely offered to Sinners in general, because Christ had so often denounced
irreversible Judgment against the man that should betray him; though in truth
that was no bar to his Salvation, if he had sought it in the way of the Gospel.
For this is the condemnation of them that perish, that they will not come to
Christ that they may have life: And that was his Condemnation. For though many
shall seek to enter in, and not be able, yet that is at the Day of Judgment, as
appears by the next words to these, Luke 13.25. And as a man that has sinned
against the Holy Ghost, might have pardon, but that the nature of that Sin is
such as binds the Sinner up in impenitency and unbelief; so that Sin of Judas
was such as hardened his heart against any serious Address to Christ for pardon.
And so our Savior doomed him to destruction, not as one excepted from the
Promise, but as one concluded under unbelief. Thus many men come near to Faith,
and yet miscarry by reason of a misunderstanding of the Gospel.

But where God goes on with the design of Conversion, he so directs the humbled
Sinner in his Attention to the Gospel, as to bring him at the next Step to an
hearty believing of it. So the Jews, Acts 2. attending diligently to the Gospel
preached by Peter, at length gladly received it, which they could not have
done, if they had not heartily believed it. -- This is that which the Apostle
calls, Believing of the record which God has given of his Son, 1 John. 5.10.
and which is usually and fitly called Assenting Faith.

This Assenting Faith consists in two things.

1. A Perception, or understanding of the Doctrine of Salvation in the Gospel.
2. A Reception, or taking of it for Truth, upon God's own Testimony.
1. First, The humbled Soul by a serious Attention to the Gospel, comes to
understand what is the Report and Account which it gives of the Salvation that
is in Christ. Nothing can be believed that is not understood; the Soul must
apprehend the sense and import of that which is propounded to belief, before it
can believe the truth of it.

Now the sum of the Gospel which is to be known and believed to Salvation, is.
That God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him, might not perish, but have everlasting life, 3 John 16. -- or
as it is Epitomized in 1 John 5. This is the record, That God has given us
eternal life, and this eternal life is in his Son. -- Which may be thus plainly
expressed:

That whereas the Law condemns every Sinner to Eternal Death, and Justice
requires Execution; Jesus Christ has satisfied the Law in his own Death and
Righteousness; so that now God may save Sinners at his own pleasure, without
offense to his Justice. And accordingly he does most seriously, and freely
offer Salvation to all Sinners without exception. Particularly,

1. That the Law condems Sinners, and Justice demands Execution, is presumed by
the Gospel, and the Sinner under Soul-humbling Consideration is convinced of it
already; (as has been said) God so loved the world, that -- whosoever believes
-- might not perish. This does manifestly imply, that according to Law, and
strictness of Justice, all Mankind is under Condemnation to perish eternally,
and must perish, if God had not made provision for the saving of some. The
wages of sin is death, Romans 6.

2. That Christ not only fulfilled all Righteousness in obeying the Law in his
Life, but endured in his Death the Punishment which it denounces against
Sinners, is manifestly the Doctrine of the Gospel, Gal. 3.10. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6.
2 Cor. 5. etc. For though he was not under the Wrath of God, he bore the Pains
and Torments in which the Wrath of God is poured out on Sinners, and the
anguish of a forsaken Person, though he was not forsaken. And though his
Sufferings were not Eternal, yet they were equivalent to Eternal, by reason of
the unconceivable greatness of them for the time, and the infinite worth of his
Person.

3. That by this means it is become free for God to save Sinners without
prejudice to his Justice, is clearly asserted by the Gospel, Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
Herein is declared the Righteousness of God in forgiving sin; because he does
it not against Law, but upon a full satisfaction given to it. So that he is not
only Merciful in justifying him that believes, but Just in showing that mercy
on him.

4. That God in Christ hereupon most seriously offers Salvation in a way of
free gift to all Sinners without Exception. This is indeed the very Gospel it
self, as the Apostle John expresses it; This is the record, That God has given
us eternal life, etc. What Salvation is, we are plainly taught in Joh. 3.16.
Not to perish, but to have eternal life, this is to be saved. To have Sin
pardoned that we may not perish, and so to be brought into an holy Union and
Communion with God, which is begun in this Life, and completed in that to
come, and so continued to Eternity. This, I say, is Gospel-Salvation for a man
to be freed from Condemnation for Sin, and to be brought into an holy and
blessed Conjunction with God. By Nature we are dead in Trespasses and Sins; How
dead? Dead because Sin separates from God; and a man divided from God, is as a
Body separated from the Soul; so take away Sin by converting, pardoning, and
renewing Grace, and the Person returns unto union with God, that is, into Life;
and this Life once begun by Jesus Christ, is Eternal. Thus Christ's Salvation
is set forth in plain terms, Act. 3. God sent Christ to bless men; to bless
them, i. e. to save them, and make them happy; to save them from the Curse
which they are under by Nature, by turning them from their iniquity, that they
may receive remission of sin, and an Inheritance among them that are
sanctified, Act. 26.18. -- By which it is evident, That as men cannot be saved
without pardon, which frees from punishment; so neither can they be saved by
pardon, without being turned from Sin it self. Let Pardon go as far as it can
without Holiness, and the Person is miserable still, and dead still, because
separated from God.

This is the Salvation which the Gospel treats of, and which is freely offered
to all Sinners without exception. To offer a thing freely, is to say, Here
it is, Take it, and it shall be thine. So the Gospel offers Salvation by Jesus
Christ, as appears if we consider these two things:

First, It is the good pleasure of God, that whosoever accepts this Salvation,
shall have it; that whosoever will take of the Water of life, should have it
without Money, and without Price, Rev. 21. Isa. 55.1. To as many as receive
Jesus Christ, he gives power to be called the sons of God, John 1.12.

2. He invites and commands all to accept it without condition or exception.
Whosoever will, let him take, etc. Ho, every one that thirsts, come, etc.
That word, that thirsts, is no limitation at all; It is but every one that
lists, or is heartily willing. And acceptance cannot be against, or without
the Will. As when a man offers Meat at a Table to all that have an Appetite,
it is all one as to offer it to all. So rest is promised to the weary, Matthew.
11. i. e. to all that will come for it. So the grant of Salvation in the Gospel
is absolute and unconditional, unless you will (as some do) call Acceptance it
self the Condition. And so it is a question, whether any Gift can possibly be
unconditional; and certainly no Gift that is given oblatively by way of offer,
can be without Condition. Thus we see the Sum of the Gospel, that must be
understood and believed to Salvation.

Secondly, The humbled Soul seriously attending the Doctrine of the Gospel, not
only understands what is the sum and substance of it; but also discovers the
Authority of God impressed upon it, and perceives his Voice in it, and so
receives it for certain truth upon his Testimony, and this gives form and being
to the faith of Assent, viz.

An humble and reverential Acquiescency in the Testimony of God, for the
infallible certainty of the thing that is affirmed. 1 John 5.10. He that
believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the testimony,
that God has given of his Son; which implies immediately, that he that does
believe the Testimony, believes God in it, and grounds upon his Veracity and
never-failing Truth. Believing is grounded on the Veracity of him whom we
believe; and consequently, to deny belief, is to deny or question at least the
veracity of the Speaker, John 3.33. When we heartily assent to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and are fully persuaded that it is certain truth, and that
Persuasion is grounded on the truth of God, because we receive it as from his
mouth, who cannot deceive us; this is believing the Gospel.

And this is the Sixth Step or degree of this great Work of Salvation; When God
by making the Soul heedfully attend to the Doctrine of the Gospel, causes him
so to understand it, and comprehend the substance of it, and so to apprehend
and perceive the very Voice and Authority of God in it, that he threupon sits
down concluded in it as undeniable and undubitable, because God affirms it. See
1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

The man had often heard the Gospel before (it may be), and knew the Contents
of it, and did not deny the truth of them, but let them pass for things as
commonly received for truth, in the place where he lived, maintained by Learned
Men, and delivered down from Generation to Generation; so that it would have
been matter of shame to him to have called them into question: But now he has
another sense and relish of the things themselves, than he had before, and is
strongly persuaded of the certain truth of them, by the invincible Authority of
God, from whom, as his Oracles, he receives them.

The Seventh Step or degree of this great Work is,

Fiducial Faith A resting or trusting on the Mercy of God in Christ, in hope of
his Salvation tendered to Sinners in the Gospel.

These two Graces (if indeed they be two) Faith and Hope, are so nearly united
and conjoined, that the one can neither be, nor be defined without the other.
Romans 4.18. Abraham believed in hope; and Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance, or
subsistence of things hoped for.

Hope is the Intention of the Soul to that good which a man is persuaded he may
attain.

Faith (fiducial) is a man's resting or trusting in that thing, or Person, by
means, or help, or favor whereof, he hopes to attain the good which he
intends; as Act. 3.5. the impotent man expected to receive an Alms from the
Apostles, and trusted in their supposed Liberality. So Romans 4.18. Abraham hoped
to become a Father of many Nations, and trusted in the Alsufficiency and
Faithfulness of God. So all Hope is grounded in fiducial Faith, and all
fiducial Faith exerts it self in Hope. Hope looks at the end which is intended,
and Faith at that by means and help whereof it is to be attained. [D. Ward de
fide Justificante].

But notwithstanding this distinction, It is commonly observed, that the
Scripture oft-times expresses both Faith and Hope by one and the same word; and
refers Hope as well to the means as to the end. As when we read of Hoping in
God, hoping in Christ, and hoping in mercy, which is certainly all one with
trusting in God, and trusting in Christ, and trusting in Mercy, etc. as the
Learned Dr. Ward observes.

Again, Trusting is commonly referred to the End, as well as to the Means, as
Psalm. 22.8. He trusted in God that he would deliver him. He trusted that God
would deliver him, there is that which is distinctly called Hope; and he
trusted in God, there is that which is more precisely called Faith. So Phil.
2.24. I trust in the Lord, etc. whereas in v. 19. it is, I hope in the Lord, as
the original word signifies. And besides, our English Translation commonly
renders the word hope by trust, as Romans 15.24. 1 Cor. 16.7. 2 Cor. 13.6, etc.
Plainly implying, that there is no absurdity in taking them both for one and
the same act of the Soul, which as it is referred to the end, is called Hope,
and as referred to the means, is called Faith. As we are saved by faith, Ephesians.
2.8. or as Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope. I shall therefore for plainness
treat of fiducial Faith and Hope as one Act, not as affecting to follow the
Schoolmen or others, who go that way, but as intending the best advantage of
the Understanding, which is usually disturbed by an unnecessary multiplication
of things; And if Scripture commonly speaks of both as one Act (which is
confessed) why may they not be so handled?

Obj. If any object that in 1 Cor. 13.13. Where Faith, Hope, and Charity are
enumerated as three distinct Graces.

Ans. I answer. If we take Faith for Assenting Faith, which is primarily and
most properly Faith, the number is made good; and indeed it is most probable
that the Apostle intends that Faith whereby we believe those thing now, which
we shall hereafter see; as by Hope he means the confident expectation of that
Good which we shall hereafter enjoy. These things premised, I proceed to the
Description of fiducial Faith, Viz.

A Resting or trusting in the mercy of God in Christ, in hope of his Salvation
tendered to Sinners in the Gospel.

Here we are distinctly to consider, 1. The end of Faith, the Salvation of God.
2. The tendency of Faith to that end, and that is in Hope. 3. The foundation of
that Hope, the mercy of God in Christ.


First, The End of Faith, i. e. that which it looks to attain, is the Salvation
of Christ propounded in the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.9. What this Salvation is, was
showed before: Viz. Pardon of Sin, and an holy union and conjunction with God.
John 3.16. not to perish (i. e. to be condemned for Sin) but to have
everlasting life; (i. e. he united to God, and enjoy him, which is the Soul's
life.) Sin separates from God meritoriously, and legally, by virtue of the
Curse, binding the Sinner over to an everlasting Separation from his glorious
presence, and to everlasting Destruction. And it separates from him naturally
and formally, though there were no punishment by Law assigned to the Sinner;
for what fellowship has light with darkness? Now separation from God is man's
spiritual Death, even as the separation of the Body and Soul is his natural
Death. So men are by nature dead in Trespasses and Sins, as well as liable to
death for them. Death is the work of Sin, as well as its wages. And the
Salvation of Christ consists as well in delivering men from Sin it self, as
from the punishment of it, Matthew. 1.21. And if he did not this as well as the
other, he could never make them happy. Sin would keep them miserable still,
though they were redeemed from the pain of sense. Then a man is saved, when he
is brought to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. i. e. into an union and conjunction with him.
And indeed pardon of Sin is but in order to this part, as the principle of man's
Salvation. The Law subjecting the Sinner to his Sin, and giving him up to Satan
as the most signal part of his punishment, it is impossible that he should be
delivered from Sin, unless the bond of the Law, the Curse, I mean, -- which
holds him under Sin, be loosed, 1 Cor. 15.56. This then is the End of Faith,
Salvation from Hell and Sin; Pardon, and an holy Conjunction with God.

Secondly, The tendency or motion of fiducial Faith to this end, i. e. toward
Salvation, is in a way of Hope. Faith rests on Christ in hope of everlasting
Life. All fiducial Reliance or trusting in any thing or person, in reference to
any good to be attained, is in hope of that good, When a Man trusts in a
Physician for his Health, it is in hope of obtaining it. When a rich Man trusts
in his Riches, it is in hope of safety and favor among Men, etc. When the Jews
trusted, or were said to trust on the broken Reed Egypt, it was in hope of aid
from thence. -- So to trust in Christ for Salvation, is to hope for his
Salvation. Tit. 1.2. The faith of God's elect is in hope of everlasting life.
-- Now Hope (as was said before) is the Intention or Desire of the Soul to some
good thing which is looked upon as attainable.

Some put in (difficulty), but that is not always competent to the object of
hope. Hope therefore implies; First,

1. An earnest desire of the thing hoped for. Secondly,

2. A Persuasion in the mind that it may be attained. Wherever these two
meet, there is Hope, and no where else; No man hopes (but as the word is
sometimes used Catachrestically) for that which he desires not. A Man may
desire that which he has no hope of. As Men totally despairing under sense of
God's Wrath have a desire of Pardon; else they could not be grieved as they are
for want of it, but they have no hope of Pardon. A Man may wish himself an
Eagle, or a Swallow, as David, but can have no hope to be so. For besides
desire, Hope always implies a Persuasion, that the good desired may be
attained, or (which is more) that it shall be attained. Devils may have a
desire to be out of Torment; and it is certain they have so, but no hope of it,
because they cannot believe it attainable. The lame man, Acts 5. hoped to
receive Money of the Apostles, as desiring it, and thinking they had it to give
him. But as for a Cure, he desired that also, but hoped not for it, because he
did not believe at first that they had such an healing-power about them. -- He
that hopes for any thing, looks on it as attainable; and the more likely he
apprehends it to be attained, the more confident he is in his hope. And if he
looks upon it not only as probable, but as certain, then it is full Assurance of
hope, as Heb. 6.11.

Now to apply this to the case in hand. When God has brought the humble Soul to
an hearty believing of the Gospel, he thereby works him up to an hearty desire
of the Salvation therein propounded; and withal persuades him, that he may for
his own part attain it; and so the Soul begins to hope for everlasting Life.
The Soul understanding already, and believing the Gospel, sees such an
excellency in the Salvation of God, as makes him vehemently desire it; he now
accounts it the greatest happiness in the World to be delivered from Sin and
Hell, and joined unto God, though he made never so light of it before, and
earnestly cries out, Oh, that I might have peace with God, Union with God, and
God to be my God for ever! Oh, that I might eat Bread in my Father's house!
Luke 15. Thus the Merchant having seen the Pearl, (like Achan, presently fell
in love with it, and) so importunately desired it, that he stuck not at selling
all he had to buy it. This is that Hunger and Thirst to which the promise is
made, Matthew. 5.6. Isaiah 55.1. and elsewhere. This is that willingness which
makes a Soul capable of the Water of Life, Rev. 22.17. and that asking of which
our Savior speaks, John 4.10. If thou had known the gift, etc. thou would
have asked. God makes the humble Soul in the former act of Faith to know his
Gift, and to believe the worth and goodness of it; and therefore now he
earnestly desires and asks it. And here we see at the very entrance, how far
Men are from saving-faith and hope in Christ, that do not earnestly desire
after God and Holiness. A Man can never hope for that which he desires not; and
to desire after God, and not hate Sin and all Unrighteousness, is utterly
impossible; as for a Man to desire to be in the light, and yet not be out of
love with darkness.

No wicked Man, while he continues so, has any true desire after the Salvation
of God in Christ. Freedom from punishment he may desire, but Holiness and Union
with God he desires not, nor can he have any good affection toward it; yea, he
says to God, Depart from me, I desire not the knowledge of the most High, Job
21.14. Now the knowledge of the most High is Life eternal, John 17.3. So that
wicked Men, whatsoever Profession they may make of Faith and Hope in Christ for
Life eternal, do not so much as desire Life Eternal -- No? you will say; Is
there any that does not desire Eternal Life? God, that knows the Language of
their hearts, and will not wrong them in the interpretation of it, gives us
this account of what is said by Wicked men in general within themselves; We
desire not the knowledge of the Almighty: We desire not his acquaintance; no
communion with him. They had rather starve, than go and dwell in the Father's
House, to eat bread there, and live.

2. As the belief of the Gospel makes the humbled Soul earnestly desire the
Salvation of God, so it gives him a persuasion that he may attain it, and this
makes his desire an hopeful desire, i. e. it gives it the nature of Hope. A man
that rightly understands and believes the Gospel, and earnestly desires the
Salvation propounded in it, must needs apprehend a possibility, at least, of
his own Salvation, while he remains under the dispensation of the Gospel. For
(says the Soul) if the Salvation of Christ be freely offered to all to whom the
Gospel is preached, i. e. If it be the good pleasure of God, that whosoever
accepts this Salvation, should have it; and if he invites and commands all to
accept it, without any other condition, or any exception, then there is fair
probability that I may have my part in it; I am sure I desire it more than any
thing in the world; and though I be never so unworthy, yet the gift is free:
And though the Law condemns me, yet Christ has so answered the Law, that God
may with honor save me, if he will. Who knows then, but even I may attain
everlasting Life by Jesus Christ? -- under this persuasion now the humbled Soul
earnestly desires the Salvation of Christ, and this is Hope. So the Prodigal,
as he hungrily desired to eat of his Father's Bread, so he had a good
persuasion, that at his Father's House he might have entertainment; that his
Father would not shut the Doors against him, but receive him; and in this hope
he went. The Merchant, Matthew. 13. had not only a desire to be Owner of the
Pearl, but a persuasion, that selling all that he had, he might certainly
entitle himself to it. So he that comes to the water of Life, comes not only in
a thirsting desire after it, but under an hopeful apprehension, that he may
take, and have it freely for his own refreshment, that his Soul may live. This
is very amply expressed in those words of the Apostle, Gal. 2.16. We knowing
that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ: Even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ. -- 1. They knew, and believed the Gospel, that
Justification, pardon of Sin, and so Salvation, is to be attained only through
Jesus Christ. 2. This Justification, or Pardon and Salvation, they earnestly
desired, else they would not have prosecuted it. 3. They had a persuasion that
they might possibly attain it, as well as others, and so they believed in Jesus
Christ, that they might actually attain it.

This persuasion is utterly wanting in Devils, and despairing Sinners; though
they should be never so earnest in desire of Salvation, yet they have no
persuasion that they shall, or may obtain it. The former having no Gospel for
it, the latter no right understanding, nor true belief of the Gospel; and
therefore they have no hope, no trust in Jesus Christ. And as this Persuasion
grows stronger and stronger in him that sincerely hungers and thirsts after
Christ, so his Hope gets up to better measures and degrees.

In these two things we see the Father's drawing of Souls to Jesus Christ, John
4.44. It is a work done by the Gospel. 1. Men hear the Gospel. 2. Hearing it,
they learn it; i. e. they believe it with an assenting Faith. They believe 1.
The Excellency of Salvation as propounded in the Gospel, and so they desire it.
2. They believe the free offer and grant that is there made of it, to poor
Sinners, without exception; and so they get a persuasion, that they themselves
may attain it, and thus they come to him for it; they come to him in their
hopeful desire of his Salvation.

Thus much of the end of Faith, which is Salvation; and the tendency of Faith
to that end, in a way of hope.

Thirdly, The next thing to be considered, is the ground or foundation of this
Hope, The free mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

In all hope the expecting Soul has somewhat to rest and bear upon as the
foundation and basis of its hope: and that resting and leaning is the formal
proper act of a fiducial Faith. The lame man, Acts 5. hoped that the Apostles
would give him Money, and grounded that hope in their supposed Liberality. So
he trusted in their Liberality in hope of an Alms. The Governor, Acts 24.26.
hoped for a Bribe, and grounded that hope upon the love ('it is likely) which he
supposed Paul's Friends had for him. So he trusted in the interest that Paul
had in his monied Friends in hope of a Bribe. Thus Believers hope for the
Salvation of God propounded in the Gospel, and ground their hope on his free
Mercy in Christ; i. e. They trust on the free Mercy of God in Christ in hope of
Salvation. As in Faith of assent there is a persuasion of the truth of the
Doctrine contained in the Gospel, and a resting on the Testimony of God in that
persuasion; So in Fiducial Faith there is an hoping for Salvation, propounded
in the Gospel, and a resting on the Mercy of God in Christ, in that hope.

Now that the mercy of God in Christ is the proper Ground whereon the Soul
rests it self in the Act of Saving Faith, may thus appear.

1. Man being an Offender, and guilty of Death Eternal, cannot be saved but in
a way of Pardon, which is an act of Mercy. And thereforefore he can have no
hope of Salvation from God, but as he is a merciful God. He that is bound over
to the punishment of Eternal Death, must either suffer it, or be forgiven it.
Now nothing forgives but Mercy. Look upon God as Almighty, and it speaks terror
to the guilty Soul. Power makes him able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.
Look upon him as Just, and Justice speaks terror, as that which makes him hate
Sin, and punish Sinners. But consider him as he is merciful, and pitiful to
poor Creatures in their misery, and there you have some ground of hope. Hope
can never find whereon to rest the sole of its foot, till you come to a sight
of God as merciful. -- God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13. He could
light on nothing in all the World to stay his Hope upon, but Mercy. The poor
Leper, Matthew. 8. urged our Savior with his power to make him clean; but if he
had not had some hopeful conceit of his willingness to relieve poor Supplicants
in such a case, he would never have asked him for the cure. He that expects a
Debt, may trust in the Justice of him that owes it: But he that expects an Act
of Grace, must rest on the mercy of him from whom he expects it, or he has
nothing to trust to.

Obj. You will say a Believer hopes in the Faithfulness of God, and the
infallible Truth of his Word, as well as in his Mercy.

Ans. I grant it, A believer hopes in the Truth of God; but it is only as his
Truth and Faithfulness does assure the Soul of his Mercifulness. God professes
and declares himself merciful, the Soul believes that he is so, and will
approve himself so, because it judges him faithful; and therefore hopes in
Mercy so declared. So the Soul relying on Mercy, relies upon the Power of God,
but only as Mercy turns and uses it to the saving of Sinners; otherwise he is
true to punish according to his Threatenings, as well as he is true to save
according to his Promise. So he is mighty to destroy as well as to save. Yea,
the Soul relying on Mercy, relies also on the Justice of God, as he is just in
showing mercy. But all this while Mercy lies at the bottom, as the foundation
of a Believer's Hope. Let God be never so mighty, never so wise, never so
faithful, never so righteous, all this speaks no encouragement to the poor
humbled Sinner, but all against him, till Mercy be discovered, and then some
ground appears for him to build his hopes upon. And now the other Attributes of
God give their assistance, and bear up Expectation.

2. But yet no man can safely hope in the absolute Mercy of God for Salvation,
but only in the Mercy of God considered as he is merciful in Jesus Christ; i.
e. as he is merciful, so as to provide and accept a satisfaction to Justice in
the Death of his Son, and so to offer Salvation freely to Sinners; or in the
words of Scripture, As loving the world so as to give his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
For,

1. If the humbled Sinner considers Mercy absolutely, Justice presently comes
in, and damps his hopes of Salvation. For as it is not to be expected that God,
though he be Almighty, should do any thing which his Wisdom does not allow of,
because he is infinitely Wise as well as Almighty; so neither can it be hoped,
though he be infinite in mercy, that he should do any thing in a way of pity to
a Sinner, which his Justice will not bear, because he is just as he is
merciful. Now Justice requires that the Law should proceed, and that the Soul
that has sinned should die, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. But God in giving his Son
to die for Sinners, has so satisfied the Law, that Justice has nothing at all
to plead against the Salvation of any one Sinner whom God will please to save,
Romans 3.25, 26. By this means God has so ordered it, that he is highly just in
showing mercy to the Sinner, as having laid the punishment which belonged to
him, upon his own Son. And therefore Mercy thus considered, is a sufficient
ground of hope, but not otherwise; as Heb. 9.21. Without shedding of blood
there is no remission; no hope of Pardon and Salvation, but through the Death
of Christ, though God be never so merciful.

Secondly, If the humbled Soul considers Mercy absolutely, he can have no
Assurance of the Terms, on which he will save Sinners, supposing that he will
save any of them; and so the Soul may object against his own hopes of Salvation.

Obj. 1. It may be God will be so merciful as to save Sinners, that have not
broken out into gross wickedness, but have restrained themselves to some bounds
of fairness and morality: And it is great mercy if he will save such. But I have
exceeded in Sin, and done evil with an high hand.

Obj. 2. It may be he will be so merciful as to save Sinners that have sinned
out of ignorance, as being uninformed and unconvinced of the evil of the things
wherein they have offended; and it is great mercy if he will save such. But I
have rebelled against the light, and sinned against knowledge, and the express
dictates of my own Conscience.

Obj. 3. It may be God will be so merciful as to save Sinners that accept the
first or second call that he gives them to Repentance, and close with offered
Grace betimes, and it is great mercy if he will save such Sinners: But alas, I
have withstood many gracious Invitations, and neglected Salvation when it has
been offered to me God knows how many times, and so my day may be expired. It
may be God will be so merciful as to save Sinners, that have not signally
contradicted their Professions in the course of their lives; who, as they have
not practiced Godliness, so have never much pretended to it; and it is great
mercy if he will save such, or some of them: But I have dissembled with him,
and lived the life of the Ungodly under the profession of Godliness; yea, I
have given up my Name to Christ, and yet have given my hand to Satan and my own
Lusts.

Object. 4. It may be God will be so merciful as to save Sinners that have not
sinned against the Holy Ghost; and it is great Mercy if he will vouchsafe to
save some of them: But I fear I have sinned the Sin that is never to be pardoned.

Object. 5. It may be God will save some great and eminent Sinners, but they
are such only, as are within the eternal purpose of Election, and he shows
great mercy in saving them; but I fear I am under the decree of Reprobation
rather. And if you tell the humble Soul, that they that Sin against the Holy
Ghost never heartily repent of it; and no Man in this Life can certainly
conclude himself reprobated, because for ought any knows he may repent and turn
to God; He will yet object,

Object. 6. It may be God will be so merciful, as to save Sinners that are
deeply and kindly humbled for their Sins, and full of the Spirit of mourning;
and it is Mercy indeed if he will save such. But I have an hard heart, and an
uncontrite Spirit; I cannot grieve for Sin to any purpose, though I know my
self to be one of the chief of Sinners. All these, and many more such
Objections will be unanswerable, if the Soul considers only the absolute Mercy
of God. For God may indeed be merciful, and gloriously merciful in saving
Sinners, though he should only save some of the most restrained, and least
provoking, the soonest yielding, and most signally humbled and mourning
Sinners; and so the Soul that judges worse of himself, can have no hope of his
Salvation. But the Mercy of God in Christ, is such as that he freely offers his
Salvation to all, even the worst of Sinners to whom the Gospel is preached,
inviting and commanding them to accept it, and rely upon him for it. And this
answers all Objections.

The worst the Soul can say against himself, exempts him not from the number of
Sinners; and Salvation is freely offered to all Sinners in general. He is one
of them, let him make as bad of himself as he can. And though he thinks it
never so unreasonable for him to hope for Mercy, yet no reason in the World can
have any force against the Command of the most High God, which requires him to
repose his hope and trust in Christ for his Salvation. Thus it is evident, that
the ground of a Christian's hope, or that which he relies and rests upon in his
hope of Salvation, is the free Mercy of God in Christ. And therefore is Faith
commonly in Scripture called a trusting, or believing in Jesus Christ, because
the Satisfaction which he has given to the Law, and the free tender of
Salvation which he makes in the Gospel to Sinners in general, is the only
sufficient ground that any Soul has to stay and rest upon, in hope of his
Salvation, John 3.15, 16, 18, 36. John 6.35. 1 Pet. 2.6. Acts 11.17. Acts
16.31. and many other places.

Faith is a believing in God. But it is a believing on him looked upon and
considered as he is in Jesus Christ. The Soul cannot believe or trust in God
for Salvation, but as he trusts in Christ. 1 Pet. 1.21. Who by him believe on
God who raised him from the dead, etc.

It is a trusting or hoping in the Mercy of God. Psalm 15.5. Psalm 147.11. But
it is a trusting in Mercy only as it is expressed, displayed, and offered to
Sinners in Jesus Christ.

It is a trusting or hoping in the Word. Psalm 119.42, 74. in as much as it
declares and propounds that Mercy of God in Christ, on which alone the Soul may
rest it self in hopes of Salvation.

Thus have we seen the Sinner brought by the several Steps of Consideration,
Conviction, Humiliation, etc. to a fiducial Faith, or believing on Jesus
Christ. And now is he in the state of Effectual Calling or Conversion, 1 Thessalonians.
2.13.

Then Men are called and converted, when they believe in Jesus Christ, as it is
fully proved in Romans 1.16. with 1 Cor. 1.24.

Now is the Soul set safe from Condemnation, and therefore is this Faith called
Justifying Faith, Romans 5.1.

Now is the Soul adopted and entitled to everlasting Life. And therefore is
Faith called saving Faith, or believing to Salvation, Heb. 10.

Yea, now the Soul is by the work of the Spirit possessed of all Graces
necessary to qualify and prepare him for Heaven, the heart being purified by
Faith, Acts 15.9. and taken up by the Lord Jesus for his Habitation, Ephesians.
2.22. with Ephesians. 2.17. wherever there is Faith in Christ, there is also Love
to God, Obedience, Patience, Humility, Self-denial, and all other Graces in
which the Law is written on renewed Hearts. The Exercises and Increases whereof
come next to be considered.

The Sum of all is,
1. The Sinner takes the estate of his Soul into serious Consideration. Ezekiel.
18.28. He considers, and turns away from his Transgression. 2. He finds
himself to be in a lost and perishing Condition. Luke 15.17. I perish for
hunger. 3. The sight of himself in this estate affects his Soul with deep
Sorrow and distressing Trouble. Acts 2.37. When they heard this, they were
pierced at the heart. 4. This distress puts him upon a studious consultation,
and enquiry for a Remedy of his Estate. And they said, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? 5. Upon this enquiry, God directs him to a serious and heedful
attention to the Gospel. Acts 11.14. Send for Peter, -- he shall tell thee
words whereby thou and all thy House shall be saved. And Acts 10.33. We are
all, etc. 6. Thus attending the Gospel, he comes to understand and believe the
Doctrine therein contained, and to receive it for certain truth upon God's
Testimony. Acts 2.41. They that gladly received his word, were baptized. John
6.45. They shall be all taught of God. Every one therefore that has heard and
learned of the Father, comes to me. 7. Upon the belief of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, he proceeds to an hearty reliance on the free Mercy of God in Christ,
in hope of his Salvation. For, Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified
by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Christ. Even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ.

1. Believing the Gospel, he is informed of the excellency of Christ's
Salvation, and so desires it earnestly for himself.

2. Believing the Gospel, he sees this Salvation is freely offered to Sinners
in general, and so conceives hope that he may have it.

3. Believing the Gospel, he sees that Salvation is procured and granted only
through the Mercy of God in Christ, and therefore he rests only upon that Mercy
in hope of his Salvation.

PART II. Of the Progress of a Believer from his Conversion to his Perfection,
under the work of Sanctification.
1 PETER II. 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby.
THE Text is an Exhortation to an earnest desire after the Word. Where note
first,

1. The Persons exhorted, they are lately converted Christians, compared to
newborn Babes; so young and incomplete Christians are called, 1 Cor. 3.1. And
I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal,
even as unto babes in Christ. Babes in Christ, because the work of
Sanctification had gone on but a little way in them, they being hitherto very
Carnal.

2. The matter of the Exhortation; a desire after the Word. Where note, First,

First, The object of this desire, the Word, compared to pure Milk, the sincere
Milk of the Word, (that is) the Word which is for you, as pure Breast-milk is
for the newborn Babe, sweet and pleasing, nourishing and strengthening, the
means appointed to the perfecting of the Work of Sanctification, John 17.17.
Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth. And Edification unto Glory, Acts
20.32. The word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Secondly,

Secondly, The desire it self, described by the appetite of newborn Infants to
the Nurses Milk, (that is) a vehement and importunate desire, and such as will
not otherwise be satisfied.

Thirdly, The end of this desire, growth in Grace, that ye may grow thereby.
What that is in which they should intend a growth, appears plainly by the
Sequel of the Apostle's Discourse, to be Faith and Holiness. The Grace
wherewith the Souls of Christians are qualified by the Spirit of God unto
Salvation, as it is expressed in the last words of the next Epistle, Grow in
Grace. Growth is the gradual process of living Creatures to their due Measures
and Maturity. And of all the growths, the growth of Children, which is here the
Apostle's Similitude, is a very slow and imperceptible Motion. Such is the
tendency of saving Grace in the Souls of Christians toward its proper and
purposed Perfection. Mark 4.27. the Seed springs and grows up we know not how.
And hence we way observe,

Direct. 1. That saving Grace begun in converted Souls, goes gradually on to
its perfection under the sanctifying work of God. -- Justification is perfected
at once, and with it Adoption. But the work of Holiness is begun in low
degrees, and brought on by steps to it its intended height and fullness. See
this proved in Phil. 1.6. He that has begun a good work in you, will perform
it until the day of Jesus Christ. So again in Prove. 4.18. The path of the just
is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day. So
likewise Hosea 6.3. His going forth is as the morning. And Mark 4.26. The
Kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, etc. The
Kingdom of God is his work of Grace in the Souls of Men, in which he begins
that, which in its perfection is the Kingdom of Glory. So Grotius, and some
others, understand those three Ages, 1 John 2.12, 13. I write unto you, little
Children, because your sins are forgiven you. I write unto you, fathers,
because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you, young
Men, because you have overcome the wicked one.

But I shall prosecute this Doctrine in a distinct Consideration of the several
advances of Grace in the Souls of Christians toward perfection, from their
first Conversion. And that in ten successive periods of their Motion. First,

The first Period or Point of a Christian's Motion toward Perfection; that I
shall speak of, is

1. A vehement pursuit of some clear and comfortable assurance of Salvation.
When once Men are brought through the Terrors of the Law by the Invitations of
the Gospel, to believe in Christ for his Salvation, they presently become very
laborious to get some comfortable Assurance that they are in a saved Estate.

They do not indeed neglect the duties of Obedience, the mortifying of Lusts,
well ordering of their Lives, and the glory of God as the end of all. But that
which they especially and most ambitiously intend now at their first setting
out, is a Soul-quieting certainty, that all is well between God and them.

Though they do believe in Christ, and know that he that believes shall be
saved; yet it is usually a great while, before they can clearly understand
themselves to be Believers in Christ, and by Faith saved Persons. A man must be
(of necessity) a Believer, before he can know himself to be so; and Faith is
sometimes very long unevident to him that has it. And though he do perceive the
believing act in himself, and dares not deny it; yet he is very doubtful
whether it be true saving Faith, or no, and very impatient of the doubt: And
this is commonly the main Intention of young Converts, and their great affair,
to assure themselves that they are in Christ, and not perishing with the World.

It Is true, the very act of Faith, through the Grace of Christ, brings in a
sweet calmness of Spirit, easing the Soul of those despairing and tormenting
fears with which 'twas overwhelmed before; and therefore Faith it self is in
Scripture called, a resting on the Lord, and a staying of the mind on God, Isa.
26.3.

But a positive Assurance of ones being in the state of Salvation, is a further
benefit, and must be sought after in the use of means, appointed to the making
of our Calling and Election sure: And this is usually the great study of new
Converts, as Hosea 6.2. He will receive us; that was it in prosecution whereof
they stirred up themselves to follow on to know the Lord.

And that they do mainly intend and follow this, appears.

First, In their eager desire after Ordinances and means appointed to this end,
to confirm Faith, and work assurance. As soon as the Eunuch was converted, he
was presently ambitious to be baptized upon the first opportunity. Acts 8.36,
37. And the Eunuch said, See, here is water; what does hinder me to be
baptized? And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may.
And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And
they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized
him. Baptism being a confirming Ordinance, a seal of the Promise and Covenant
of Grace, he was very desirous to have that Doctrine sealed to him by washing,
which he had lately heard preached out of Isa. 53. And Paul, when converted,
assayed to join himself with the Church: Communion with Saints being a good
means to inform us of our own good estate, Acts 9.26. And when Saul was come to
Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the Disciples.

2dly, Their earnest hearkening after Promises, and such parts of the Word, as
declare the love of God to poor Sinners. They are not at first so studious of
that Word, which sets forth that Reward which Saints shall have in Heaven, as
of that Word of Promise which serves to give humbled Souls notice of their
Interest in Christ, and the Love of God. They go to every Sermon that they
hear, in hope of a word of peace: And are mightily taken with that Word which
sets forth the love of Christ, descending and stooping down to poor unworthy
Wretches: Though they heartily like a Boanerges, a Son of Thunder, and bless
God that ever they have heard the Terrors of the Lord in the Doctrine of the
Law; yet now they are sore and wounded, and most earnestly desire after
Barnabas, the Son of Consolation, to pour some Oil into their Wounds, and give
them some heart-reviving Cordials. Newborn Babes desire Milk, words of comfort
from the breasts of Consolation, Isa. 66.11. That ye may suck, and be satisfied
with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted
with the abundance of her glory.

3dly, Their great fear of deceiving themselves. Though they love Promises, and
search Scripture for them, and gladly go many miles to hear them explained and
preached, yet they fear to apply them to themselves: Knowing their hearts are
deceitful, they are always afraid, lest they should take up too good thoughts
of themselves. And though they vehemently long after spiritual Comfort, yet
they heartily fear lest they should receive it too soon, before they have a
right to it, or are duly prepared for it.

4thly, Their continual enquiring after Marks and Signs of Persons being in a
state of Grace. No Sermon suits them, if it be not in some parts of it made up
of Notes, distinguishing between Believers and Unbelievers: And in discoursing
with godly men, they are always asking Questions of this kind, How may one know
that he is converted, and believes in Christ to Salvation? etc. What are the
properties of a sincere godly man? What is the lowest Evidence of Grace, which
is not found in a graceless Person? May not an Hypocrite go thus and thus far?
etc. These and such Enquiries, show what their minds are set upon; (to wit) to
be assured, that they are converted, and in a state of Grace. But they that
make light of such Enquiries, and the notes of a saving Conversion, seem not to
have known the Terror of the Lord, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.11.

5thly, Their usual trouble at the inconformity of their Experiences about the
work of Grace, to these of other godly men: so desirous are they to get beyond
doubt of their sincerity, and safety, that they are always comparing themselves
with what others have (or think they have) found. They are presently dejected
with fear, lest they should prove unconverted and unbelieving. -- Hence come
such reasonings as these. -- I have never been so humbled and broken for sin as
such and such have been: I never felt in my self such vehement desires after
Christ: Never could take such delight in God; never knew what it is to have such
communion with him, and therefore I cannot yet see ground to judge my self in a
state of Salvation.

And though such Christians cannot deny but they have had their hearts humbled
for Sin, and their desires carried out after Christ, yet they say, that all
that they have known of this kind, is nothing to what others use to have; weak
and faint, and (they fear) to no purpose.

And if you tell them they must wait for those higher Experiences of delight in
God, and communion with him, they think it is all one as if you should tell
them, they must live at uncertainties, and continue in their wearisome
doubtings, till they come up to such seize; which they fear they never
shall do.

This also is the reason why they are so often enquiring, whether ever any such
as they obtained mercy; seeking for Parallels of this sort, if they may be
found; that they may be the more encouraged to hope, that themselves are in a
state of life, when they find some like themselves among the Heirs of Salvation.

And thus their labor and study is still about Assurance. As their Question
was formerly, What must I do to be saved? so it is now, How may I know that I
shall be saved?

I come now the Use.

Use. This argues them to be in an unconverted estate, who live contentedly
without any Assurance of their Salvation. Either

First, Not minding the Question, Whether they are in the state of Grace, or
no; let the morrow of Eternity take care for it self: When poor humble
Christians are seeking resolution of their Doubts, these are at ease, caring
for none of those things that concern their future estate; not remembering their
latter end: As it is said of Jerusalem, Lam. 1.9. Her filthiness is in her
skirts, she remembers not her last end. Or,

2dly, Conceited of their being in a safe estate, but upon unstudied grounds;
as if a mere opinion of their being in a good condition, were enough to make it
so: Saying, I shall have peace, with an although to what may be objected, as
Deuteronomy. 29.19. though I walk in the imagination of my own heart.

But oh secure Souls, will you consider,

First, That it is a most dreadful thing to perish eternally. The loss of Heaven
offered in the Gospel is infinitely more than the loss of a thousand Worlds.
The Torments of Hell, an Everlasting Fire. It Is hard to endure the aching of a
Tooth, or the pain of the Stone, for twenty four hours; what is it to be fried
as Laurentius on a burning Gridiron? to be flead alive as Valerian? and to
endure that pain for ever? but alas, these are nothing to the anguish of the
never-dying Worm, the Torments of the never-quenched Fire.

2dly, Will you consider how sad a thing it must needs be to live at
uncertainty, whether this shall not be our case? The Servants of Pharaoh in
Prison were sad, Genesis 40.7. They thought their Dreams imported some great
matters, and they did so indeed, but they knew not what it might be.

3dly, To live at a careless uncertainty of Salvation, is the way to make our
Damnation certain; For how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation,
Heb. 2.3.

4thly, It Is much more your concernment to secure your Salvation, than theirs
that call upon you to do it: You must bear it; Prove. 9.12. God the Father calls
you; the Son invites you; the Spirit strives with you; Ministers pray you to be
reconciled, and pray for you, that you may be reconciled: But what is it to God
or man, beside your own gain, if you be saved; and your misery, if you perish?

5thly, You may be saved, and be sure of it, if you do not willingly neglect.
Thy destruction is of thy self, Hosea 13.9. Why will ye die? Ezekiel. 18.31.

The second Use is for Comfort to those that are earnestly seeking and
laboring after assurance of their Salvation: Even this is an hopeful Evidence
of your being in the State of Salvation. Your earnest and hearty following of
the Question, gives an answer to it; this is their proper study, and endeavor,
who are turned savingly to God, even from their first Conversion. Some may
object

Obj. That all this is but self-minding, whereas a true Christian should be all
for God, whatever comes of himself. But

Answ. I answer -- Salvation is for our selves, and coming to Christ is for our
selves; as the Apostle says, Acts 2.40. Save your selves: And again, Matthew.
11.29. Ye shall find rest to your souls.

The third Use is to exhort all Christians, to use diligence to clear up their
Assurance of Salvation. It Is the property of the youngest Believers to
endeavor it, those of lowest standing; and it is the concernment of every one
that thinks he stands, 1 Cor. 10, 12. to take heed lest he fall. That your
grounds may be good, and safe, take a few Directions.

Direct. 1. Be very careful to acquaint your selves with the Word of God. It Is
the Glass in which you may see your own faces, and what manner of persons ye
are, James 1.24.

2dly, Watch narrowly over your hearts and lives, that you may know what is
your general aim and intendment, wherein you exercise your selves; as Paul,
Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self, etc. For a Christian is to try
himself by his main purpose and design; as the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.

3dly, Rest not upon other men's judgments of you, Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove
his own work; the work that is wrought by him, of what sort it is, and so the
work of Grace, which is by himself, or others, thought to be wrought in him.

4. Think not to confirm your Assurance by changing modes and ways of
Christianity; Neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem shall ye worship
the Father, John 4.21. In this Mountain; there was their Forefathers Example
leading them to Mount Gerezim, etc. But ye, that is, the Jews, plead Solomon's
building, and God's blessing the Temple at Jerusalem. Some have tried this way
of changing forms, and been quieted a little while; but their doubts have
returned, and must needs, for any help that can be that way gotten. Evidences
of Salvation are internal, and standing things abiding.

5thly, Slight not any hopeful Evidence, because you yet find some doubts. Paul
blessed God, that with his mind he served the law of Christ, though with the
flesh the law of sin, Romans 7. last. Assurance is always imperfect, and this
first work is always needful; as I shall show, if God will, in the next Step.

6thly, Wait always on God by Prayer for information concerning your own
estate. See Psalm 139.1, 2, and 23d Verses. Search me, O God, and know my
heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting.

MATTHEW. XIII. 44. The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field:
The which when a man has found, he hides; and for joy thereof, goes and
sells that he has, and buyeth that field.
THE second Period, or degree of a Believer's motion toward his Perfection,
may be described by rejoicing in Christ, as that which is most signal and
remarkable, in Believers of some little standing, after they have awhile
conflicted with Fears and Doubts, and taken some solicitous pains to assure
themselves, that they are in a state of grace. By this time it is usual with
God to give them peace, and persuade them of his special love. Some Sermon or
other he imploys on purpose to disperse their darkness: Some Promise or other
he so interprets, and applies to them, as to make it look them in the face, and
speak comfort to them. Sometimes it comes in return to some earnest prayer that
they have lately made for it: Sometimes, when they are sadly pondering their
doubts, and almost overwhelmed with sorrows. But usually when they have little
expectation of it, then they hear the voice of peace, and receive intimation of
the love of God, and this highly rejoices and chears up their hearts. As our
Savior's words, which I have read, imply. The kingdom of heaven is like unto
treasure hid in a field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for
joy thereof goes and sells all that he has.

By the Kingdom of Heaven, I understand the Salvation of God in Jesus Christ,
the perfection whereof is, that it crowns men with a Kingly, Heavenly, and
Eternal Glory. This Salvation our Savior here compares to hidden Treasure;
because as it is of infinite value and excellency, so it is unseen by men, till
their eyes are opened by the Gospel, and they are brought by Faith to Jesus
Christ, and made to believe in him; 2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the God of this world
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
Then when a man believes, he finds the Treasure. Jesus Christ is found by
faith, Isa. 65.1. To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Christ is the arm of
the Lord, and when he is revealed, he is found; and he that finds him, finds
life, Prove. 8.35. and when the Soul has thus found Salvation, his great care is
to secure it to himself; that he may be sure of it and not fail to obtain it;
which I take to be here intimated by hiding of the Treasure when it is found.
For in such a case, a man's way to ascertain himself of the attainment of what
he has found, is to make it as sure as he can from other hands, that he may not
miss of it; and having so done, he rejoices in the hope of having it to
himself, which signifies that joy whereof I am now speaking, viz. The joy of a
Believer, under persuasion, that he is in a state of salvation. The same joy is
that reported of the Samaritans, Acts 8.8. There was great joy in that city.
And Verse the 39th, it is said, The Eunuch went on his way rejoicing. And that
in Acts 16.34. He rejoiced, believing with all his heart. And Romans 5.1, 2. We
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Some Instances of this Joy in Christians, upon their first assurance of
Salvation after their coming to Christ by faith, I shall now show you. And the
first Instance is,

Inst. 1. A very thankful remembrance of the means, by which they have been
awakened, and persuaded to return to God. Though many Christians are unable to
give a particular account of the first time, and means of their Conversion, yet
ordinarily they remember by what means they have been more remarkably stirred
up, and moved to enquire after God, and seek peace with him, and are very
thankful to God for it And so you shall hear them blessing God for such or such
a Sermon, or such a man's Ministry, whereby it pleased God to set them a moving
toward himself; O that was a proper word for my case. I thought the word was
chosen, and the Sermon studied on purpose for me; it came home so closely to
me, discovering my sin, showing me what was my confidence, and how I deluded my
self in it; what was my danger, and how near I was to it. I little thought to
have been so fully met withal, so clearly to have seen my own face in the glass
of the Law, to have returned so convinced, so affrighted, etc. I used to hear
for others, and to observe how they were met with, and concerned in what was
said; But now it pleased God to give me my Portion, and send me home with my
own Burden; and blessed be his Grace, that so, and so seasonably found me out.
I thought I had been armed sufficiently, and could have endured the force of a
Sermon as easily as any man in the Congregation, and have born up my face
undauntedly against all Rebukes and Threatenings, but the Word was too strong
for me, and brought me down -- upon my Knees, and blessed be God that it did
so; blessed be God that prepared it, so sharpened it, so timed it, and so
followed it with powerful motions of his Spirit, that I could never acquit my
self of it, till I was persuaded to return, and yield my self up to God.
Secondly,

2dly, Their thankful acknowledgement of the goodness of God to them, in that
they died not in their former Estate. As Hezekiah, when he was recovered of his
Sickness, and found himself well again, wrote a Memorial of the goodness of God
to him in his Restitution, wherein he recorded the danger he had been in, and
how near he was to Death, and what a narrow escape he had, Isaiah 38.9. So
Christians when once they apprehend themselves passed from Death to Life, are
even afraid to think what an Estate they were in before, and mightily taken
with the Mercy of God that suffered them not to perish in that Condition. I was
in love with my own perverse way, when I was running headlong to Destruction: I
thought my self safe enough when I was even in the midst of all Evil: I trusted
to my own Works, when I was working out my Damnation, Prove. 5.14. I was almost
in all evil. I despised reproof, and hearkened not to the voice of my Teachers;
and if the Lord had then taken me off by Death, I had certainly perished: O!
blessed be God, that had pity on me, when I had no care of my self; and
awakened me when I was sleeping the Sleep of Death. Thus Paul, I was a
persecutor, a blasphemer, and injurious, but I obtained mercy, etc. Now to the
King eternal, the only wise God, be honor and glory, for ever and ever, 1 Timothy
1.13. So all the followers of the Lamb the Lord Jesus are said to sing the Song
of Moses, Rev. 15.3. Blessing God that suffered them not to dye under Egyptian
Bondage, or perish in the Red Sea.

3dly, Their readiness to tell others what God has done for their Souls.
Christians are hardly ever so communicative of their experiences, as about this
Age. As Children, when first they get use of their Tongues, are most apt to
talk. Thus Christians, when they have newly got the sense of saving love, are
often saying with David, Come and hear ye that fear God, and I will declare
what he has done for my Soul, Psalm 66.16. I was perishing unawares, and he
showed me my danger, and then I thought I must needs perish without remedy. I
walked up and down trembling like Cain, and could neither eat nor drink, lie
down nor rise in peace. All was black and dark about me. Every word of God
seemed to be against me, and the Wrath of God was always ready, as I thought,
to swallow me up, till such a Word came, and such a Promise was set home to my
heart: And them my Fears vanished, and my Soul was quieted, my Mourning turned
into Joy, etc. Never was a poor fainting Soul so revived: O taste and see, that
the Lord is grocious, he belivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my
feet from falling, Psalm 116.8.

4thly, Their great contentedness under outward Troubles, because God has
spoken peace to their Souls. Though they be poor (it may be) and low in the
World, and meet with many Enemies; though they are reproached by their
Neighbors and their old Companions, and suffer the displeasure of their
Friends, for betaking themselves to a new course of Life; yea, though they are
watched and kept in, and are fain to make hard shift to get out to Ordinances,
and into Christian Communion, yet all is easy to them, and they bear it
patiently, because God has manifested himself to their Souls, and given them
good hopes, through Grace, of everlasting Glory. Now let Friends reject them,
Father and Mother forsake them, since God has taken them up. Their acquaintance
disown them, but God owns them; the World frowns upon them, but Heaven smiles.
They are in danger to suffer loss of all, but they have found Christ, and won
Christ, and it is enough, they rejoice in their Portion. Fifthly,

5thly, The sweet Savor which they find in the Gospel, and the word of
promise. Joy sweetens our Meat and Drink to us, and makes us relish what is set
before us. So Christians in this Estate are strangely taken with spiritual
Promises, and find a sweetness in them which they never perceived before, so
that they wonder at themselves to think how many times they have read, and
heard such a Portion of the Word, and never understood it, never found any
relish in it. But now they cry out, O what a good Word is this! Oh delicacies
of our Father's House! What Nourishment, what Cordials are in his Evangelical
Provisions! This is bread from Heaven, Angels food indeed --! What a Table is
here spread? What a Cup is here filled? The Word of God is quite another thing
to such a Soul from what it was before. Sixthly,

6thly, Their affectionate Thoughts of God and Christ; as David expresses
himself in Psalm 116.1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications. So Christians raised up out of their Sorrows, Terrors, and
Despairs, highly admire and love Jesus Christ, in whom they have now believed,
as the Apostle Peter speaks in his first Epistle, Chap. 2. Verse 7. To you that
believe he is precious. Though they were yet but as newborn Babes. Now let me
give you a few Reasons. First,

Reas. 1. No marvel that Christians are so much rejoiced upon the first receipt
of such Assurance, because it is usually the fruit of much studious Pains and
Labor, many Prayers, much waiting, and many strict Examinations of themselves.
That is naturally pleasant which is hardly attained. They that sow in tears,
reap in joy, Psalm 126.5. Secondly,

Reas. 2. It has in it the beginning of Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end
of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Believers now receive the
beginning of that Salvation, which is the end of their Faith. Salvation is the
intended end of Faith, that which Faith is always seeking and aiming at, that
which Faith seeks and waits for, and it is the end of the Faith of Christians,
as that in which it ceases as believing, and is turned into Vision. So Faith of
Assurance is a very joyous thing. Thirdly,

Reas. 3. They commonly think their doubts and fears now gone for all; they
think they shall despair no more, distrust God no more. As David, Psalm 30.6.
said, I shall not be moved. But this third Reason has a mistake in it, as it
ordinarily proves; of which I shall speak afterward. Fourthly,

Reas. 4. God gives this comfort to facilitate his Peoples way to Heaven. If
they should live all their days under Fears and Sorrows, yet Heaven would make
amends for all. But God will not put them so hardly to it. He will not always
contend, lest the spirit fail, Isaiah 57.16. I come now to the Uses.

Use 1. Let none dislike the way of God as a sorrowful and uncomfortable way.
Christianity has its Nights indeed, but it has also its pleasant Mornings,
which makes amends for them. Christians have much labor and sorrow, but it is
recompensed abundantly with rest and ease. They go through an hungry and
thirsty Wilderness, but have Manna to eat, and Water out of the living Rock to
drink. They have in fit season and proportion, the Cup of Consolation given
them in this Life; and the best Wine is reserved to the last, when Christ and
they shall drink it new together in the Kingdom of their Father. As Matthew.
26.29. Secondly,

Use 2. This speaks Encouragement to mourning and trembling Souls, that are
laboring after Assurance of Love of God. Heaviness may endure for a night, but
joy comes in the morning, Psalm 30.5. It is the work of converted Christians to
settle themselves in the hope of Salvation, and the usual way of God, when they
have been exercised a while in this labor, to give them Peace and Joy in
believing. As the Apostle speaks of Sufferings and Prayers for the scattered
Saints in a suffering Estate, in 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of peace, after that ye
have suffered a while, make ye perfect, strengthen, stablish you. So Christians
after that you have feared and trembled a while, the Lord will stablish you in
assurance of his favor; and that will bring in a Joy far exceeding your
present Sorrows. Wait therefore in the use of means, and hearken that you may
hear what God will say, For he will speak peace to his people. You know not how
near your Joy may be at hand, as the Church in the Canticles, Chap. 3. Verse 4.
It was but a little that I passed, etc. but I found him whom my Soul loves.

Use 3. This teaches Christians to try the soundness of their persuasion, that
they are in a state of Grace. It is and must needs be a very rejoicing thing to
be well persuaded of it. If you think your selves safe for Eternity, and under
the favor of God, and yet take no pleasure in it, it is a plain sign you
deceive your selves. And this is doubtless the case of many that think to go to
Heaven when they dye, and yet have no joy of that Opinion, because they have no
love to an heavenly Estate, no desire after Communion with God. This their
Persuasion relieves them against some fear of Hell, but for the most part gives
them very little pleasure of Heaven. But it must yet be granted, that Men may
have some joy of a false Persuasion that they are in a state of Salvation. Let
us therefore enquire into the difference between Joy of Faith, and of a false
Persuasion of Salvation. First,

1. Joy of Faith, and of good Assurance, is a Soul-humbling Joy. It gives all
the Glory to God, and abases the Soul in what it is, Isaiah 29.19. The meek
shall increase their joy, and their joy increase their meekness.

But that of an unsound Persuasion is attended with Pride and Self-confidence,
Luke 18.11. I am not as other men. He despised others.

2. It raises the heart to Heaven and future Glory, and makes the Soul look
earnestly at more of the glorious presence of God, as Moses in his Song, Exodus
15.17, 18. Thou shall bring them in, viz. (thy People Israel) and plant them in
the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou have made
for thee to dwell in: in the sanctuary, O Lord, which thine hands have
established. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. So Cant. 3.4. I held him,
and would not let him go, till I had brought him into my mothers House, etc.
The Church having re-obtained the sight of the favor of God in Christ,
resolves to keep up to him, till she should come to a joyous beholding of him
in Heaven: To which Vision, that which she now sees of him, makes her earnestly
to aspire.

Again, This Joy as it raises the desire toward Heaven, so it moderates the
Affections to earthly things, as Hosea 10.34. Ye suffered with joyfulness the
spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that you have in heaven a
better and more enduring substance. This assurance does not make Christians
rejoice in the loss of their Goods, but in the hope of better in Heaven. Joy of
an unsound Persuasion inclines the mind to earthly things, Phil. 3.28. Who mind
earthly things; while yet they profess to have their hope in the Cross of
Christ, but are its Enemies. Yea, this Joy makes the Soul desire to depart and
be with the Lord in Heaven, Lord, now let thou thy servant dapart in peace,
Luke 2.29. Thirdly,

3. It Is active and obediential, and puts Men upon work and service for God:
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? Psalm
116.12. I Will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. As to stand before
the Lord, is to wait for his order and commands, so to walk before him, is to
perform and execute them. But Joy of an unsound Persuasion takes off from Duty;
What need so much Work and Duty, so must strictness? etc. But this falls in the
third Step or Period, which I shall now speak to from,

ROMANS VI. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of
rightousness.
THE Third Period, or Degree of a Christian's Motion toward his Perfection, is
a resolved settling upon a Course of Christian Practice, which is intimated in
these words, Being made free from Sin, etc. Freedom from Sin in this place, is
to be understood of the State of Justification, into which Men enter in the
very first Act of Faith, (that is) in their first true Conversion, as appears
in Verse 14, 15. Ye are not under the law, but under grace, i. e. not under
Condemnation, but justified freely by the Grace of God. This he called freedom
from Sin in the Text, which may be yet further argued thus. The Apostle speaks
of such a freedom from Sin, as requires a service to righteousness, Verse 9.
Now freedom by way of Sanctification does not require service to righteousness,
but immediately implies it. It Is the same thing to be cleansed from Sin and to
be Holy; freed from the inherency of Sin, and engaged in the service or
practice of righteousness. It were absurd to command a Man, because he is no
ignorant Man, to be wise and knowing; because he is no intemperate Person, to
be sober; when the very quality of the Person mentioned, and the reason of the
command, imply the presence of the thing required. So it is not to be imagined
that the Apostle supposes the Romans free from the indwelling, and the power of
Sin, and therefore persuades them to submit themselves to the practice of
Godliness, for this is implied in that freedom. But he speaks of the freedom of
Justification, which strongly calls for Holiness, and demands Obedience, as
Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. And
thus with thankfulness to God, he reminds them of the gifts of his Grace, under
which being justified, they became Servants of Righteousness. By becoming
Servants, we understand a Self-resignation to the Will of God, in the practice
of the duty of Righteousness and Holiness, as Verse 17. Ye have obeyed from the
heart (that is willingly) the form of Doctrine delivered to you. Neither are
these Romans to be considered only as freed from Condemnation, as apprehending
themselves to be so. As it is evidently the main Subject of the Chapter, Verse
1. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? Where he condemns the ill
use that Men might be supposed at least to make of their Pardon and
Justification; (that is) to take liberty thereupon to Sin, because if they
sinned never so much, they were under Pardon, and the more they sinned, the
greater would be the glory of that Grace that pardoned them. Now no Man can
possibly thus argue himself into Sin, unless he apprehends himself to be
pardoned, and free from Condemnation. So that the Sense of the Text is plain,
that when Christians do truly apprehend themselves to be free from Condemnation
for Sin, they willingly deliver up themselves to be Servants of Righteousness.
So we have clear ground for this Assertion:

Prop. That justified Persons, especially when they apprehend themselves to be
so, do heartily apply themselves to Duty in the practice of Godliness, Psalm
116.8, 9. Thou have delivered my soul from death; I will walk before the Lord,
that is, I Will serve him in holiness and righteousness before him, as is
expressed in Luke 1.74, 75. And Psalm 56.13. Thou have delivered my soul from
death, etc. and 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. It plainly
argues a propension in such Persons, as are in a state of Grace, and apprehend
themselves to be so, to obey the Lord in the perfection of Holiness. And this
is evident in the following Particulars.

1. First, They studiously endeavor to inform themselves of the commanding
Will of God. Whereas before they were mostly inquiring after promises that
might comfort them. Now they earnestly seek to know the Precepts, by which they
ought to be directed in the well ordering of their Life. That, as the Apostle
says, They may prove what is the good and acceptable will of God, Romans 12.2.
Now they make it their business to ask questions, concerning the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of matters of Practice, and enquire what may be done, and what
must be done. Thus the Corinthians wrote to Paul about matters of Practice.
Marriage in time of Suffering, 1 Cor. 7.1, 2. And eating of things offered to
Idols, Chapter 8. Such were the things that they wrote about, that they might
clearly understand what was the Will of God concerning their practice in such
things. This also is evident in the case of the Centurion, Acts 10.6, 7. the
Angel assured him of his acceptance with God, and that he was in a state of
Salvation; but tells him a way to know his Duty, what he ought to do. And
presently he observes the direction, and sends for Peter; carnal Reason would
have replied, If I be accepted with God, then my Sins are pardoned, and I am
safe; what need I more? but immediately says he, Verse 33. I sent for thee,
etc. So it is manifest that Persons in the state of Grace, and perceiving
themselves so, do very much intend the knowledge of their Duty.

2. Secondly, They very gladly accept and comply with the Will of God, when
once they have discovered it. They have in them a new Nature, the Law written
in their hearts, which makes them with pleasure to receive information of their
Duty from the Word, because it agrees with what they have through Grace an
internal Disposition to; 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. We beseech you brethren, and exhort you
by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how you ought to walk, and
to please God, so ye would abound more and more. Ye received the Word, is often
used for an affectionate Reception; as a Man receives him whom he kindly
entertains, and makes much of him. Acts 16.33. And he took them the same hour
of the night, and washed their stripes, and was baptized. And John 14.3. And if
I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self.

The Commands of God are welcome to a Man in the state of Grace; especially
when he once comes to understand himself to be so. It Is but a Meiosis that the
Apostle uses in the 1 John 5.2. His commands are not grievous, that is, they
are very pleasant. As Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous, that is, he is highly
Righteous. Before, they were willing to know the Law, but nothing was
comfortable to them but the Gospel; the word of promise to stay them from
despair. But now they rejoice to know their Duty, and what will please him that
has showed mercy on them. See a notable instance of this in Acts 15.31. They
rejoiced greatly for the consolation; in the Margin it is Exhortation, declaring
matter of Duty. So the Jews rejoiced for that they understood the first words
of the Law, Neh. 8.12.

3. Thirdly, They put themselves upon speedy and present performance of Duty as
soon as they know it. They do not only consent to the Law, and approve of what
it requires, and so resolve upon it for time to come; but according to their
Ability they apply themselves to a present performance of it. As David, I made
haste and delayed not, Psalm 119.60. This some understand by the first love,
Rev. 2.4. Thou have lost thy first love, that is, thou art not so zealous in
thy Work and Duty as formerly. The Apostle's Argument implies this, 1 Cor.
15.58. Always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know. -- The
words evidently presume, That if Men know their acceptance, they will addict,
and give up themselves to Duty. In Scripture Language the same word signifies
Consolation and Exhortation, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words. The Comfort that Christians receive from the Promise, presently
exhorts and persuades them to the Duty which they owe to the Command. So they
set up Duty of Religion in Families, and appoint themselves times of Prayer in
secret; take all opportunities to hear the Word, and provide for the strict
Observation of the Sabbath, etc.

4. Fourthly, They are much pleased with a Course of Christian Duty, when once
they are got into it. It Is no burden but a pleasure to them, as David says in
Psalm 119.14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all
riches. Their Joy in Christ excites them to Obedience, as was said before, and
their Obedience advances their Joy, Psalm 37.23. He delights in the way. Thus
Christians find the ways of Wisdom to be ways of Peace, and her Paths, Paths of
pleasantness.

5. Fifthly, They are very desirous to acquaint themselves with godly Persons,
by whose converse they way be helped on in the way of Holiness. No sooner was
Paul after his Conversion comforted, and assured of God, that he was reconciled
to him, and a chosen Vessel; but presently, He assayed to join himself to the
Disciples, Acts 9.26. even while they were yet afraid of him. He knew very
well, that as he had Abilities whereby he might be of use to them, so by
walking with the wise, himself might become wise, Prove. 15.20. Therefore David
speaks of Evil Company in Psalm 119.115. Depart from me ye evil doers, for I
will keep the commandments of my God.

6. Sixthly, They are impatient of diversion from the way of Duty, or
Impediments in it. If any thing falls out that hinders them from a good
Exercise in the season of it, it is a Sorrow and Affliction to them. When they
are taken off from hearing a Sermon, or withheld from an Assembly for Prayer,
they bear it as a great Affliction, as David bemoaned himself when he was
withheld from the Tabernacle and the Altar, Psalm 42.1. As the heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. And Psalm 84.1,
2. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my Soul longs, yea, even
faints for the courts of the Lord. This made it so great a woe to David to
dwell in Mesech, etc. or that he was kept in a wandering Condition, like the
Inhabitants of Arabia Deserta, with them, (that is) wandering as they do, and
so kept off religious attendance on the Lord. So among those whose manner of
Life was an impediment to him in his purpose and design to walk with God; they
were quarrel-some and contentious, and he could have no peace nor rest with
them, unless he would go with them, and do as they did, Psalm 120.5. Woe is me,
that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. Now we see that
this is eminent in Persons coming to a comfortable persuasion of their Interest
in Christ, they are impatient of any hindrance in Christian Duty; they much
intend the practice of Godliness and Christian Duty. But there are some
weaknesses attending this their intention of Duty, especially at this Age,
which here we must take some notice of.

1. Their Obedience at the first stands most in outward Actions. The first care
of a Christian about his Obedience, is to rectify his life, and amend his ways.
He has first notice of his outward actual Sin, before he comes to be so much
aware of his indwelling Corruption; and so he does not yet effectually
consider, no nor understand what work he has to do within himself: Like
unskilful Menders of the Highways, where they find a Slough or Quick-sand, they
lay a little Gravel on the top, and that holds awhile, and then sinks in; but
wiser Men dig to the bottom, and scour the Ditches, to drain away the water,
and so clear the way. Every converted man knows the Doctrine of Original Sin,
in some degree; but men little think what the sin and wickedness of their
Nature is, when first they set out Heavenward, till some experience of
themselves has showed them what false and treacherous, proud and selfish, yea,
sensual and brutish hearts they have within them; and therefore at first if
they can reform their Lives, and outward Actions, they think they have done
their business, and so fall directly upon that the Corinthians at first were
careful and inquisitive about outward Actions and Estates, Marriage and
Celibacy, (or single Life) 1 Cor. 7.1. eating things offered to Idols, whether
they might touch them or no, Chap. 8.1. These were their work and enquiry, not
as yet so much minding their Pride, which made them contentious and
schismatical; and therefore the Apostle heard not of that immediately from
themselves, as of the other matters; but by those of the house of Chloe, which
some take to have been a Town or Village, or Family, at some distance from
Corinth, which had observed it in them, 1 Cor. 1.11. For it has been declared
unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the house of Chloe, that
there are contentions among you. Secondly,

2. They are usually very much led by the example of good men, as to the manner
and method of Christian practice, without a due enquiry after the
Scripture-grounds for it. Though they are heartily desirous to know the Will of
God as before, yet in many things they contentedly fall into the same Road
wherein Christians of their time walk, without examining the Rule, as thinking
that certainly such good men must needs be right. Much is said about the way to
advance Uniformity, but Experience shows that Custom and Example is mostly
inducing to Uniformity. Well-disposed men commonly associate themselves to
those whom they look upon as Disciples of Christ, and do as they do, without
looking any further. Hence they are subject to be puzzled by men of unsound
Opinions, that object against their Christian practice, because they have
little but example to plead for it. And here young Converts often fail; not
that they follow others in that that is good, (for that argues humility, and a
good esteem of them that fear God) but that they observe not the Apostle's
Rule, which teaches to consider how those others follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be
ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. Thirdly,

3. They do many times unduly divide themselves between Duties of Religion, and
their particular Callings. They are at first so eager to hear Sermons, and join
with others in Prayer and Conference, and such Christian Exercises, that they
take not a fitting Consideration of what God requires of them in their
particular stations: So their Families suffer, if they have Families, or their
Parents or Masters are injured by their unseasonable attendance on Exercises of
Christianity, while they forget the Ordinance of God, that in six days we
should do all our work, all that is incumbent on us, as necessary to be done:
Yea, this way sometimes, young Professors take themselves off from their
business, and unfit themselves for it, and sometimes disorder their minds, and
weaken their very natural Faculties, by an irregular Intention. I say, by an
irregular Intention upon spiritual things; and this turns much to the
disparagement of Religion, among them that have a mind to take up all
Exceptions against it that they can meet with; as if Religion put People
besides themselves. Thus it is many times with Christians at first setting out,
but afterward we find them, and they find themselves slow enough, and
lamentably backward to the best Exercises. Fourthly,

4thly, The newness of the way of Christianity to them, is very much a cause of
their pleasure in it. They take up Duty in obedience to God, and love it for
its goodness; and so far Grace acts them, and works in them: But besides, there
is a natural pleasure which they take in it, as a new course of life, to which
they have not been used: And this serves for a while, to hold them up to a
great deal of forwardness and activity, which afterward wears off with its
cause, and leaves but so much activity behind, as there is Grace in the Soul to
produce and maintain it. This sometimes makes Christians seem to others to have
been but Hypocrites in their former diligence in Christianity, because they are
now more remiss; and commonly themselves at some time or other, are brought to
suspect that they have no saving Grace in them at all, because as they think
they are grown worse; whereas indeed there is but an accidental Motive fallen
off, which makes the Motion slower than it was, though the true and proper
Principle remains. As if a Man pulls a Clock or Jack by the Line, when it is
going, it goes apace; but when he withdraws his hand, it goes more slowly, and
yet it goes as fast as the proper weight made it go before, and is not grown a
worse Clock or Jack, but only the Hand-help is withdrawn. This newness is it
which causes that first love which the Ephesians are blamed for leaving, Rev.
2.4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love. Now this some take to be the zeal and forwardness of Christianity,
for the newness of it: But some may object and say,

Object. This may seem to be no fault in the Ephesians, and not reprovable in
them; it is no fault to leave it. I answer:

Answ. It Is Sin in others as in them, when we do not love Duty still in as high
degree for Christ's sake, when such accidental motions fall off, as when they
are at the highest, as a Schoolboy should love his Book when it is old, as when
it was fresh and new: so perhaps new Converts loved Christianity better at
first than afterward, but it is their fault.

Thus far have I been speaking concerning Christians that are hopefully and
comfortably in a state of salvation. I now proceed to the reason of this, why
Christians that are comfortably assured of their safe estate, do give up
themselves to the practice of godliness, why they are so active and forward in
the Duties of Religion. First,

1 R. Christians comfortably assured of their Justification, or Interest in
Jesus Christ, do therefore heartily give up themselves to the service of
Righteousness, because they love God, and this is the proper exercise of their
love. The grace of love to God is implanted in their Souls in their first
Conversion, when as yet they have no clear assurance of their salvation; but
when they come to a comfortable persuasion that they are in a state of grace,
they love God, because he has first loved them; see Psalm. 116.1. I love the
Lord, because he has heard my voice. And in 1 John 4.19. We love him, because
he first loved us. Secondly,

2 R. The trouble and torments which their Sin has brought upon them, makes
them gladly betake themselves to a course of Holiness, in hope to be at ease:
Psalm. 25.12, 13. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in
the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease, etc. Obedience seems
to flesh and blood a very hard and wearisom course of life, and therefore it
pleases God so to order it, that men should return to him, wearied with the
troubles and vexatious fears and despairs which attend on Sin, that they may be
the more willing to give up themselves to Holiness and Obedience.

3 R. Thirdly, They know it is the way to their complete happiness. Tho Heaven
be not merited by Holiness, yet it is not to be obtained without it; as Heb.
12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. It Is a usual saying of
Divines, That Holiness does not merit Heaven, but it is the way to it; and this
Christians understanding, are more willing and forward in the practice of
Holiness. I come now to the Uses.

Use 1. This confutes the usual Objection against the Doctrine of Assurance of
Salvation, that it leads to the neglect of duty; for, say they that deny
Assurance attainable, If once men be persuaded that they are in a state of
Salvation, and shall be saved, they will presently think it needless to take
more pains about their Salvation. But we have seen, that a comfortable
persuasion of their being in a safe Estate, is an effectual argument to duty;
and Christians never set so courageously and resolvedly upon the practice of
Godliness, as when they have attained a good assurance of their Salvation.

Use 2. This Doctrine which I have been propounding to you, may convince men of
their Self-deceit, who neglect duty, and take liberty to sin, because they hope
to be saved. It Is a false Opinion of an interest in God, that stands with the
neglect of his Commands; especially when it is the ground and argument of that
neglect. I am God alsufficient, walk before me, and be perfect, Genesis 15. So God
indents with them whom he receives for his people, and they consent with him.
You that live beside the known Rules of Christianity, without any stated
worship of God in your Families, without the Exercise of Secret Prayer, and
meditations in your Chambers, and Closets; you that ordinarily profane the
Sabbath, and lay it common to your worldly Uses; that are ordinarily guilty of
swearing, lying, defrauding and injuring your Neighbors; that are intemperate
in eating and drinking, etc. and you that so clearly know your sin, that you
use your art and skill to hide it from the eyes of men: Do you not know, that
the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against such unrighteousness of men?
Yea, but possibly some may say, We have believed in Jesus Christ, and are
justified through his Blood, and hope to be saved, as well as those that live
the strictest lives. Certainly your hopes deceive you, and you are in a
perishing estate. For the knowledge of being in a state of Grace, will make
them apply themselves to the practice of Godliness. -- being made free from
sin, ye became the servants of righteousness. Such is the case of those that
encourage themselves in the Examples of Noah, and David, Forefathers, or of
men reputed godly.

Use 3. It helps much to confirm Christians in their hopes of Salvation, who
find themselves moved and excited to Obedience; it is a sign your Persuasion is
rightly grounded.

And thus much for this third Step of Converts toward their Salvation; A
resolved settling upon a course of Christian Practice.

2 COR. V. 1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God.
THE fourth Period, space, or interval of a Christian's motion toward
Perfection that I shall speak of, is a laborious endeavor to mortify
in-dwelling Sin; which is intimated in these words, as here laid in an
Exhortation from Chapter the Sixth. When a Christian under persuasions that he
is in a state of Grace, has for some time made it his business to reform and
rectify his life; though he meets with no small obstacles without, yet he
manifestly perceives at length, that the greatest difficulty of his work arises
from the evil that is within him; that other law, of which the Apostle speaks
so fully, Romans 7.23. But I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind; and thereupon proceeds to the great Design, of mortifying his
inherent Lusts and Corruptions. Let us cleanse our selves, etc.

The Apostle Paul here represents himself, and the Corinthians.

1. First, As in a state of Grace and Salvation: Having the Promises, in which
God undertakes to be their Father, and takes them for his Children.

2dly, As being comfortably persuaded that they were in that happy estate.

3dly, As intending to perfect holiness: That is, to perform the Will of God in
a course of obedience; Perfecting holiness in the fear of God. And in order to
this, he stirs up himself and them, to a strenuous and diligent endeavor, to
purge out their yet remaining and indwelling Sin. Let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. And hence we have this Doctrinal
Observation.

Doctr. That Christians heartily intending obedience to God in their Lives, are
thereupon effectually disposed to mortify Sin dwelling in their Souls, Heb.
21.1. Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us,
and run with patience, etc. They that are heartily intended to run the race of
duty, are thenceforth put upon it to cast off the weight and fetters of
inherent Sin: Such is Paul's report of his own Example, in the 1 Cor. 9.26. I
so run, not as uncertain (that is) that I may certainly obtain: There is his
intention of obedience: And that he may so obey, he mortifies the body of Sin.
I keep under my body, and bring it under subjection. Now that a man does indeed
intend the mortifying of his Sin, that is within him, will appear, if we
consider these Evidences following: First,

Evid. 1. Such Christians they are full of sorrowful complaints of the evil and
naughtiness of their hearts; they would go forward in a way of holiness, but
being hindered by evil Inclinations, and Indispositions to duty, they sadly
bewail the unhappy temper of their Souls; which plainly argues a great desire
and inclination to a better and more purified Estate. Men that are always
complaining of the evil posture of things Political, State-matters,
Maleadministrations, and Mis-governments, are usually looked upon as studying
Innovations. So here, The man that is generally querulous against the
Corruptions of his own heart, is certainly to be accounted a man aiming at the
purging them out, and endeavoring a thorough Reformation within his own
Territories. Thus Paul, O wretched man that I am! Romans 7.24. Earnest complaints
against Persons and Parties in a Nation, are plain indications of a desire and
intention to expel them, if it may be, and drive them out. Christians! What is
your Errand to God, when you make your secret Applications to him? is it,
beside other things of like importance, very much to give in Accusations
against your proud Hearts, your sensual Hearts? your covetous, worldly,
hypocritical Hearts, This is a great sign you are endeavoring the
mortification of your Pride, Sensuality, Covetousness, and Hypocrisy.
Christians at first mostly confess their actual sins, especially which lay upon
their Consciences; but after some progress made in Christianity, and some
essays to reform their Lives, they come in with new complaints against
themselves, for the Sin that is within them, that gives rise and egress to all
their actual Sins.

2dly, Such persons are utterly unsatisfied with all their former humiliations
for sin, as finding themselves worse, and more desperately wicked than ever
they thought they were; all the Sorrows that ever they have had for Sin, seem
nothing in proportion to that vileness and wickedness which they observe in
their hearts, and therefore their common complaint is of a hard heart, a stony
heart, etc. Now this is manifestly an assay to mortify their Sin, to drown and
choke it (as I may say). In godly sorrow, an endeavor (in the language of the
Prophet) to wash the heart from wickedness, Jer. 4.14. as the words may be
expounded by James 4.8, 9. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your
hearts ye double-minded. Though sorrow and mourning do nothing to the washing
away the guilt of Sin, yet it does much to the removal of the filth of it:
Though it has no validity to satisfaction for sin, yet it has much efficacy to
purification of the Soul from it.

3. They are always inquisitive after means and directions to the bettering of
their hearts. What may I do (says one) to get an humble heart, an heavenly
mind? Inquiring how to suppress evil Thoughts, and keep them out; to subdue
unruly affections, and resist sinful Desires. As before they were much in
asking what is the will of God, that they might do it; so they are now in
seeking how they may withstand and overcome their own Wills which they find
rebelling against the known Command of God. As Diseased Persons are always
asking, when they meet with those that are skilful, what is good against a
Consumption, a Dropsy, the Scurvy, etc. so Christians heartily intending
holiness and mortification of their Sins, are much disposed to Questions
(though not in the Jewish sense) about purifying: Questions about healing of
Soul-diseases, and purging out of evil Humors. That Word, that Sermon, is most
acceptable to such a Soul, which gives most proper Directions, and prescribes
most hopeful Remedies against evil and sinful Inclinations, and gives him most
assistance against himself, as he is corrupt and sinful. He is not so much
taken with a fine notion, or an ingenious gloss upon a Text, or a witty
Interpretation, as a solid direction against the evil of indwelling Sin.

4thly, They are always calling for the help of the spirit against their sins,
as finding themselves unable to destroy and mortify them. Who shall deliver me,
(that is to say) wilt not thou, O God? as Psalm 60.9, 10. At first newly
converted Souls are all for the comforting operation of the Spirit; but now for
his Soul-sanctifying Work, that they may through the spirit mortify the deeds
of the body, Romans 8.13. and as David requests in Psalm 51.10. Create in me a
clean heart, O God.

5thly, They are altogether uncontented with the good apprehensions that others
profess to have of them. Yea rather discontented at them, because they know so
much evil by themselves which others are not aware of. So though their Brethren
justify them, they condemn themselves, and have it usual in a readiness to
answer, Oh, if these men that seem to have such hopeful thoughts of me did but
know the vile workings of my wicked heart, they would never endure me. They
judge of me as they think, but little think what I know by my self. The heart,
as Solomon says, knows its own grief. The Soul that is burdened with sinful
Lusts, and laboring against them, cannot believe the Case of any others to be
so bad as his. As no man thinks his Neighbor's trouble, though of the same
kind, so grievous as his own. This high dislike and loathing of a man's own
Sin, when it lies quite out of sight of other men, is a great evidence that the
work of Mortification is set on foot, and proceeding in the Soul; for God
gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. and as Grace is coming in, Sin is going
out. And thus have I endeavored to show you those Evidences that appear in
Christians that are heartily intending and endeavoring the mortifying of
inherent Sin. But now a little to speak to the consequence which the endeavor
of mortification has to the sincere practice of Holiness; or the Reasons why
Christians intending an holy Life, are thereupon disposed to mortify indwelling
Sin.

R. 1. A sincere intention of obedience gives a man notice of the sin within
him. By a sincere endeavor to reform his Life, a Christian comes to discover
Sin that is within himself. As it is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.1. When I would
have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered; and Romans 7.23.
I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind. Newly
converted Christians, till they have tried awhile what they can do in practice
of Godliness, little think what proud, stubborn, earthly and hypocritical
hearts they have within them; little think what work they have to do in their
own Souls. But by that time they have applied themselves awhile to it, they
find such a backwardness to duty, as they could not have imagined, and such an
aptness to receive Temptations and Sin, without temptation, as they did not
think themselves guilty of; their often relapses, and breaking of Resolutions,
shows them the falsehood and treachery of their hearts, which they were not
formerly aware of; and now they see that they have a great work of reformation
to do as well within as without; as if a man reform his Family, he shall find
not only ill Companions without, but some of his own Children against it.

2dly, Internal Sin once discovered, appears more evil and hateful to a
Christian, than his outward sinful Actions. It is that which the Apostle calls
exceeding sinful Sin, as Romans 7.13. Outward Acts of Sin derive all their Evil
from the vicious Inclinations, and evil Intentions of the Soul: The more there
is of Pride, Wilfulness and Stubborness of the Heart in any Sin, the worse and
more hateful it is. If we sin wilfully, Hebr. 10.26. after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. And the soul
that does ought presumptuously, shall be cut off, Numb. 15.30. So that now a
Christian sees that he has cause and need to labor more to mortify his
internal Corruption, than to rectify his outward Actions, that being the
greatest part of his work.

3dly, Outward Reformation can never be thoroughly carried on, without reforming
the heart. All the practice of Christianity that we can attain to in our
outward Actions, while Sin is unmortified in the heart, is but forced and
violent, and such as will not hold. Weeds, you know, that are cut off above the
ground, will grow again, you must pluck them up by the roots if you would clear
the ground of them; therefore the Apostle blesses God for the Romans, that they
had obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered them, Romans
7.13. Cleansing the heart, is of necessity to washing the hands in innocence,
Psalm. 73.13. till they come to this, Christians do but intend and assay to
rectify their Lives, never do it to purpose. But

4thly, The motion of a Christian toward God, is in prosecution of communion
with him, which is hindered by indwelling Sin; Iniquities separate. If a
Christian would walk with God, he must cleanse his heart, or he can have no
intimacy with him. This Duty of Self-cleansing, is propounded in the Text to
this very end, that we may attain the happiness of God's gracious presence,
that he may dwell and walk with us, as in Chap. 6.16, 17. I will dwell in them,
and walk in them. Where God walks with a man, he dwells within him; and that
cannot be without an ejection of Sin. The Apostle James requiring men to draw
nigh to God, promises that he will draw nigh to them, presently commands them
to purify their hearts, Jam. 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to
you. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts.

5thly, Mortificatson of Sin, is the proper effect of a sincere Obedience.
Every gracious action adds something to the habit or principle of grace in the
Soul, so much it does to the weakening of the contrary corruption. To perform
the work of a godly man, is the way to become more godly. The way of the Lord
is strength to the upright, Prove. 10.29. And by holding on his way, he grows
stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. Now the stronger a man is in grace, the weaker
sin is in him; contrary qualities destroy one another, as they increase; Grace,
by doing its own work, undoes its Adversary. I now proceed to the Uses.

1 Use. The first Use is for comfort to sincere Christians against all the
activity of men to hinder them in their spiritual work and business. A main
part of a Christian's work lies where men can give it no impediment, nor so
much as see what is done; it lies within doors, where no other person can force
an entry. It was the great endeavor of the Jews enemies to hinder their work
of building the Temple, and then of the wall at Jerusalem, Neh. 4.11. And our
adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst
among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. So it is the design of
Satan and his Followers to hinder the work of Christianity; but against this
part of a Christian's work they can do nothing. He may throw down and demolish
the works of Satan, and fortify himself inwardly against temptations and
seducements, and none can hinder him or observe him; all external opposition
serves to carry on this work, to make Christians more holy within, more
heavenly-minded, more zealous for God, and indifferent to the world. So they
that would hinder you from the outward part of your Duty, will further you in
that which is your great and main work, purging out malice and envy, and wrath
and bitterness against them; and for all that ever they can do, you may be
strengthening your selves in your love to God, lowering your selves in humility,
bowing your souls to patience, and persuading your hearts to love them that use
you most unkindly and injuriously: while men are acting their enmity against
you, you may be confirming your love to them, which will be no small advantage
to you; Against these there is no law, Gal. 5.22.

2d Use. The second Use shows the unsoundness of their Religion who rest in
external Reformation. Christians indeed begin there, but they cannot rest
there, nor suffice themselves with it. It Is that which our Savior charges on
the Scribes and Pharisees, that they made clean the outside only. You are
temperate, and abstain from Excesses; just and honest in your dealings; you
worship God in public, and in Families as others: But what do you within
doors? Thirdly,

3d Use. It shows how far they are from true Christianity, that are not careful
so much as to rectify the course of their Lives; who make not clean the
outside, that are not ashamed to appear outwardly Ungodly, Atheistical,
Voluptuous, Intemperate. Fourthly,

4th Use. The Fourth Use is, to persuade Christians to the mortification of Sin.

1. Resolvedly deny the motions of Sin, when first you observe them. As Asaph,
when he found his heart about to speak bad language against God, Psalm. 73.15.
presently recollects his thoughts, and says, If I speak so, I shall offend
against the generation of thy children.

2dly, When you are overtaken in any signal act of Sin, take an early
opportunity to humble your selves for it: So what Sin gains by your Fall, it
will lose, and somewhat more by your Humiliation.

3dly, In all your resistances to Sin, look up to Heaven for help. As the
Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5.3. Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

4thly, Interest all your Crosses and Afflictions into Rebukes for Sin, that
you may set your hearts against it.

5thly, Aim still at perfection of Holiness. As in the Text, Perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. Keep up an awful fear of God. And thus much for
the fourth Period of a Christian's motion toward Perfection, A laborious
endeavor to mortify indwelling Sin.

ROMANS VII. 24. O wretched man that I am!
THE Fifth Step or Period of a Convert's motion toward Perfection, that I shall
treat of, is the Sou's Conflict with Discouraging-troubles arising from the
sense of indwelling Sin; which as it is the main Subject of the latter part of
this Chapter, so is most emphatically expressed in these words, O wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death! or, as it is in the
Margin, from this body of death.

I confess I cannot well say how long Paul had been converted when he wrote
this Epistle, the time of his writing it being uncertain; but it is certainly
evident first,

1. That he speaks of himself as a converted Person, and in the state of Grace,
renewed and sanctified in some good degree; his Will being habitually
determined against the evil which he did, and to the good which he did not, as
verses 15, 16. and verses 18, 19. He speaks of himself, of his inner man,
delighting in the law of God, verse 22. which is the very practice of a godly
man, as David speaks in Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea,
thy law is within my heart. The Law is always grievous to a wicked man; though
he may like well of some Duties required by it, yet the Law it self is a burden
to him, which he is not willing to bear, etc. All this that he professes of
himself, (to wit) that he had such a will to good against evil, and delighting
in the Law, was highly good, and that for which he is thankful, verse 25. I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. But he utterly denies any good to
dwell in him as carnal, verse 18. For I know that in me (that is in my flesh)
dwells no good thing. So that if he had now been altogether fleshly and
carnal, thus much good could not have been in him, nor any at all.

2dly, That he speaks of himself as laboring to do the Will of God in a course
of Obedience. He did some good, and intended and was desirous to do all the
rest, even that he did not; and though he did many evil actions, yet his
intention and endeavor was against them all, which is manifestly the case of a
man applying himself to holiness of life.

3dly, That in his endeavoring thus to obey God in all his Actions, he found a
strong and vigorous Inclination in his heart to Sin, and against Holiness. As
appears, verse 21. I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me. And ver. 23. I see another law in my members warring against
the law of my mind.

4thly, That upon this discovery of so much wickedness within him, he turned
his hearty endeavors against it. As appears by these words, verse 23.
Rebelling, Warring, leading Captive. In his mind he had (as before) entertained
the Law of God, and in obedience thereto he made resolute Decrees against his
contrary Inclinations: But they rebelled; he fought against them, and they
against him; for a War cannot be without fighting on both sides. And when he
sinned at any time, he was carried Captive by his indwelling Sin, which plainly
argues he made resistance against it; for they are Adversaries one to another,
that carry one another Captive.

5thly, That in this War against his evil Inclinations, he found himself too
weak of himself to obtain the Victory, and therefore cries out as a distressed
man in these words, O wretched man that I am! No man will so bewail his case,
that finds it in the power of his hand to keep himself, O wretched man that I
am! it is the same word that is translated Misery, Romans 3.16. Destruction and
misery are in their ways. And Jam. 5.1. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl
for your miseries that shall come upon you; O miserable man I --! It Is made of
two Greek words, which signify Suffering and Lamentation; that is to say, I am
a lamentable Sufferer. Hence we observe this Doctrine:

Doctr. That Christians heartily endeavoring and laboring against Indwelling
Sin, are subject to much discouraging and afflicting trouble about it. O
wretched man that I am! The very Phrases of mortifying the members of the body
of Sin, Coloss. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, etc. Crucifying the Flesh, imply much pain and anguish; killing
and crucifying are painful things.

Object. Yea, you will say, to them that are killed; now that is Sin, not the
man that kills it. I answer:

Answ. Sin in a man is so near to him, and has such an union with him, that it
is not unfitly called himself. And so the man that mortifies Sin, as he is
spiritually renewed, mortifies himself as he is sinful and unsanctified;
therefore the Apostle speaking to the Colossians, bids them mortify their
members; that is to say, your hands, your feet, your eyes, which is the very
language of our Savior, If thine eye offend, pluck it out, Mat. 5.29. And that
of David, Psalm. 38.4, 5. is most plainly and naturally resolved into this
sense, Mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me. He was engaged, as every good man is, in a Combat against Sin,
and the work too hard for him, and his Sin a burden too heavy, and that
distressed him.

Troubles of Christians about Indwelling Sin.
1. The first Trouble is, That it seems to increase and grow upon them. It Is a
very grievous thing to be conflicting with a growing Adversary, as David says,
Psalm. 3.1. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! A great discouragement
and heart-killing thing to a Christian striving against Sin, when he apprehends
it more and more abounding in him. When the Body of Sin appears in him like the
Hydra, of which the Poets give us their Fictions of a Serpent of Fifty Heads,
whereof when one was cut off, two more presently grew up in the stead of it;
what hope off overcoming such an Adversary! and the unlikeliness of the
Victory, must needs be a sore trouble to the Combatant. Thus Paul complains
that he was sold under Sin, verse 14. as a Captive or a Slave that is sold in
the Market by him that has him in his power to do what he will with him, as 2 Timothy 2. ult. Taken captive by Satan at his will. He that is sold, is more
hopeless than he that is but newly taken. Alas! says the Soul, I am at that
pass now, that one sight of a tempting Object, one word, one thought will hurry
away my Soul into sinful desires, and reaching after forbidden things, which
awhile ago were abominable to me, and I thought all the Art of Hell could never
reconcile me to them; sure I am much worse than ever, O wretched man that I am!
Besides this, growth of Sin appears, in a woeful backwardness and indisposition
to Duties of Holiness, to which the Soul was much inclined heretofore. Time was
when I found no hindrance to Duty but worldly business, or the prohibition of
Superiors, or the Scorns of Neighbors, etc. And if I could but get time from
my Calling, and leave of my Friends, and liberty of my Superiors, I easily
broke through other discouragements, and found nothing to stay me; but now when
I have leisure enough, and leave enough to wait on God in Duties, my heart
stands off from them, I am fain to force and drive my self to them, and many
times cannot do so much; certainly Sin is increasing and growing in me, against
all my Prayers, Resolutions and Endeavors to forsake it.

2dly, They very much suspect themselves to be altogether graceless and
unrenewed. They see so much Sin in themselves, and that so hateful and
abominable, that they can hardly think it possible it should stand with Grace.
It Is true the Apostle Paul could in this case distinguish between himself
absolutely considered, and himself in his flesh or fleshly part; and therefore
when he was saying, In me there dwells no good thing, he limited it to the
flesh in me, that is, in my flesh; but every Christian has it not in a
readiness so to distinguish. Many sincere Christians conclude themselves to
have no Grace, because that they see they have so much Sin; and this is a sore
Affliction. I had hoped, says a Christian, that I was in Christ, and took much
joy in my supposed saved Estate; after much fear and terror, I had my heart
quieted, and I thought upon right grounds; then I set upon Reformation, and I
thought was acted in it by the Holy Spirit; but now I fear the work of
Conversion was never soundly wrought in me, as the Disciples were distressed
with fear that Jesus was not the Christ; We hoped it had been he that should
have redeemed Israel. I find my self so proud, so sensual, so under the power
of brutish and base Lusts, that it seems utterly improbable there should be one
spark of saving Grace in me. Oh sad Case! so many Convictions, so many Sorrows
endured, so many Hopes conceived, so many Prayers for Mercy poured out, and so
many Purposes and Resolutions of Obedience taken up, and all lost; and am I a
graceless Sinner yet? O wretched man that I am! Such a Soul knows, by what it
has formerly felt and suffered under condemnings of Law and Conscience, what
it is to be in an unregenerate Estate, and therefore is most sadly afflicted
when it falls under fear of being yet in that Estate.

3dly, They many times fear they shall never prevail against their Indwelling
Sin, because they find it so strong and active. They labor sadly under bondage
to their Lusts, and they fear it will never be better with them, and this must
needs be a sore trouble to a Soul that has so much Grace as to make Sin a
burden to him, and to make him hunger and thirst after Righteousness. It was a
grievous thing to David, that God seemed to forget him; but that made it a full
Affliction indeed, that he begun to fear that it might be so for ever, Psalm.
13.1. To be always thus enslaved to vile affections, etc. it is a woeful misery.
What should I do in this Case, says the Soul? if I humble my self, acknowledge
my Sin, fly to mercy, and cry out for help from Heaven, etc. it is but the same
I have done already, and, for ought I see, the evil Spirit prevails upon me, as
that of old did upon the Sons of Sceva; and if this be the success of such
Assays, what hope but I must be a Slave to Satan, and to abominable Lusts while
I live?

4thly, They charge themselves as Hypocrites in all their Profession and
Practice of Christianity hitherto. If they had been sincere, they think they
could not have been so bad and so base, as they now find themselves to be
within. No, sure such an heart as mine is, must needs be unsanctified and
graceless, and then have I dissembled with God and Man all this while? How
often have Ministers comforted me as a Convert, and Christians received me, and
prayed for me as a Believer, and thought a good Work was wrought in me, and
were glad of it; and alas, I fear, I have been all this while but a painted
Hypocrite, as the Martyr said of himself. This is a sore trouble to him that
knows the danger that Hypocrites are in, but much more to him that hates
Hypocrisy.

5thly, They sadly fear they shall return to their former wickedness, or more,
in their lives. Seeing they have so much Sin in themselves, they can hardly
hope better, but that God will give them up to the Lusts of their hearts, and
then they believe they shall be as bad as any. Work Iniquity with greediness,
to their own shame, and the shame of the Religion they have professed, and of the
Ordinances on which they have attended, and the People of God with whom they
have conversed; and this fear is a great Affliction to them, though it be a
good sign of sincerity.

6thly, Sometimes they tremble in the fear of some dreadful Judgment, or sore
Rebuke from God to fall upon them. They think God will not long bear with such
sinful Wretches, Persons so proud, so sensual, so hypocritical, but some way or
other providentially manifest his displeasure against them; if they be
graceless, they know God is angry with the wicked every day. And if he intends
good to them, they look he should take some severe Course with them; therefore
David prays, Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, etc. Psalm 38.1. They find their
hearts so lazy, and themselves so formal and hypocritical, they think sure God
will deal severely with them in their Persons and Families, etc.

7thly, They are often afflicted with the fear of perishing eternally. That
this fear was rising in the heart of the Apostle himself, when he spoke these
words, may very probably be collected from what follows, Chap. 8.1. where he
seems to encourage himself against the danger of its Death, and the means which
he professes himself to use for prevention of that danger: There is therefore
now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. And in 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a castaway. Which shows that he was not altogether
above the fear of it. And indeed this must needs be a sore trouble to them that
have tasted of the Wrath of God in their former Convictions, and have had the
sense of his Love shed abroad in their hearts, and have been comforted in the
hope of Glory. Neither Judas nor Cain ever felt such horror and astonishment
under their despairs, as a sincere Christian in this case of fears would fall
into, if he were not upheld by a secret power of Grace. For alas, they never
knew so much of the Love and Goodness of God, as the weakest of sincere
Christians knows, nor ever had such desires and hopes to enjoy him.

I come now to some Causes of these great Troubles in sincere Christians about
Sin within.

1. The first Cause is, -- The awakened activity of Sin and Satan being
effectually disturbed by the Spirit of Mortification. When the strong Man keeps
the House, all things are at peace, Luke 11.21. i. e. till the stronger, the
Lord Jesus, enters and begins to take away his Goods, and his Harness; Then
Satan bestirs himself, and raises all the force of sordid Lusts and
Corruptions, which lay much more still before; if Sin had been so active
before, the Sinner would have proceeded to the very acting of the Sin, which
now it does but reach at, being checked and held back by Grace, which makes him
say in himself; how shall I do this great wickedness? But now, as things are
ordered by the blessed Work of God, there is a principle of Grace that forbids
and hinders the acting of those Sins, to which corrupted Nature is disposed.
And that conflict makes a great unquietness in the Soul, and so gives a
Christian much more notice of the wickedness of his heart than ever he had; and
hence arise those Troubles, Distresses, and Fears, which I have spoken of;
there being so much ado to hold in the wickedness that would be breaking out,
and to repress the inward Motions of it. As when Physic is admitted into the
Stomach, ill Humors are rouzed, and that causes hard Gripes, sick Qualms, and
sad Complaints. These are, ultimi conatus moribundi peccati, the last
Struglings of dying Sin. First Cause,

1. It Is the subtilty of Satan.

1. To solicit some Men less to outward Acts of Sin, while unconverted;
because he sees and observes it is usual with God, to make their great and gross
wickedness occasional to their Conviction and Conversion, according to that in
Matthew. 21.31. Publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. And
therefore having hold on Men in a natural Estate, he is not so zealous to
excite them to Sin, lest he should over-do and suffer loss. Therefore, I say,
he solicites some less; for there are whom he drives on to much outrageous
Wickedness, as the Publicans and Harlots.

2dly, To stir up Men converted as much as he can to Sin, that he may make
Apostates of them. If they be not sincere, which he knows not; or make them
shame their Profession by gross Acts of Wickedness, or at least cause them to
go on with the more trouble and discomfort.

3dly, It is the nature of contraries to be excited by the Opposition of their
contraries; as we see in Nature it self. Water thrown upon the Smith's Coals
makes them burn the more fiercely, and so in Meteors. Philosophers tell us,
That the cold Cloud gathering about an hot Vapor, makes the Heat gather it
self together, and so it fires, and thence comes the Lightning and the Thunder.
Thus Grace in the Soul pressing hard upon Corruption, makes it more vehement in
its struggling to preserve it self. Thus it is no wonder though Christians
striving against Sin, think it grows upon them, because it is, indeed, more
active and stirring than ever, though not more in the Habit or Principle. They
have more evil desires, and reachings, and wishings toward Sin; and thinkings,
and ruminations upon it than ever. Sin that was always in them, is more sinning
in them. Lust is more drawing aside and enticing, and in conceiving, as James
1.14, 15. than ever it was. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his
own lust, and enticed. When Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and Sin
when it is finished, brings forth Death, though the body of Sin it self was
as much and more in the Soul. And hence come all the forementioned Troubles,
the former Apprehensions which the Soul had of its peace with God, being for a
time eclipsed by these sad appearances.

Cause 2. They see Sin more clearly than they did before. The Spirit of Grace
is a Spirit of Light in the understanding, by which they see the evil and
sinfulness of all those within-door workings of Corruption, which they scarce
found any fault withal before, and take notice of those stirrings of Sin which
they did not mind before; and so Sin being indeed more active than it was, and
they having better Eyes to see it, no marvel that these think it much grown,
and be otherwise much troubled at it, as Paul says, I see another law rebelling
and warring, etc.

3dly, They have a greater dislike of Sin. As understanding more of the evil
nature of it; and the worse apprehension they have of it, the more they are
troubled and disheartened at the sight of it. If you see a company of Men
coming toward you, and have no bad suspicion of them, you are not moved; but
if you be informed, and assured, they are Thieves and Murderers, then you think
they are many more than you accounted them, and your heart trembles at the
sight of them. Now the more Grace is in the Soul, the worse opinion Men have of
Sin, and the more afraid they are of it. I come now to the Uses. First,

Use 1. This shows their unsoundness in Christianity, whatever their Profession
and external Practice may be, who are untroubled about their indwelling Sin.
All Christians are disquieted and grieved for the Sin of their Natures, and
they especially that have made some progress in Christianity. But if a Man
lives at ease from sorrow and trouble about the internal Estate of his Soul,
the condition of things within him, sure he is no sincere Christian.

Use 2. The second Use is for comfort to Christians laboring under such Fears
and Troubles about indwelling Sin; but against these fears there is this
comfort:

1st, They are all Arguments of sincerity. For if we only intended a form of
Godliness, we should be at peace with our indwelling secret Sin.

2dly, God has fit comforts in a readiness for them. Blessed are they that thus
mourn. Heaviness may endure for a Night, but joy comes in the Morning.

ROMANS VIII. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
THE sixth Period, or Step of a Christians motion toward Perfection, which I
shall speak of, is, His renewed Comfort after a time of Soul-trouble about his
indwelling Sin; and I shall settle what I have to say of it upon these words,
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? They are words of triumph over
all the Enemies of the Salvation of Christians, among whom the Apostle plainly
reckons himself, as appears by this word (us), Who shall separate us? Having
spoken in the third Person, concerning Justification of the Elect, Verse 33,
and 34. he concludes with a manifest insertion of himself among the Elect and
Justified, for whom Christ makes Intercession in Heaven. Who also makes
Intercession for us; and thus proceeds to a challenge to all the World to
separate him or any of them from the love of Christ. Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ?

The love of Christ in this place, is not the love that Christians bear to
Christ, though none can abolish that; but it is the love of God to them, as
Verse 39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. This love
cleaves fast to them, settles immoveably upon them, as if it should say, This
is my resting place, here will I dwell, Psalm 132.14. This is the love of
Christ unto Christians, according to that in Zeph. 3.17. God rests in his love;
and this happiness the Apostle Paul assumes to himself. None shall separate me
from the love of Christ. It Is observable, That Paul in the former Chapter
expresses so much trouble about indwelling Sin, and cries out, O wretched man
that I am! now declares himself a happy Man among the Saints; as he speaks
here, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? And hence we may observe,

Doct. That spiritual Comfort interrupted by Soul-troubles, revives in greater
measures and higher degrees.

As the Day is more pleasant after the darkness of the Night, and the Spring
after the coldness of the Winter. Now I shall show you how spiritual Comforts
revive after Soul-trouble for Sin.

1. By advantage of Soul-trouble, Christians do attain to a better discovery of
the Work of Grace in themselves. It serves in the end, to give a Man a right
understanding of himself. -- When the Physician has shaken the Glass, he the
better observes the Symptoms and Indications appearing in the Water. So to put
a Man into a Passion, is usually accounted a likely way to know what kind of
Nature he is of, and how he stands affected.

Thus Christians by Soul-trouble, especially about indwelling Sin,

1st, They perceive that the Sin that is in them is very grievous, and a sore
burden to them.

2dly, That there is some better Principle in them that makes earnest
opposition to it.

3dly, That they really hunger and thirst after a full freedom from it in
Holiness and Righteousness. Who shall deliver me? So then I my self serve the
law of God, Romans 7.25. Thus Peter by the advantage of his great trouble about
denying Christ, came to perceive clearly that he loved him, John 21.17. Lord
thou know all things; thou know that I love thee. Indeed unquietness of
the mind makes a Man unable to judge of himself, but afterward he lies more
open to his own view; as the Water after a Commotion being settled again, is
more perspicuous.

2dly, After Christians have been a while exercised with Soul-trouble, God
usually disposes and enables them to devolve the wearisome burden of their
cares and fears upon his alsufficient Grace. To lay their aching Heads, and
fainting Hearts in his Bosom, as David persuades himself, Psalm 42.5. Why art
thou cast down, O my soul? Hope thou in God, and so the Soul returns to its
rest. As Psalm. 116.7. Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee.

3dly, He ordinarily imploys some special part of his Word in his message, to
comfort the Soul. As David was quickened, Psalm 119.50. Thy word has quickened
me; has made me alive again, as the word signifies. So those comforting words
in Jer. 31.3. Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: come in as an
answer to a troubled Soul's discourse with it self. The Lord has appeared to
me of old, (they are, says Junius on the place) the words of the godly
acknowledging God's former gracious appearing and bounty to them; but
complaining implicitly of the cooling of his love to them at present. To which
the Lord gives a present answer of kindness, Yea, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love. -- The Word (saying) is allowed by our Learned Translators to
be left out, (as you may see by the change of the Character into Italian) as if
he had said, Did I love thee of old? Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting
love. Some have been mightily revived in this case, by that in Micah 7.19. He
will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all their sins into the depths
of the sea. Some with that in Psalm 138.8. The Lord will perfect that which
concerns me, that is, though I walk in midst of trouble, as Verse 7. Many with
that in Hosea 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, and love them freely. And
many with that in Isaiah 50.10. Who is he among you that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light?
Let him trust in the name of the Lord. As if that Text, and this Chapter, Romans
7. were written on purpose (as sure they were) for establishing of comfort to
Souls that have been troubled about Sin remaining in them.

4thly, God raises great Joy in their hearts, in consideration of that
immutable love of God on which their Salvation depends. When they come to see
and consider, that it is not their love to God, but his love to them that saves
them. This mightily refreshes their Souls after a weary Combat wite Despair
and Diffidence, occasioned by the sense of Sin remaining, and much prevailing
in their Soul. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ,
etc. Romans 8.1. That is to say, I see now my safety is not in that I can do for
my self against my Sin, but in what Christ Jesus has done and suffered for them
that are in him, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

5thly, God gives them a delightful prospect of their future Happiness. When
they have known the trouble of Sin, and are wearied with it, he shows them
their remaining rest, as Psalm 73.24. Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory. Then no more Sin in my Soul. No more Temptation
in my way, but pure Holiness shall enrich, adorn, and delight my Soul for ever.
Now a word or two of the Reason, why God is pleased to quiet the Souls of his
People, when revived after Soul-trouble for Sin.

Reas. 1. God revives them in greater Measures, Because he pities them in their
Sorrow and Trouble they have had about their Sin remaining, as Jer. 31.19.
Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth. As if he had said, I cannot but affectionately think how
his heart has been troubled at what I have said against him, therefore my
Bowels are troubled for him, I earnestly remember him still. -- As Christ had
compassion on his poor Disciples, when he saw them toiling in the Storm, Matthew
14.24. and so in Lam. 3.32. Though he cause grief, yet will be have compassion
according to the multitude of his mercies. Because,

2dly, Soul-trouble prepares a Christian for good measures of spiritual
Comfort. Sorrow is not given to Christians for it self, but to fit them for the
receipt of Comfort, they are cast down that they may be lifted up. Particularly
they are thus afflicted with Sorrow in themselves for a time,

1. That they may know it is a free gift, and not merely raised up, and reasoned
out by themselves. They may have Grace in their Souls, and Promises to that
Grace, and yet little comfort till God sends it in to them.

3dly, That they may the better manage it when it comes, Men must be well
humbled, or comfort will make them forget themselves. As Paul was in danger to
be lifted up, 2 Cor. 12.7. lest I should be lifted up above measure, there was
given me a thorn in the flesh. Soul Trouble and Affliction is a gift of God to
a Christian, when in danger to be lifted up.

4thly, It Is given them in a way of gracious recompense to all their Labor and
Pains, in striving against their indwelling Sin. Heaven indeed is the great
recompense; and this is some beginning of it. God freely rewards Christians for
the care and pains they take in preserving their own Souls against the hurt of
Temptations, when they are tempted to despair in time of Trouble, and crying
out, O wretched man, that I am! It Is a remarkable thing, the story of Pharoah's
Daughter, who had Compassion on Moses, when she saw him weeping. It Is said she
hired Moses's Mother to nurse her own Child, Exodus 2.9. Take this child away
and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. Now for the Uses.

Use 1. Is to inform us of the exceeding great love of God to believing Souls,
that has so much pity to them when they are troubled in themselves, and is so
careful to revive them. When the poor disquieted Soul is thinking, Sure God has
no favor for me, has cast me off, and left me to my self and Satan. Then is he
meditating mercies and comfort to that Soul, and preparing the Soul for the
receipt of it. Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not your thoughts. I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, Jer. 20.11.

Use 2. Is to encourage Christians laboring under Soul-troubles, especially
about Sin dwelling and remaining and working in them; such trouble serves to
prepare Christians for comfort, and lays a good foundation for it. Your Comfort
is at hand: Say to your Souls as David to his in the 42d Psalm, ver. 5. Hope in
God, for I shall yet praise him.

PHIL. IV. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
THE seventh Period of a Christan's motion or progress toward perfection that I
shall treat of, is. A settled dependence on the strength and power of Christ for
the performance of the whole Work and Charge of Christianity. When a Christian,
under some comfortable persuasions of his peace with God, has set upon
reformation of his Life, and finding himself strongly hindered in that work by
his indwelling Sin; has made earnest essays to mortify his Lusts, and cleanse
his heart from wickedness; and when by reason of the difficulty of that Design
he has been sadly troubled and disquieted in himself, it pleases God in sitting
time to raise up and revive the weary and disheartened Combatant with spiritual
consolation (of which lately); and now the Soul having had so much experience
of it self, and of God; his own insufficiency, and the All Sufficiency of
Divine Grace; resolvedly betakes himself to a fiducial reliance on the gracious
Power of Christ, for the carrying on, and management of all the duty incombant
on him as a Christian; which is intimated in this Text, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me. That we may clearly understand them, it is
to be noted,

1st, They are words of self-encouragement to so great and weighty undertaking:
As Joel 3. Let the weak say I am strong; i. e. Let him put on a noble and
generous Resolution, and gird up the loins of his mind to warlike Enterprises.
Thus Paul here, I can do all. I am strong for all things, ready armed and
furnished with strength for all things which God sets me to do.

2dly, The work to which he so encourages himself, is the whole duty of
Christianity; to do that which is to be done in a state of Prosperity, and to
suffer what is to be undergone in a day of adversity, as verse 12. to do and
suffer as a Christian; this is all: (That is) it comprehends the Work and Duty
of a Christian; as Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this
is the whole duty of man: This is all of man.

3dly, The Argument wherewith he thus encourages himself, is not any opinion of
his own strength; yea, his words import a denial of any such confidence. I am
strong for all through Christ, implies him not otherwise sufficient for any
thing; according to the words of our Savior, John 15.5. Without me ye can do
nothing.

4thly, The strength on which he professes his reliance, is the power of Christ
working in him. Christ strengthening me within. A strength not only given by
Jesus Christ, but acted and exerted by him; not a strength received from
Christ, but the strength of Christ employed in him. Christ in me strengthening
me.

5thly, He attained to this dependence on the Power of Christ by the benefit of
Experience: He had learned it, verse 12. As men learn matters of Practice by
many Experiments: So Statesmen learn their Policy, and Tradesmen their Arts:
So David learned to keep the Commands of God by experience of the Evil of
Affliction that attends the neglect of them, and the comfort that follows a
diligent observance of them, even in affliction, as Psalm. 119.21. Thou have
rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy commandments. Thus
Paul having had experience of his own weakness, and the power of Christ in him;
was now come to this, That he could confidently undertake the whole Duty
belonging to him as a Christian, and an Apostle too, depending on the Power of
Christ. And hence we may observe.

Doct. 1. That Experience brings Christians to a steadfast reliance on the
gracious power of Christ for the performance of their whole Christian Duty.

1. I shall give you Scripture-Arguments to prove, that Christians do depend on
Jesus Christ for his gracious Power in the performance of their Christian Duty.

First, The promise of perseverance is made peculiarly to them that depend upon
the gracious Power of God for it. Isa. 40.31. They that wait on the Lord, shall
renew their strength; it is promised to them that wait on God for strength. Now
see the former Verse, and you find the rest excluded; the Youths that trust to
their own strength shall fail: Hence it is manifestly consequent, That all
persevering Christians that make a constant progress in Godliness, and grow up
to maturity, do thus depend on the Grace of God for it, Joh. 15.4, 5. In the
4th Verse our Savior commands his Disciples to abide in him -- as the branch
does in the vine -- Now men are in Christ by Faith, and so their continuing in
him, is in a continual exercise of Faith; and particularly, Faith, for a
Fruit-bearing Virtue, as the Branch cleaves to the Vine, to derive nourishment
from it, and be made fruitful by it: And to such as abide so in him, he
promises that they shall bring forth much Fruit, Verse 5. So all fruitful and
thriving Christians do certainly depend on Jesus Christ for strength and spirit
requisite to Christian duty. The Conditions of Promises are the qualities of
those to whom they are performed. If a man be justified, it is certain he is a
Believer, because it is promised to such; and so if a man makes a good
proficiency in Christian practice, it is evident he depends on the strength of
Christ, because it is promised only to such.

2dly, It Is their earnest prayer, that they may be enabled for their duty in
the strength of God. That they may be strong in the power of his might. As
David prays in the 119th Psalm 35. Make me to go in the path of thy
commandments, for therein do I delight. Though he had not only been exercised
to obedience, but had found pleasure in it; yet he knew himself unable to go on
without the Power of God, and therefore begs that he may be made to go. Matter
of Precept is matter of Prayer to a Godly man; what God requires of him, that
he requests of God; what God bids him do, that he begs God to do in him. The
Apostles, Acts 4.22. was mightily confirmed with strength and courage for their
work of Preaching the Gospel, and yet they pray for further supplies, as
acknowledging themselves unable to go one step further without the strength of
God, though they had gone with much boldness so far already.

Prayer is the Language of Faith; what a serious Petitioner asks of God, that
he depends and relies upon him for: According to that of the Psalmist, in the
62d Psalm 8. Trust in the Lord at all times, pour out your hearts to him.

3dly, They humbly acknowledge all that they do in the way of duty, to the
grace of God working in them, Phil. 1. last. So in 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored
more abundantly than they all -- according to this working: Yet not I, but the
grace of God which was with me. So in 2. Gal. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. So the Church confesses all her work to be the work of God, Isa.
26.12. Thou have wrought all our works for us, or in us: All which plainly
demonstrates, that experienced godly men do constantly and in a settled way
depend and rely on the power of Christ for the performance of their duty.

Now I shall show you in the

2. Second place, How Experience brings them to it.

First, Upon trial and experience they find themselves utterly unable to
maintain the practice of godliness in their own strength. At first setting out,
Christians usually betake themselves to reformation and holiness of Life, as if
they were now able enough for it of themselves in the use of that which they
have attained; thinking that the hatred which they have to Sin, which has cost
them so much humiliation, and their high esteem of Godliness, will carry them
through all they have to do in obedience to God.

They know indeed that all that belongs to their Salvation, is of Grace, and
therefore do in some measure trust in Christ for it. But yet at first there is
but little of this Faith in them, and much of Self-confidence remaining, till
Grace has wrought it out; and therefore they are much persuaded at first that
they shall discharge all Christian Offices in the strength of those Resolutions
and Purposes of Holiness which are raised in them, and scarce apprehend any
danger of being at any time drawn away from their known duty, to the Sin which
they have heartily forsaken.

But after awhile, the sense they have of indwelling Sin, makes them ready to
despair of any progress at all in Christianity, because they are so strongly
diverted by the body of Death from the good they would do, and carried to the
evil which they would not. This makes them cry out, O wretched man! and raises
in them that woeful Soul-trouble, of which I have been lately speaking; and so
brings them to that sorrowful acknowledgment of the Apostle, Romans 7.18. To will
is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not. Moses
Example is a fit Emblem of a Christian in this Case. At first he went out among
his Brethren in Egypt, and smites an Egyptian, and reproves an injurious
Israelite: As if he would presently deliver the Nation, and reduce them to a
free Estate even of himself, Exodus 2.11. with Acts 7.35. Moses, whom they
refused; saying, who made thee a ruler, and a judge? The same did God send to
be a ruler and a deliverer: He supposed his Brethren would have understood,
that by his hand God would deliver them. But afterward having found the work so
hard, he could not hope to do it, though God expressly set him about it, and
gave him his Commission for it. Exodus 3.10, 11. Come now therefore and I will
send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou may bring forth my people the children of
Israel out of Egypt: And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto
Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
Yea, when he had now had some experience of the power and presence of God with
him in the undertaking; yet he speaks as despairing of bringing it to any
effect, because he found so much difficulty in it: Exodus 5.22, 23. Moses
returned unto the Lord, and said; Why is it that thou have sent me? for since I
came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he has done evil to this people: Neither
have thou delivered thy people at all. So Christians newly converted, make
almost nothing of resolving, if God will pardon them, and speak peace to them,
to do all that they shall know to be duty, and breaking off from all Sin for
ever after. But in process of time they find Sin so mighty in them, that they
think they shall never do any thing to purpose in that work of Godliness: So
they find themselves utterly unable for obedience, and holy walking in their
own strength: This is the first Experiment tending to this dependence on the
power of Grace in Chrst.

2dly, They find that there is a presence of God sometimes with them, helping
them against all weakness, to perform their duty with much ease and pleasure;
so they are marvellously encouraged in trusting God; Enlivened in seeking of
him, animated in speaking and acting for him, and made free and cheerful in
submitting to his Providence; insomuch that they cannot but wonder at
themselves that they should be so transported beyond their ordinary bounds of
weakness, heaviness and indisposition, as Hab. 3.19. The Lord God is my
strength, he makes my feet like hinds feet, and he will make me to walk upon
high places: And on this occasion they many times err, thinking that it will
continue always so with them as they have found it.

3dly, They find that this assistance usually comes in most, when they are most
sensible of their own weakness, and despairing of themselves; 2 Cor. 12.10.
When I am weak, then am I strong: The like you shall see in the 94th Psalm 18.
When I said, my foot slippeth; thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. That is very
notable and observable to this purpose, Judges 6.14. The Angel bids Gideon go
forth in this thy might; why, what was his might? He being humble in the sense
of his weakness, God would be with him.

4thly, They find that the more earnestly they look to God for his help, the
more sensibly he is pleased to relieve and succor them with it; as David said
in the 28th Psalm 7. The Lord is my strength, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped. They fail most when they either forget their weakness, and think to go
forth as at other times (as Sampson said) or when they conceive no hope of help
from God, but provoke him by despair to leave them for the time to sink in
their sorrows: And thus Experience plainly leads them to a constant and steady
dependence on the gracious Power of God for all their work and suffering: When
they find themselves unable, God enabling them; and that when they are most
sensible of their weakness, and when they wait most earnestly on him for
strength. What can be more plainly taught, than all this teaches them to depend
on the power of Grace for the performance of their whole Christian duty? Now
for the Uses.

Use 1. This shows how far they are from the true spirit of Christianity, who
make their weakness an Apology for their sloth and negligence, instead of
looking to Christ for strength of grace. They cast off the Duties of
Repentance, and new Obedience; and plead for themselves, that they are not able
of themselves for such work, and God has not given them power and grace that is
requisite to it, and therefore they must let it alone unassayed, unendeavoured,
till more strength comes.

First, It Is evident they do not love Christian duty. They are unwilling to it,
or they would be impatient of their weakness; crying out for strength as the
poor Syrophenician Woman, when Christ seemed to neglect her; Lord help me,
Matthew. 15.24, 25.

2dly, They do not heartily believe the necessity of holiness and obedience to
Salvation; that of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall see
God, has no power on their hearts. Nor that in 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels. In flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. For let us reason it a little. If you believe these things,
why do you not live holy and religious lives? Why do you suffer your Lusts and
brutish Appetites to lead and carry you to such Company, and such Courses, as
you know are unsuitable to Christianity; and such as you are ashamed Persons of
any Religion and soberness should take notice of? Why do you not set up a
strict exercise of Religion in your hearts and lives, and devote your selves to
the practice of Godliness? If you say you do not, because you cannot, you have
no ability. Then, it seems, you think you cannot but perish, you cannot but be
damned; for he that cannot be holy, cannot see God; and cannot but fall under
the Vengeance of Eternal Flames; and do you believe this? No, no, if you did,
you would not live an hour at quiet, never enjoy your selves, or any thing in
this World; but be always crying out, O wretched man, etc. No, I Will never think
you can be such monsters as to believe you are under a necessity of perishing,
and yet be pleased and quieted in that Estate -- But you will be secure, and
hope the best; and quarrel at them that would disturb you. Well: If you will
rather disbelieve God, and make him a Liar, than be disturbed in your security,
who can help it? you will shortly find your Error.

Use 2. It informs us of the unsoundness of that Faith which looks only at
safety from misery, and not at the Spirit of Grace and Holiness to do all
things through Christ. True Saving-faith relies on God for grace to the
performance of duty, as well as for the Reward, and for a freedom from
Punishment: Though at first Christians are usually but low in this act of
Faith, yet Experience brings them to it. The third Use

Use 3. Is to persuade Christians, troubled about their inability for holy
actions, to yield themselves to the Counsel of God's conduct of Experience, as
it leads to a reliance and waiting on God for strength of his Grace; That which
the Word requires, Isa. 40. last. To wait on the Lord, that they may renew
their strength. You find your selves weak, etc. And do you not sometimes find
God relieving you against your weakness, and that when you are most pressed
down under the sense of it; especially when you look up most earnestly to him
for help? What can be more plainly spoken, than this speaks the Language of the
Prophet, Isa. 26.4. Trust in the Lord for ever: For in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength.

1 JOHN I. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ.
THE Eighth degree of a Christian's Motion toward Perfection, is a spiritual
Communion or Conversation with God. When God has brought a Believer to a settled
dependence on his gracious Power for the practice of Godliness, He gradually
draws him into a converse and intimacy with himself; which is at least
comprehended in these words, Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

The word Fellowship signifies Communion or Communication, when two or more
Persons partake of the same thing, as they that feed on the same Diet and Table
together, are called Commoners; So they whose Cattle partake of the same
Pasture, are said to Common together; and so they are called partakers of the
Altar who eat together; or alike of the Sacrifices, as in 1 Cor. 10.18. This is
an ordinary Signification of the word Fellowship, Communion, or Conversation.
-- But when it is referred to God and Christ in Scripture, it has a more free
Signification.

1st, Sometimes it imports Assimilation and Conformity of Christians to God the
Father, and Christ the Mediator. So in as much as Saints are like God in
holiness, They are called partakers of his divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Holiness
in Christians is not the same that is in God, for that is Essential; but
somewhat Analogous: So Christians conformed to Christ in Sufferings, are said
to partake of his Sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.13. Rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings; (that is) He suffered, and they suffer
likewise; as Verse 1.

2dly, It is used to signify the virtual Interest that Christians had, and have
in the Death and Mediatory Performances of Christ. The benefit whereof is
derived to them, as if themselves had died, and done as he did for them, Phil.
3.10. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. Fellowship
of his Sufferings; (that is) what it is to partake with the Saints of the
benefit of his Sufferings, as if I had suffered with him; in which respect
Christians are said to have died, risen, ascended with Christ, and to sit in
Heaven with him, as Col. 3.1. and Ephesians. 2.6. He has raised us up together, and
made us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ. And Col. 3.1. If ye then
be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above.

3dly, It notes Converse and Society between God and Man. 2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye
not unequally yoked together with unbelievers; for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? (that is) They cannot join or abide together. God, who is Light, can
have no Conversation with Unbelievers, who are Darkness. Christ with Belial,
Ver. 15. therefore you should have none. Hence the word Companions, Heb. 10.33.
Ye became companions of them which were so used, that is, suffer like them. And
this I understand to be especially intended in this place, Our fellowship is
with the Father. Christians are at first Conversion conformed to God in some
degree of Holiness, and made partakers of the benefits of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ in their Justification and Adoption. But acquaintance
and converse with God, they attain to by degrees, when they have had experience
of him and his ways. Now it is evident, the Apostle is here directing Christians
to something higher than they had yet attained to. They were now the Children
of God, Chap. 3.2. And had the Unction of the Spirit, Chap. 2.20. But he
directs to something in which they might be Copartners with himself and others,
whose Fellowship he could truly say was with the Father and his Son Jesus
Christ. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
To have fellowship with the Son, is to have fellowship with the Father; as to
see the Son, is to see the Father, John 14.19. Yet a little while, and the
world sees me no more; but ye see me. God transacts all things with his
Church, in the Person of his Son the Mediator. He is doer of all since his
Ascension, and is always with his to the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. Lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world. So Communion with the
Father, is Communion with the Son. Again, Christ being now ascended, manages
all in a Divine way, and invisibly; therefore they that have fellowship with
him, are said to have fellowship with the Father. So the Apostle having
attained this fellowship with God the Father and Son, and directing others to
it; We may gather this Observation,

Doct. That Christians as they proceed in Godliness, they grow into an intimate
acquaintance and fellowship with God. That your fellowship may be with us: And
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. There is
much proof I might easily give of this, Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in
heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Our
Conversation is in Heaven, (that is) with God. So Asaph in Psalm 73.23. says, I
am continually with thee. So Enoch and Noah walked with God. So in John 14.23.
our Savior says, If any man love me, he will keep my word; and my father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. So in Psalm
139.18. says David, I am continually with thee. And so in several other places
we find the Intimacy and Communion with them that walk with God. And this comes
to the point in hand. That Christians, as they proceed in Godliness, they grow
into an intimate Acquaintance and Fellowship with God. Take some instances of
the Converse and Fellowship which Christians have with God.

1. They confer much with God in Holy Meditation. Meditation is a secret
Conference, and close Discourse between God and the Soul. Good thoughts, as
they come into the mind, are the very whisperings of God; and as they are the
act of the Mind upon God, they are the proper Language of the Soul speaking to
him, as Psalm 27.8. Thou said, Seek ye my face; my heart answered and said,
thy face Lord will I seek. It Is observable in the Hebrew Tongue, that the
Scripture uses two words for Meditation, and both signify to speak, there being
in Divine Meditation such a close Discourse between God and the Soul. And
though all Christians are more or less exercised in Divine Meditation, yet to
hold a close and constant Intercouse with God in it, is very peculiar to
Christians of good experience and maturity.

2dly, They bemoan themselves familiarly to God in all their Grievances. And he
answers them in the Consolation of his Spirit. We have an Expression of this of
David, in Psalm 142.2. I poured out my complaint before him; I showed before
him my trouble. If any thing be amiss with them, they run presently to him with
their Complaint, and so he eases them, and relieves them. Psalm 34.18. When I
said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. Christians are full of
complaints to him, every thing that troubles and grieves them, is a matter of
complaint, and so they give him frequent occasion to express his kindness to
them. It Is true, Christians are used to this way of opening their Griefs to
God, from their youth up; But are much more free and familiar in it after they
have gained experience of the Goodness of God, and are established in their
confidence in him, and so they grow more inward with him.

3dly, They go confidently to him for the supply of all their wants: And he
satisfies them with gracious answers of their Prayers. The Spirit of Prayer is
in all Christians, but they are well-grown Christians that can come boldly in
all cases to the Throne of Grace, and perceive when they are answered,
according to that in 1 John 5 14. This is the confidence we have in him, that
if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. A Christian that
prays the Prayer of a well-established Faith, as he comes to God in good
assurance of acceptance, so he finds his Prayer one way or other answered to
his satisfaction. David found an answer to his Prayer for the Life of his
Child, in an acquiescence in the now discovered Will of God, 2 Samuel 12.23. I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. David takes comfort in this, I
shall go to him. He arose and went to the House of God and worshipped; what
else would he have done if the Child's Life had been granted? Why he could have
done no better, for he had satisfaction, and was assured that he should go to
his Child. Thus the Apostle Paul found a good answer to his Prayer, for the
departing of Satan's Messenger, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee.
Now this answer was matter of gladness to the Apostle, Most gladly therefore
will I rejoice in my infirmities. And Christ himself had his Prayer answered,
even in that which he feared. And this is parallel to that of David, Psalm
65.5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation. Terrible things, things to be wondered at.

4thly, They express their Joys to him in the acknowledgment of his Mercy, and
he inspires them with the hopes of more. It is a special part of friendly
intimacy, to impart our joys to our Friends, and tell them the things that
please us, to show them such Goods or Rarities as we have about us, wherewith
we our selves are taken. So Christians, and especially those that are grown up
to good maturity, are much addicted to acknowledge the mercy that God has
showed them, and not only pour out their Sorrows, but express their Joys before
him, as David in Psalm 63.4, 5. Thus will I bless thee while I live. My soul
shall be satisfied as with marrow. It is, inded, a special property of a
well-grown Christian, to be much disposed to thanksgiving; and telling not only
others, but God himself, what he has done for his Soul. And herein Christians
have a comfortable converse with God, in as much as he not only accepts their
Praises, but usually warms and chears their hearts in suggesting to them hopes
of more and greater Mercy. See Psalm 23.2, 3. David there acknowledges to God
what he has done for him, Thou (say he) makes me to lie down in green
pastures; he leads me besides the still waters; he restores my soul. He
leads me in the paths of righteousness for his name sake. And then he
concludes, Ver. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. I shall add but one
place more, and that is in Psalm 73.23, 24. whereas David was considering what
the Lord had done for him, and how gracious he was to him, this comes in, Thou
shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. As he sent
Nathan to David, when he was considering and acknowledging the favor he had
received, 2 Samuel 7.11. Also the Lord tells thee, that he will make thee an
house.

5thly, They retire fiducially to him in cases of danger, and he encourages
them in hopes of safety. See Psalm 57.2, 3. I will cry to God most high. He
shall send from heaven, and save me. And so Psalm 91.1, 2. and throughout. It
is a Soliloquie all along: He that dwells in the secret place of the most
High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He
is my rock, and my fortress: my God, in him will I trust, etc.

6thly, They consult him in all doubtful cases, and he graciously resolves
them. I will, says David, cry unto God most high, and he shall save me. And the
same David, Psalm 119.24. says, Thy testimonies are my delight, and my
counselors. And Isaiah 30.21. This is the way, walk ye in it. As Peter in
Matthew. 18.21, 22. said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee, until
seven times, but until seventy times seven. So Asaph, Thou will guide me by thy
counsel.

7thly, They reason out their Troubles with him when any Providence of his is
less satisfying to them, and he contents and pacifies them. This is a point of
great freedom and familiarity that godly Men have with God, and a very gracious
condescension of his to them. See Jer. 12.1, 2. Righteous art thou, O Lord,
when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? And Psalm. 73.16, 17. When I thought to know this, it was too
painful for me; until I went into the sanctuary of God.

So Moses in Exodus 5.23. Why is it that thou have sent me? So was Moses
seemingly dissatisfied with God's dealing with him. But look into Chap. 6.
Verse 1. The Lord said unto Moses, Now shall thou see what I will do to
Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand
shall he drive them out of his land. And thus ordinarily when Christians set
themselves in an humble way to treat with God about their Troubles, he casts
such Thoughts into their Minds, and brings such Words and Works of his to their
remembrance, as shall serve to content and quiet them, as if he were (as in a
good sense we well say he is) unwilling that there should be a misunderstanding
between him and them. As the Father answers his eldest Son, Luke 15.25. when he
was dissatisfied with his dealing, and was angry, and would not go in; he says
unto him, Son, thou art ever with me.

8thly, They give him all that they have in the World, as he has occasion to
use it; and he requites it to them in gracious Providence and Spiritual
Comforts, Mark 10.28, 29, 30. Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left
all, and have followed thee. Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you,
There is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sister, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospels, but he
shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, and in the world to come
eternal life. So Heb. 10.34. He made them to know in themselves that they had
in heaven a better and an enduring substance. And so gave them as much joy in
losing, as they had before in possessing, and it is likely much more.

9thly, They always press after more intimate knowledge of him; and he reveals
himself still more to them, Psalm 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee. And
Hosea 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: So graciously
does God uphold and support his People when they follow hard after him.
Christians they desire always to behold his beauty, and enquire in his temple,
Psalm 27.4. And he leads them from Room to Room, and brings them to his
Presence Chamber, John 14.21, 23. He that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father; and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Jesus answered
and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. I come now to
the Use, which is of Exhortation.

Use. To exhort Christians to an earnest Prosecution of Communion with God, Job
22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace. It Is that to which all
Christians are appointed, and by degrees growing up into it. The happiness of
heaven will be your Joy on Earth.

Earnestly seek peace with God by Faith in Jesus Christ, that you may have the
assurance of an agreement with him, else you cannot walk with him, Amos 3.3.
Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

2. Walk in the light, Verse 7. (that is)

1st, Regularly in the Law, Psalm 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
who walk in the law of the Lord.

2dly, Uprightly and sincerely, not pretending Godliness, and hiding Sin; but
in plainness and integrity, John 3.21. He that does truth, comes to the
light; likeness fits for Conversation. God is upright, as in Psalm 92.15. To
show that the Lord is upright, he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness
in him. So Psalm 15.1, 2. Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall
dwell in thy holy hill? He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness,
and speaks the truth in his heart. And again, Psalm 11.7. The righteous Lord
loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright. Thus now by our
earnest seeking peace with God, and walking in the light, we shall come to have
sincerity, and by sincerity we shall have communion with God, and fellowship
with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

PHILIP. I. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and be with Christ, which is far better.
THE Ninth Degree or Period of a Christian's motion toward his appointed and
intended Perfection, which I shall speak of, is, An earnest desire to be
removed out of this World, unto the glorious presence of Christ in Heaven;
which is here intimated in these words, Having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ.

A Christian has two great matters to consider and attend in this world, His
Work and his Wages, Duty and Reward. And as he loves to be employed in the
former, so he longs to enjoy the latter: Between these two Paul was in a
strait, not knowing which to make a present choice of, in case it should have
been in his own power to take which he would; I wot not which I shall choose:
(that is) which I should rather choose, as the words do signify, being an Hebrew
form of Speech; I know not, I wot not which I shall choose. He thought it long
ere he was at rest, and yet he thought it hardly time to leave work. He knew
indeed to be with Christ was better for him, but yet he thought it needful for
the Philippians, and other Christians, that he should abide in the flesh, and
consequently that Christ had yet further need or use of his labor, and this
made him doubtful which he should choose; not absolutely, but with respect to
the present time. Not whether he should choose to be in Heaven with Christ, or
abide always on earth; for he must needs choose Heaven rather. It is not whether
he should be with Christ, or abide in the flesh; but whether he should now
presently go hence to Christ, or for some time continue in his service among
his People; and in this respect he was in a strait betwixt two, having a desire
to depart, Phil. 1.23, 24.

The Apostle Paul was now a Believer, highly confirmed and established in
Christ. A man of great attainment in Grace; and so what he here speaks of
himself, is especially applicable to well-grown and experienced Christians,
though there is some beginning of the same desire even in the lowest Christian,
a desire to be with Christ -- Having a desire.

The word desire is sufficiently understood by all; but to have a desire, is
more in signification than to desire; it notes a settled and habitual desire. To
desire, is but an Act, which may be sudden and transient; but to have a desire
of any thing, is to be so affected to it, as when a man is always reaching
after it in the intention of his heart, when he remembers it. Having a desire
to depart -- This word to depart is a plain word, though Interpreters make many
Glosses upon it, and observe some one, some another Metaphor in it. It
signifies sometimes to return, as a man returns home, from whence he has been
abroad, as Luke 12.36. Be ye like servants that wait for their Lord, when he
shall return from the wedding. Sometimes it signifies to depart and go away,
and both ways it agrees to death, which is a return of the Soul, as Solomon
says, to God, Eccles. 12.7. And so is that word used to which this in the Text
answers, Psalm. 90.3. Return ye children of men, (that is) you that have been
abroad in the world, come home again, and return ye children of men. So it
signifies a going away of a man out of this world, 2 Timothy 4.6. I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. Thus the Apostle
expresses his desire to go out of this world, Having a desire to depart; the
next is, to be with Christ. Though Christians have now communion with Christ in
Faith and Holiness, (as was aforesaid) yet comparing their present with their
future nearness to him, the Apostle might well say as he does in 2 Cor. 5.7.
For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven. And ver. 6. While we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. To be with Christ, as the Apostle here speaks, is to be
in the state of Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17, 18. Then we which are alive and remain,
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words. And so in John 14.3. That where I am, there ye may be also. Now
says the Apostle, I have a desire to depart, and be with Christ; that is, much
rather than to be on the earth. And hence we may observe:

Doctr. That a well-setled and established Christian lives in an earnest desire
to leave this world, and be with Christ in heaven. He has a desire to depart,
and be with Christ. In 2 Cor. 5.2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to
be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven; (that is) ill at ease
here, but desire to go hence, and be with Christ. So we find that excellent
person Simeon addressing himself to God, and saying, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29. So in 1 Cor. 1.7. The Apostle commends the
seize of the Corinthians in this respect, that they had a desire to the
coming of Jesus Christ; So that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. So in Romans 8.23. Christians are said to wait
for the adoption; that is, that inheritance whereunto they are adopted; and
that is, the redemption of the body from the hand of the grave. In all which
places it is evident, that well settled and established Christians live in an
earnest desire to leave this world, and be with Christ in Heaven: For,

First, He earnestly desires to leave the world behind him, to depart, as being
much out of conceit with the things that usually invite men to live here, and
weary of them. His heart falls off from that which to other men seems desirable
in the world, and he is well content to take his final leave of it, as Asaph
says in Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee. But to speak more particularly, there are
four things especially that take off the heart of an experienced Christian from
the desirable things of the world.

1st. His many disappointments in them. He has been so often deceived in his
opinion of them, and expectation from them, that he is now weary of his
converse with them; How often, said he, have I found trouble, where I looked for
comfort? and dissatisfaction, where I thought to have had some kind of
contentment? why should I lose any more hopes?

2dly, The hindrance which they give him in the way of duty. He finds that his
Estate, (more or less) Credit and Esteem among Men, his Relations, and all
earthly Comforts, do many times hang upon him as Weights and Burdens, and make
him go slowly and heavily toward Heaven; they suggest fear to him, when he
should be resolved for God; they fill him with cares when he should be only
minding things heavenly; give him many Arguments of diversion from the strait
way, etc. make him go sorrowful, as the young man, If he went to sell all, etc.
Mat. 19.22.

3dly, The many occasions of Sin which they minister to him. They do not only
hinder his progress, but give him many Falls; he often stumbles at them, and
hurts himself, etc. It Is true, it is not the world's fault but his own; but
finding himself so disposed and tempted that the world has always much
advantage against him, he is very willing to be gone out of the danger of being
seduced by it.

4thly, The Avocation which it is always offering to his heart, from better and
more worthy things. He cannot love God, and delight in him, and please himself
with him as he would do, for the world; though the world be in some degree
crucified to him, and he to it, yet it is always tampering with his heart, and
suing for his affections, etc. and so he is weary of it. But

Secondly, He earnestly desires to be with Christ in heaven, Psalm. 73.25. Whom
have I in heaven but thee? And he desires to be with Christ in heaven:

1st. For the full freedom from Sin, and complete Holiness, which he foresees
there to be had and enjoyed. When he shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John
3.2. And this was Paul's desire after the Resurrection, Phil. 3.11. If by any
means I might attain to the resurrection, (that is) the state in which the dead
in Christ shall rise, that is in glory, 1 Cor. 15.43. Perfection of grace is
glory, and in that state the godly man arises.

2dly, For that full contentment and satisfaction which he propounds to himself
in the enjoyment of Christ. He finds a sweetness in the presence of Christ
here, in that communion which he has with him in Heaven. By the taste of
Joshua's Grapes in the Wilderness, he judges what it is to sit under the Vine in
Canaan; In thy presence, says the Psalmist, is fullness of joy, and pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

3dly, For the great Advantages which Saints have in heaven to glorify God. The
great ambition of a godly man is not his own honor, but the glory of God. Now
he finds that in this life he cannot praise him as he should, nor exalt him as
he would. Nay, he finds that God is very often a Sufferer in his Honor, by
reason of his weakness, inconstancy, and uneven walking; therefore he would
fain be in that estate wherein he shall eternally glorify God, and never more
dishonor him. So here he joys in hope of the glory of God, (that is) not only
of his being made glorious by the gift of God, but God being glorified by
himself, in hope of glorifying God.

But some may object and say,

Object. This desire of death seems to be above the ordinary experience of
Christians. There is rarely a man to be found among the best of Saints, that is
not desirous to abide in the world as bad as it is, rather than to go out of it,
and that is not heartily afraid of death.

Answ. 1. I answer, Among sincere Christians many are weak, and of little
growth. Though a man have not attained such a willingness to entertain death as
some have, he may be sincerely godly, and growing to it.

Answ. 2. You must take these conjunctly, A desire to depart, and be with
Christ. So Christians can ordinarily subscribe and say, I desire to depart, and
be with Christ. Looking on the one as enough to sweeten the other, and make it
desirable; else it were better for a Christian to be with Christ as he is, than
die and not be with him. This Paul intimates in the next words, which is far
better. As a dinner of herbs where love is, Prove. 15.17. is better than a
stalled ox with hatred. A Wilderness with Manna, is better than the Fleshpots
in Egypt: So to be gone out of this world, and be with Christ, is far better
than to be in this world.

Answ. 3. The one part must be understood as absolutely desired, the other but
relatively, to that in its relation to the other. To be with Christ, a
Christian desires absolutely, he aims at it in all his faith and holiness; but
die he desires not at all, save only as it serves to bring him to Christ; as
Christ laid down his life to take it up, Joh. 10.17. Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. So earnest
willingness, excludes not real unwillingness; as a man desires to have his Leg
or Arm cut off to preserve his Body, yet is really unwilling to have the one or
the other cut off.

4thly, The best of Christians are not always actually assured of this
conjunction, and relation of death, and being with Christ, and then they cannot
desire death at all. Death cannot be desired, but as it is a passage to Jesus
Christ; t^ke away that order which it has to a Christians being with Christ,
and it is undesirable; and a Christian is not always sure that when he dies, he
shall be with Christ.

5thly, Though a Christian do heartily desire to depart, and be with Christ,
yet he cannot fix his desire upon any particular point of time for them, as to
say, Now I desire to depart, and be with Christ. For,

1. Christians usually desire somewhat between them and death, which they
apprehend conducing to their better dying, as David requests of the Lord, Spare
me a little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence; and, as Moses,
Lord, let me go over Jordan, etc. But now it is not the case of every Christian
that he can fix upon the time, and say as Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace. Every Christian cannot say so, though he has a desire
to depart, and be with Christ.

2. They must be determined by the Will of God, however for the time, and not
by their own assignment; as Simeon, Now dismissest thou thy servant in peace,
Luke 2.29. So Paul, I know not which to choose, Philip. 1.22. And so much for
the proof of this Point, That well-setled and established Christians do live in
an earnest desire to leave this world, and be with Christ in Heaven. I come now
to the Uses. And first:

1 Use. By this we may judge of our Seize in Christianity. If our hearts
stick fast to the world, and we have no mind to leave it. If our desires after
Heaven be loose and cool, it is a sign we have made little progress in
Christianity. If we be Christians at all, natural motion is stronger toward the
end; as a Stone falling to the earth, the nearer it comes to the ground, the
swifter it is in motion. So the further we grow in Christianity, the more
heavenly-natur'd we grow, and so the more desirous to be there; every thing
tends to its natural place. The more we grow in Grace, the more sight we have
of the excellency of Heaven, and so are more willing to leave the world. Heaven
is the Christian's Center, and the nearer he comes to it, the faster he moves
toward it. Time, and experience of the world, may make us less esteem earthly
things, but Grace only makes us willing to leave them, because it only raises
our desires to Heaven; for till we know and hope for better, we are never
content to leave what we have, though it be never so sorry and undesirable.
Secondly:

Use 2. This serves to humble us for our unwillingness to leave the world, and
weak desire to be with Christ. It Is an evidence of our little proficiency, or
improficiency under means of Grace, when it is little in our minds and
unpleasing; we hardly leave the world, and join with Christ a little while, a
Sabbath, an hour; when it is grievous to us to part with any thing in the world
for Christ, when we take little care to get and keep that communion with him
which we might have in this world. Thirdly:

Use 3. This serves to persuade Christians to set their affections on things
above, Coloss. 3.1. That they may be loose from these earthly things, and live
in a desire to depart, and be with Christ. For,

1. This will assure you of your attainment of your desire. Earnest desire to
depart, and be with Christ, is a certain evidence that when you depart, you
shall be with Christ in Heaven, as the Apostle speaks in 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love
his appearing; (that is) his coming to receive them to himself, etc. that long
to see the very first glimpse that is to be had of him; as when a man looks for
a Friend coming by Sea, he longs to see the top of the Sails of the Ship that
brings him: so the Soul that loves the appearance of Jesus Christ, if there be
any sign of his coming to receive them to himself, they rejoice to see the very
tops of the Sails of that Ship that brings Jesus Christ to them. The Lord will
never frustrate such a desire; open thy mouth thus wide, and it shall be
filled, if Heaven be enough to fill it.

2. It will make all easy that is to be suffered by the way. If once you attain
to this, that you can desire to die, and be with Christ, you will not stick at
sufferings on this side death; that being the King of Terrors, all other Fears
are but its Subjects, and terrible only as they serve under its Banner to
subdue men to it, and bring them under its power; as Paul argued, Acts 21.13. I
am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of
the Lord Jesus. If to die, no doubt to be bound.

ACTS XX. 24. That I may finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I
have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.
THE last and greatest step to, or into a Christian's perfection, is the Soul's
resignation in death. Death, as it is alike certain and inevitable to all men,
so it is equally profitable and advantageous to all Believers. But it must be
noted, it is easy and comfortable to some more, to others less, in a great
variety; as Job said concerning men, so we may say of Christians, One dies in
his full strength, another in the bitterness of his soul, Job 21.23. (that is)
one dies mourning and dejected, another joyous and triumphant, which was Paul's
ambition in these words: That I may finish my course with joy.

The Life of man is a Race, and so is his Work.
First, His Life is a Race. Every man runs from the womb to the grave; a Stage
far shorter to some indeed than it is to others, but it is a Race to all.

2dly, His Work in his Lifetime is a Race. Man is a busy Creature, and does
much Work, such as it is, in a little time, and therefore his action in this
World is not only called in Scripture his walking, as Job 9.25. My days are
swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good. But it is called his
running, and running his course, as in the Text; and in Jer. 8.6. Every man
turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle; (that is) to his
own way and actions. John's work in the Ministry is called his course, Acts
13.25. As John fulfilled his course, he said, etc. And so Paul speaking of
Christian practice, tells the Galatians, Ye did run well, Gal. 5.7. And thus
the Apostle's own work was his course in which he proceeded with an
extraordinary swiftness; I labored more abundantly than they all, 1 Cor.
15.10. But the course which he here speaks of finishing, is that of his life,
the other of his Ministerial work being presently subjoined, And the ministry
which I have received. Both these Races had the same period in Paul's intention
at least, and probably in performance (though not the same speech); it was the
Apostle's intention not to leave off the work of his Ministry during the term
of his life; and his great desire was, that when he should finish the one, and
so be taken off from the other, he might finish both with joy, the course of
his life, and the course of his work; That I may finish my course with joy, and
the ministry which I have received. Of the former, I may finish --

There is nothing wherein according to nature a man is more passive than his
death, and yet even death it self is sometimes attributed to men as their own
act. All men are active to their own death in sinning, which is the meritorious
and procuring cause of it; the wages of sin is death. Godly men are active in
their own death, in a willing resignation of themselves, and delivering up of
their Souls into the hand of God, as it is said of Jacob, Genesis 49. ult. He
yielded up the spirit: So for a man to finish his course, is to die, and depart
this life, which Paul earnestly desires to do with joy.

And hence we may observe,

Doctr. That it is a Christian's great concernment, that he may depart this
life with spiritual joy and comfort; or while he lives, to consult and provide
for a comfortable dying. Because first,

Reas. 1. A Christian is subject to many Troubles in his lifetime. In the
world, says St. John, ye shall have tribulation, John 16. It Is a sad thing,
after a wearisom day, to lie down in sorrow. A servant, says Job, waits
earnestly for the shadow of the evening, Job. 7.2. (that is) of his going to
his rest after his days-work; whether you live regularly or loosely, if you
stick to rule, men will be upon you; if you sin, God will rebuke you. 2dly,

Reas. 2. A Christian has great need of spiritual joy to support him against
the sorrows with which death is naturally accompanied. Death is so sorrowful a
thing, that it would be too much misery to a godly man to endure it, without
spiritual comfort; and therefore as God in kindness to him, will not leave him
altogether destitute of it in so needful a time, so he himself is highly
concerned to make the best and most effectual provision for it. There are three
sorts of sorrows of death, that make spiritual comfort highly needful to a
dying Christian.

First, The sorrow of the parting between Soul and Body. This is the most
proper and immediate sorrow of death; the union between Soul and Body is such
as makes division grievous to the person. Death of it self is an enemy to
Nature, and therefore it must needs be a very sorrowful thing to come under its
hands; even Christ himself, that had no sin in him, was afraid of it, and
prayed against it, Hebr. 5.7. When he had offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was heard in that he feared. The Scripture sets forth this by many significant
expressions, as the pains of death, Acts 2.24 Whom God has raised up, having
loosed the pains of death. And again, the terrors of death, and the king of
terrors, as Job 18.14. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle,
and it shall bring him to the king of terrors. Again, it is called the
bitterness of death, 1 Samuel 15.32. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of
death is past. And then it is called the sorrows of death, as David says in
Psalm. 18.4. The sorrows of death compassed me. Now seeing death is unavoidable,
and has in it self so much grievousness, men have great need of comfort to make
it easier and more tolerable.

Secondly, The sorrow of parting with present mercies and comforts that we have
had the use of, (if a man has not hopes of better) this also is very grievous;
though he gets better, yet it is hard to leave the comforts which we have been
used to, and in which God has been kind to us. It Is said of Hezekiah, that when
the message of death came to him, he wept sore, 2 Kings 20.3. though he knew
his passage from hence was into a far better place; therefore God is usually
pleased to mortify men to the World by Age and Sickness, before Death comes, to
make it easier parting with present comforts.

Thirdly, The sorrow of God's Rebukes and Reproofs for Sin. Death commonly
brings Sin to remembrance, and awakens Conscience to inveigh against the Soul
for it. So Conscience will tell us at such a time when Death's approaching, it
will mind us of our Sins of Omission, the undue expense of precious time, the
loss of opportunities for spiritual benefit. It will mind us of the careless
use of the means of Grace. Sins of Commission, in which a man has dishonored
God, or been injurious to man. These things usually come to remembrance at such
a time, and Conscience falls fiercely on the Soul for them; and this is plainly
the Reproofs of the Almighty within a man, Conscience being his Deputy and
Remembrancer; yea, Death it self is a Rebuke for Sin. God would never put us to
the pains of Death, were it not that we have sinned: As when God pardoned the
sin of David, yet he appointed him the sword to dwell in his house, as a
sorrowful memorial of his sin, 2 Samuel 12.10. so he appoints all his people many
afflictions in this life, though he forgives their sin; and Death at last, as
an unavoidable Rebuke for sin: As if he should say, I take away your sin, and
free you from the curse of my Law; but yet not a man of you shall get to
Heaven, but through the pains of death, through the dark valley of the shadow
of death. Yea, many times Christians have Reproofs given them in their Death,
for some particular Sins which God gives them notice of; as Moses and Aaron
died in the Wilderness for a Reproof of their Unbelief: And many of the
Corinthians were judged of God in their Death for their Sin about the Holy
Supper, 1 Cor. 11. that is, as the Apostle there expounds it, They were
chastened of God, that they might not be condemned. And this is a very
sorrowful thing to be smitten with Death in a Rebuke for Sin, as Moses
complains of it, Deutr. 4.22. The Lord swear against me, that I shall not go
into the land of Canaan. Thus Death is so sorrowful a thing, as would be too
much for a Christian to endure, without spiritual comfort to take off the
bitterness of it.

Reas. 3. It is highly due to the Honor of Christianity, that a Christian
should die comfortably in the exercise of spiritual joy. Christianity propounds
life and glory to be enjoyed after Death, and teaches men to accept of Death as
a passage to such happiness as eye has not seen, etc. Blessed are the dead
dying in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. Now if they that hold up this Profession among
men, should be as sadly surprised with Death, and as much affrighted and
appaled at it as other men, this would bring a shame upon their Profession, and
lay it open to the reproach of those who will be ready to say, I thought you
had been going home to your Father, to your beloved Jesus Christ, to your
blessed Inheritance, etc. and can you die sorrowfully? Thus Christians are
exercised with great Afflictions, and no appearing help. Adversaries are
presently ready to ask, Where now is your God? and there is no sufficicnt
Answer, but to acknowledge his comforting and supporting presence; where is He?
why, here he is in our hearts and souls, strengthening and upholding us. So it is
in the case of Death; no maintaining the credit of Religion against Reproach,
but by rejoicing in the Lord when we are going out of the world; and therefore
our great care should be, that we may die in peace with God.

Reas. 4. It Is a necessary part of a Christian's love to those whom he leaves
behind him, to die cheerfully. A Christian's cheerful Death eases the sorrow of
surviving Friends; and we should

1. Endeavor so to go out of the world, as to leave them as little trouble as
may be that stay behind us: Especially to provide what we can, that if they
mourn, they may not mourn as those without hope concerning us.

2. But besides this, A Christian's cheerful and comfortable dying, is an
encouragement to others to follow him in the way of Christianity. Balaam
himself desired to die the death of the righteous; but where grace is, the
death of the righteous will encourage a man to live the life of the righteous,
considering, as the Apostle says, the end of their conversation, Hebr. 13.7.
Now for the Uses.

Use 1. Hence we learn, That the work and care of a Christian is as lasting as
his life. When he is converted to God, and believes in Christ, he must take
care to live well; and when he has walked with God, and demeaned himself like a
Christian in his conversation, he must have a care also to die well, that he
may depart in peace, and in the joy of the Lord. They greatly mistake, that
think a Christian once justified and adopted, has no more to do but stay the
time when he shall go to Heaven. He must take heed how he lives* and have a
care how he dies; so that living and dying, he has peculiar Duties to attend.

Use 2. It shows the happiness of a Christian in his death. He dies such a
death as will not only bear joy and comfort, but requires it. He has not only
cause to rejoice when he goes out of this world, but ought to do it: Blessed
are the dead dying in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. Men of this world please themselves
in the present delights of their life, but that is a happy life indeed which
tends to a pleasurable and truly joyous end.

Use 3. The third Use teaches and exhorts Christians, to be always providing
not only for a safe, but a comfortable death. And to this end take these few
Directions following.

Direct. 1. Be diligent to assure your selves that you are reconciled to God in
Jesus Christ, and at peace with him. The great terror of death is, that it
brings men to the Bar of God's great judgment. But when we are once sure of
Pardon, we may safely expect a justifying Sentence, and an Adjudication to
Glory. And there is no danger in appearing before that Judge by whom we shall
certainly be acquitted, when a man can say, I am going to my God, my Father, my
Redeemer, etc. This will make it comfortable dying, as our Savior said, I go
to my Father, and your Father. This assurance made Paul triumph over death, as
in Romans 8.38. Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And so in 1 Cor. 15.55.
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Direct. 2. Be much in meditation of heaven, according to the report that
Scripture gives of it; that which is more and better than Eye has seen, or Ear
heard; yea, a fullness of joy: Or, as as Eliphaz said to Job of hearing, Job
5.27. Hear this, and know it for thy self. Think of these things for your
selves -- How happy shall I be if once I may behold the face of God in
Righteousness; be like him, and see him as he is. When the Prodigal thought
what was in his Father's House, it made him glad to return; and that is the
Argument that our Savior gives his Disciples against trouble in this World,
the consideration of what is provided for them in his Father's House: John
14.2. In my father's house are many mansions: And in Phil. 3.20. Our
conversation is in heaven, whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ. We look at things not seen.

Direct 3. Be always laboring to discharge your selves of earthly hopes. We
are looking for some contentment in things of this World, and that makes Death
more unacceptable. But you have no certainty of any Earthly comfort that you
can propound to your selves; and be it what it will, there is better to your
satisfaction to be had in Heaven. Remember what Leah and Rachel said to Jacob,
Is there any portion or inheritance yet for us? etc. Genesis 31.14. That made them
willing to go into Canaan: They had no expectation left in Padan-Aram.

Direct. 4. Endeavor always to maintain uprightness and sincerity of heart.
That Is the comfort of Christians while living and dying; that is comfort while
we live, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.
And when we dye, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for
the end of that man is peace. And so Prove. 14.32. The righteous has hope in his
death.

Direct. 5. Diligently apply your selves to all duties of righteousness and
goodness toward men. It conduces much to the comfort of our death, to live as,
in the exercise of holiness toward God, so in practice of honesty and goodness
to men. It helps to make a man wait with confidence for the coming of Christ:
Tit. 2.12, 13. Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; Looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. See how Paul takes his dying leave of the Ephesians, though he
was not presently to die, Acts 20.33. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold,
or apparel. Sixthly and Lastly:

Direct. 6. Live in a continual exercise of faith in Jesus Christ for remission
of sin, and everlasting life. Be always trusting, and renewing your confidence
in Christ: There is no preserving our assurance of peace with God, no
maintaining of our hope of glory, without continual recourse had to the great
Advocate, for the saving benefits of his Mediation. He can never dye
comfortably, that does not always live by faith: 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. The continual
exercise of judgment and holy discretion in our Actions, is a keeping of
Judgment; Psalm. 106.3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does
righteousness at all times: So the continual exercise of Faith is a keeping of
Faith; which confirms the Soul against the fear of Death and Judgment. 2 Timothy
1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him against that day. Thus now have I
endeavored to show you what is necessary to a Christian's comfortable passage
through this World; and that is the last thing of a Christian's motion toward
his Perfection, To go well out of this World. And now this work of a
Christian's motion toward his Perfection, I shall conclude with this: I have
finished my course.

FINIS.

