Divine Rules for Christian Unity Opened and Urged.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF NORWICH, October 16. 1692.

By ERASMUS WARREN, Rector of Worlington in Suffolk.

Be of one Mind, 2 Cor. 13.11. If there be therefore any Consolation in CHRIST;
if any Comfort of Love; if any Fellowship of the SPIRIT; if any Bowels and
Mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being
of one accord, of one mind, Phil. 2.1, 2. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Oliver
Bookseller in Norwich, and are to be sold by J. Robinson in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

To the Worshipful MICHAEL BEVERLY Esquire MAYOR OF THE City of NORWICH.
SIR,
IT was St. Cyprian's Complaint long since (and a very sad one, because a very
true one) Videns ille idola derelicta, and per nimium credentium populum seeds
suas ac templa deserta, excogitaverit novam fraudem, ut sub ipso Christiani
nominis titulo fallat incautos. Haereses invenit and Schismata, quibus
subverteret fidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet Vnitatem. De Unit. Eccle.
That the Devil seeing his Idols left, and his Seats and Temples forsaken by a
Multitude of Believing People, thought of a new Cheat, how under the very Title
of the Christian Name, he might deceive the Unwary. He invented Heresies and
Schisms, whereby he might subvert the Faith, corrupt the Truth, and cut UNITY
asunder. And how very successful this Invention of his has been, and how many
and grievous Mischiefs it has wrought, and may still produce, Experience shows
us, and gives us but too good Grounds to suspect. I pray GOD make us thoroughly
sensible of it, and so deeply affect every one of us with it; as that the
Dangers which threaten us, and grow upon us from our unhappy Divisions, may be
timely prevented, and for ever superseded, by a speedy and perfect Closure of
all sides. And O what a Blessed Change would it be (considering how we are
crumbled into Sects and Factions) to have our many Differences molded up into
one common Interest; and all separate Parties melted down into Christian Unity!

Might this Discourse in the least Measure contribute to that Glorious Work, I
should never repent of its Publication, though I was drawn to it with
Reluctance.

I confess, Sir, when I outstood your first Motions to it, and those that were
made by other excellent Persons, while I was in your City; I hoped and
concluded that I had finally freed my self from farther Solicitations of that
nature. But when I found that they followed me into the Country, and when I met
with this Passage, amongst others, in your Letter, It is not only my Opinion,
that your Sermon will be Serviceable to the Public, toward Healing the
Breaches that are amongst us; but others of better Judgment than my self, do
unanimously agree to the same; and all People that I converse with, desire that
I would use my Interest, to persuade you to Print it. I then thought I had
reason to submit, and accordingly have done it.

And truly fear of Censure, as well as force of Entreaty, prevailed with me to
gratify you in the Instance. For in case I had refused, they who desired the
Sermon might come abroad, would have condemned me, it may be, for not duly
practicing my own Doctrine, which pressed Men by all the means they could use,
to endeavor Unity: Than which (you both wisely and seriously note in your
Letter aforesaid) as nothing can be more seasonably discoursed on; so there is
not any thing more desirable by good Christians, or more to be sought after in
this divided Nation. I heartily wish that All were of your Mind, then it might
be hoped that their Endeavors after Spiritual Unity, would be such, as GOD
would Bless with Happy Success. At least, Sir, it would make People very
careful to omit nothing conducive thereunto, if I may judge by your Procedure.
For not so much as One single Sermon, tending to Union, could be heard by you;
but as mean as it is, you would have it made public. In case it proves
Instrumental that way, I shall greatly rejoice in my compliance with you. And
if it does not, I shall still have the Satisfaction of answering the Desires of
many Good Men; and more particularly of testifying my self to be,

Honored Sir, Your most Humble Servant, E. Warren.

Ephesians 4.3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the SPIRIT in the Bond of
Peace.


A Most Kind and Important Petition was that which our adorable LORD in the
Days of his Flesh, put up for his Proselytes, St. John 17.21. That they all may
be one, as Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee; that they also may be one in
us. O that the GOD who hears Prayers, would please to answer it in the
Fullness of it!

But that so great a Blessing may come down exuberantly on the Body of
Christians, and continue with them; something must be done on their part: That
is, the Unity their LORD prayed for, they must labor after.

It is styled the Unity of the SPIRIT, because as it joins us together in one
Mind or Spirit; so it is wrought by the Efficiency or Operation of the HOLY
GHOST.

It may be thus described: It is a Blessed Agreement of Spiritual Persons, in
Spiritual Matters, to Spiritual Ends.

An AGREEMENT: For even in Natural as well as amongst Rational Beings, there
can be no Union where there is no Concord.

An Agreement of SPIRITUAL PERSONS: That is, of CHRISTIANS: Who, though in
their Natural Capacity they are like other Men; yet in their Religious
Profession they are distinguished from them, it being Spiritual in all regards.
For the Author of it is Spiritual, CHRIST: The Rule of it is Spiritual, the
Gospel: The Instruments of it are Spiritual Ordinances: The Exercise of it is
in Spiritual Duties: The Ends of it are Spiritual Excellencies: The Motives to
it are Spiritual Inducements: The Rewards of it are Spiritual Seize: The
very Confederacy in it is by Spiritual Ligaments: Whether we consider
Christians as tied together in a Community amongst themselves; or as a Mystical
Body joined to their Sovereign Head. So that Infidels agreeing never so well,
must be wide of this Unity of the SPIRIT: At best they can make but a Political
or Superstitious Society.

An Agreement in Spiritual MATTERS: As in Doctrine, Sacraments, Liturgy,
Government: So that let Christians themselves agree never so fully as to
Secular Affairs, they would be much below the Unity of the SPIRIT: Their
Agreement would rise no higher than a Civil or Amicable Combination.

To Spiritual ENDS: As to the Honor of GOD, the Interest of His Kingdom, the
Good and Happiness of the Souls of Men: So that should Christians agree never
so thoroughly in Spiritual Matters to Temporal Ends, they would be short of the
Unity of the SPIRIT still. For their Ends must either be Innocent or Sinful. If
Innocent, they would be but a Selfish Association: If Sinful, an Impious and
Unlawful one.

And therefore lastly, it is a BLESSED Agreement; and that in several Respects:
In respect of its Origin, as springing from Blessed Principles: In respect of
its Influence, as producing Blessed Effects: In respect of its Tendency and
Subservience, as promoting our present, and ministering to our future endless
Beatitude. And thus it is distinguished from all other Agreements upon Earth.

Now to preserve and promote this Spiritual Unity, I shall humbly offer some
plain Rules or Directions. Six of them shall be taken out of the Context, and
for that reason they must be of the more Weight, and I hope will be of the more
Efficacy. They are these: 1st. Be sensible of the great need of Unity. 2ly.
Learn to be deeply Humble. 3ly. Labor for a meek Temper of Mind. 4ly. Arm your
selves with Long-suffering. 5ly. Exercise mutual Forbearance. 6ly. Live in
Christian Love.


They are all couched in the two first Verses of the Chapter: I beseech you
that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called; with all Lowliness
and Meekness, with Long-suffering, Forbearing one another in Love.

First, Be sensible of the great need of Unity: It is absolutely necessary upon
the Account of our Calling: Of our high, holy, Heavenly Calling; as it is
denominated in the Sacred Volume. And therefore that we might go the right way
to work, and be inclined to endeavor it from a just Sense of the Necessity of
it; the Apostle directs us, in the first place, to walk (...), worthy of the
Vocation wherewith we are called: Intimating we can never do that, never be
worthy Disciples of CHRIST, without Unity.

For impossible it is that any should walk worthy of their Calling, whatever it
be, unless they answer the Nature of it, and advance it. But there is no doing
either of these, as to our Christian Vocation, without Unity.

Without Unity we cannot answer the Nature of our Calling. And the Reason is
evident, because a main part of that Vocation is Unity; As GOD has called us to
Peace, and called us to Holiness, and called us to His Kingdom, as the Divine
Oracles testify: So he has called us to Unity, as much as to any thing, as
appears there.

Nor must we forget that the Holy JESUS honored Christians with many excellent
and noble Gifts, and sometimes with glorious or miraculous ones, on purpose to
bring them into Unity, and keep them in it. The Glory which Thou gave me, I
have given them: And why? That they may be one, even as we are one, St. John
17.22.

Yea, the great things of our Religion, (not to say the whole of it) seem to be
designed to this End; to indear us mightily and closely to unite us. The very
Genius of it leads that way directly, and invites and draws most powerfully to
it: For says St. Paul, just after the Text, There is one Body, and one SPIRIT,
even as ye are called in one Hope of your Calling; one LORD, one Faith, one
Baptism, one GOD and Father of all. Such a Divine Sorites or heap of Arguments
persuading to Unity, as can no where be paralleled. Were Christians
incorporate in different Bodies; or were the one Body in which they are
incorporate, animated by different Spirits; or did the one SPIRIT which
animates them, allot them different Callings; or did the one Calling allotted
them, allow them different Hopes; or did the one Hope allowed them, tie them to
different LORDS; or did the one LORD they are obliged to, give them different
Faiths; or to the one Faith given them, were they admitted by different
Baptisms; or in their one initiating Baptism, were they devoted to different
GODS; or were the one GOD, to whom they are devoted, not their Father; they
might then be divided, and could not well help it. Yea, Division, which is now
their Sin, might then be their Duty. But the Case is nothing so. On the
contrary, there is but one Body, that is, the Church into which true Christians
are grafted: But one SPIRIT, the HOLY GHOST, by which they are illivened: But
one Calling, the Evangelical Religion in which they are engaged: But one Hope,
that of Salvation, by which they are encouraged: But one LORD, that is, CHRIST,
by whom they are redeemed: But one Faith, that is, of the Gospel, which by them
is professed: But one Baptism, that is, of JESUS, by which they are
consecrated: But one GOD, that is, the living and true GOD, by whom they were
created, are governed, and shall be preserved; and this GOD is their Father
too, and therefore they must all be nearly related. So that here is such a
number of Motives to Unity, and of strong Obligations binding to it, that none
more need, and few more can be added of the same Nature. Were they rightly
considered, how is it possible that Christians should divide? When in so doing,
or suffering it to be done, they must break the Frame or Contexture of their
Religion, and go against the Temper and Constitution of it, and fail most
shamefully in their proper Vocation.

If at any time therefore, or upon any occasion, we grow too hot, and our Minds
ferment, and our Passions boil, so as to threaten any thing of Division, let us
but take our Bibles in our Hands, and deliberately read, and seriously ruminate
on this Paragraph, and surely it will be enough to cool that Heat, and quench
that Fire, which would inflame us to Dissension. Let me ask, are we willing to
unchristian our selves? Why, if we do not endeavor to keep Unity, we take too
great a step toward it: At least we fall very short of our Calling, and
whatever Figures we seem to make, in a great measure we are no better than
Ciphers: Christians without Unity, and without endeavoring to keep it, are
somewhat like Scholars without Learning, and without studying to get it: They
want an Essential of their Profession, or a most necessary Piece of it; nor do
they take due care to attain unto it and be accomplished in it.

And as we cannot answer the Nature of our Calling without Unity, so neither
can we advance it. And therefore when our LORD prayed for his Disciples (as we
noted at first) that they all might be one, He gives this Reason why He sued
for their Unity, That the World might believe that Thou have sent me: So that
Unity in the Church of GOD, is to propagate Faith in the Messiah or Son of GOD,
and to advance Christianity in the World: And is it not highly needful then,
and does it not behove us to endeavor to keep it amongst our selves, and to
promote it so far as we can with others?

Our Blessed LORD taught us to Pray (and I hope we do it every day more than
once) that His Kingdom may come; That His Heavenly Religion may grow great and
powerful, and rule in the Hearts and Lives of Men; That it may take deep root
in all places, and yield much Fruit; That it may thrive and flourish more than
ever it did, ascending to the highest Pitch, and spreading to the widest
Latitude. But when we pray thus, if we do not endeavor to keep Unity, like
egregious Dissemblers we not only frustrate our own Devotions; but to GOD's
Dishonor, and the great prejudice of our selves and others, set back the
Blessing for which we supplicate.

It is the Judgment of Learned and Pious Men, that before the End of the World,
there shall be an happy Change in it: The Jews shall be converted, the Gentiles
more fully called, and true Christianity greatly exalted. Now would it not be
huge Satisfaction to us, to have this Glorious Elevation of Religion come to
pass in our days? Why then let all unfeigned Servants of JESUS do what in them
lies to hasten it: And amongst other things conducive thereunto, let them
endeavor to keep the Unity of the SPIRIT: So we shall see Religion rise, and
help it to culminate or advance apace to its wished Height. And when once it
gets into its Zenith in the Church, and shines forth in its full Strength and
Luster, who knows what an Influence it may have far and near, and how much of
the World may be taken Captive with the Charming Beauty and Glories of it?
Whereas Divisions do naturally throw Contempt on Christianity, and grievously
diminish and eclipse it; for it makes strangers to it apt to suspect, that it
is too weak to carry on its own Designs, whereof Unity is one: Or else that its
Professors (who are fittest to judge) have no great opinion of its worth, and
therefore slight it in one of the grand Necessaries of it: And when they who
are unacquainted with our Religion, or have little esteem and love for the
same, have occasion given them to take such crooked Measures of it; no wonder
if they be prejudiced and set against it, and so its Propagation be checked and
hindered.

Upon this account, in the first place, let us zealously endeavor to keep the
Unity of the SPIRIT; else we plainly declare, that we have no thorough Sense of
the Nature of our Calling, and no just Concern to advance it as we ought; and
so neither do, nor can walk worthy of it: And therefore St. Paul exhorting
Christians to a Conversation becoming the Gospel, which is the same thing as to
walk worthy of their Vocation; advises them to stand fast in one Spirit, with
one Mind, Phil. 1.27. That for the first Rule.

Secondly, Learn to be deeply Humble: Pride in a Society, is like Motion in
Matter, which naturally works a Separation of Parts, and the Dissolution of
Continuity; and is able to turn the hardest Rock into volatile or fluid Atoms.
But Humility, on the other side, is like Rest, which unites and Consolidates.
And therefore to preserve Unity, the Apostle will have us, in the second place,
to walk (...), with all Lowliness.

Pride makes Men conceited; and Self-conceit makes them singular; and
Singularity makes them differ from others; and Difference from others (be it in
Opinion or Practice) breeds Dissension; and Dissension shatters Unity.

Pride makes Men Morose; and Moroseness makes them Peevish; and Peevishness
makes them Captious and Humorous; and captious Humorsomness hinders Compliance
in requisite things; and Noncompliance hinders Conformity; and Nonconformity
disturbs Unity.

Pride makes Men Heady; and Headiness makes them Unruly; and Unruliness makes
them Disorderly; and Disorderliness makes them Disobedient; and Disobedience
disjoynts Unity.

Pride makes Men Contentious; it is the sole or chief cause of their being so:
Only by Pride comes Contention, Prove. 13.10. And Contention begets Division;
and Division is an actual Breach of Unity.

Pride makes Men Ambitious; and Ambition makes them Furious in driving to what
they aim at: And when their Fury is up, and they are hot in their Chase, they
care not through what they run, so they attain their End. If Heresy or Schism,
Sedition or Rebellion, lie in their way, they matter not rushing into any of
them, perhaps not plunging into all. But then Unity is sure to be overthrown
and trampled on.

Nor are particular Churches only thus rent to pieces by Pride, but also the
Church Universal is filled with Schisms. For what is it that makes one Church
Vsurp upon another; that sets one Church to Domineer over another; that causes
one Church to Excommunicate and Anathematize another, whereby Catholic Unity
is destroyed, but Pride chiefly?

As we prize and love Unity therefore, let us down with Pride, and resolve to
walk humbly with GOD and all Men; toward our Betters, Equals and Inferiors;
toward them that are our Friends, and them that are our Enemies; toward them
that agree with us, and them that dissent from us; let us walk with Lowliness:
If they be haughty and insolent toward us, let us, for inestimable Unity's
sake, demean our selves with all Lowliness toward them.

And why should we not? For Lord! What have we to be proud of? Are we not
Frailty and Dust, and so Nothing? Are we not Corruption and Sin, and so worse
than nothing? And for such Nothings, and worse than Nothings as we, to swell
with Pride, would be Folly and Sin enough, though the Poison of it wrought only
within us. But when its Venom is spreading and diffusive, and breaths out a
Contagion fatal to Unity; not to throw off Pride and put on Humility, must be
sinful Folly of a larger size, and GOD forbid we should be guilty of it.

Thirdly, Labor for a meek Temper of Mind: As the Wise Man assures us, Wrath
is Cruel, and Anger is Outrageous, Prove. 27.4. And truly so Cruel is Wrath,
that it will kill Unity, where it is not restrained. And as Solomon there
expresses it, such a (...) or outrageous Inundation is Anger, that if it be not
kept within Bounds, it will not fail to overflow and drown it. And therefore to
preserve Unity, the Apostle urges us, in the third place, to walk (...), with
Meekness.

Anger, we know, is a short Madness, as the Moralist teaches: And where it
Tumultuates and Rages, it even degrades Humanity, and makes Men to act in ways
unworthy of themselves: It distracts the Mind, and roils the Spirit, and throws
it into wild and ruful Disorders. It puts down the use of Judgment for the
time, and exalts Frenzy into the Throne of Reason: It quite overthrows
Wisdom's Empire; and putting the Scepter into Folly's hand, sets it up to
domineer in all our Capacities. For then it is, to use Philo's Distinction,
that (...), the Feminine Part of us, prevails against (...), the Masculine:
That (...), the Child in us, according to Simplicius, is too hard for (...),
the inner Man, as the Christian Doctrine calls it: That (...), the Beast,
according to Plotinus, vanquishes (...), the intellectual Power: That (...),
according to the Stoics, Unreasonableness, bafles (...) the Mind: That
Passions, which according to Maximus Tyrius, are (...), the Populace, or Mob of
the Soul; mutiny against and overcome (...), the ruling Faculty. And so, to
speak in Lucian's Language, (...), the Lordly part of the Soul, which, he says,
is (...), the Demon given to every one, (and in Plato's style is (...), the
GOD within us) and dwells (...), in the Top of the Body; is sunk below its own
Dignity, and indecently subjugated to base Extravagancies.

So that if through want of Meekness we be habitually Wrathful, and subject to
vehement Transports of Anger, we must needs be unfit to keep Unity, as being at
variance with our selves, and quite unhinged and out of order, by reason of
intestine Feuds and Jarrings: And they that have lost the Government of
themselves, cannot but be destitute of that Gentleness and Moderation, and of
that prudent Care and winning Conduct, which is necessary to preserving Unity
with others.

But then a choleric ireful Temper untamed, being so utterly inconsistent with
Unity, and destructive to it, how ready should we be to listen to the Apostle,
where he advises (in the last Verse save one of this Chapter) Let all Wrath
and Anger be put away. Let us quell those fierce and blustering Storms, which
are apt not only to blow up Autocracy by the Roots, but to ruffle Unity by
ruining Self-government: And let us labor hard for a sedate and calm, for a
quiet and composed Frame of Mind; for so mild, and smooth, and meek a Temper,
as may dispose us to Unity, and fix us in it; as may glue us together in a
regular Communion, and make us stick close and fast to each other, by a firm
and inseparable Spiritual Cohesion.

But if we will not take the Holy Council given us, and curb our hot and
turbulent Spirits, but will carry Gunpowder Passions about us, that are ready
to take fire from every spark of Provocation which is struck into them; no
marvel if at last we be miserably blown up, and broken and shattered all to
pieces.

Fourthly, Arm your selves with Long-suffering. The three former Rules proved
against our giving Offense to others; But Unity may as well be hindered or
destroyed by taking the Offenses which they give: And therefore to fortify us
against that, and so the better to secure Unity, the Apostle desires us, in the
Fourth place, to walk (...), with Long-suffering.

We are infallibly assured that Offenses will come; some of a lower and
lighter, others of an higher and heavier Nature: Some single and transient,
others complicated and more permanent: Some through the Weakness of simple and
unwary, others through the Willfulness of ill-meaning Men. Now our part it is
to be roiled and provoked by none of these; but to suffer them all so far as we
may, and as evenly as we can, for dear Unity's sake.

And so let us do: Let us be patient toward all Men, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. If any
affront us, if any abuse us, if any injure us, let us take all patiently;
receiving their various Wrongs and Contumelies, just as a Feather-bed or Bank
of Sand, do Stones thrown against them, without noise, or rebounding back upon
those that threw them.

Not that Christians are at any rate to become Stoics. That Is not only
improper, but impossible; for they who are tenderly to simpathize with all, can
never be senseless in themselves, nor possessed with dull Apathy as to their
own Concerns. But let us so improve in the Grace of Long-suffering, as to be
able generously to overlook Indignities; and to stand under Injuries with so
little uneasiness and ill Resentment, as that when we feel the worst Harms
which Men can do us, they may seem as if they were not done. Ye have not
injured me at all, said the great inspired Doctor to the Galatians. And this he
spoke when they had aspersed him with black and bitter Calumnies, and
vehemently opposed both his Doctrine and Practice, and even questioned his very
Apostolical Commission: Than which, what could go nearer to him?

Fifthly, Exercise mutual Forbearance. Bear ye one another Burdens, says the
HOLY GHOST, Gal. 6.2. Though the Infirmities of People, or their Faults be
such, as to become an heavy Burden to us; yet still we are bound in many
Cases, and with much Patience, to bear with them. The last Rule intimates so
much. But that Toleration or bearing with them, is not enough to preserve
Unity, unless we go farther, and forbear them also. And therefore to this the
Apostle leads us, in the fifth place, (...), Forbearing one another.

And this Forbearance must be expressed in these five Instances at least.

Forbear Despising. Censuring. Aggravating. Reproaching. Revenging.


First, Forbear Despising. Honor all Men, is the Divine Command; and therefore
we can slight none scornfully and be blameless: Differ from Men we may, and in
some things we must, but Despise them we may not: That Is a Sin, and if we
commit it, it is at our Peril.

Thy way is strait and even, and safe and pleasant, and in it thou walk
smoothly on, while many unhappy Travelers about thee do otherwise: Some of
them slip, and some of them fall, and some of them wander they know not
whither: But will thou despise them for this? Tell me first, Why art not thou
of their unfortunate number? Perhaps thy Education was better, or thy
Apprehension is quicker, or thy Judgment is sounder. O think then who gave thee
these Advantages, and be thankful to Him: And because he has denied the like
to others, be not slighty but pitiful to them. If thine Eyesight be clearer
than theirs, make good use of it; but by no means laugh at the Blind for losing
their way: They would be glad with all their Hearts, to have as good Eyes as
thine in their Heads; and if they had them, might use them as well, it may be
better than thou do. Pity them therefore in that they want; what, it may be,
they are willing to have, and what it were better for them to enjoy.

Should any leave such a Church as this, wherein are all things Necessary and
Decent, to worship GOD in a raw and wild kind of Room, we should be apt to
think them guilty of Weakness: And so we should likewise believe them to be,
who go out of such a lightsom Church, into one more Gay and Splendid, but
withal so dark, that in it they cannot see either to read the Scriptures, or
to discern Bread from Flesh, or to distinguish Wine from Blood. But then the
more our Brethrens Weakness appears to us, the more Commiseration we must show
to them: But if instead of Compassion we express Scorn, we mistake unhappily as
well as they, and worst our selves by evil Carriage, as they do themselves by
an evil Choice. And shall be so far from drawing them to Unity, that we shall
rather drive them farther from it.

Secondly, Forbear Censuring. It Is good to have a piercing impartial Eye, but
yet on many things we must look with connivence, and not only wink at, but
extenuate them: We are not to put Men's Actions upon the Tenters, and to stretch
them to the worst sense they are capable of; if we do, we violate the Law of
our Heavenly Religion, which lays an Obligation upon us to the contrary, Judge
not. Nor are we bound from it in point of Religion only, but of Policy too;
upon account of Interest, as well as of Duty. Judge not, that ye be not judged:
Plainly intimating, that if we be severe, the Rigor we use we must expect, and
that from GOD, as well as from Men. Let us therefore weigh others with Grains
of Allowance, that so the same may be done to us. But if we carp Censoriously,
and fling at them, should GOD not be angry, Men will retaliate; and we need not
question but we shall meet with those that will pay us sufficiently in our own
Coin.

Though were nothing of this to ensue, we ought to be wonderful Cautious in
Censuring, for fear of Mistake, which we may easily run into: For there may be
great difference betwixt what seems to be, and what really is. Judging (...),
according to appearance, made our SAVIOR once pass for a Sabbath breaker, and
St. Paul for a Setter-forth of Strange GODS. And through the same false Glass
do they look, who in our necessary Rejection of dangerous Errors, and
Separation from them, can descry Heresy and damnable Apostasy; and in our
lawful useful Ceremonies, can see Antichristianism and gross Idolatry. But
that is the common Fault of rash Censuring, to clap a most ugly Vizard of Guilt
upon the Face of Innocence; and to besmear Integrity with misimputed
Wickedness. In dread and Detestation of so foul an Enormity, let us Censure
none but upon surest Grounds.

And truly where Actions deserve to be censured, the Agents may sometimes be
very well spared: For where there is Darkness in the Mind, there may be
Sincerity in the Soul; and invincible Ignorance will excuse many Errors: It is
one thing not to discern the Truth, and another to deny it, desert it, detain
it in Unrighteousness: We are not presently to count them desperately Wicked,
all whose Practices we cannot justify: Heaven it self looks not upon all as
Factious and Idolatrous in their Hearts, who are so in their Ways, in their
Worship: Let not us accuse, where there is any good hope that GOD will approve;
nor be forward to condemn, whom his Mercy may acquit. As many are much worse
than their Profession can permit, so some are much better than their Principles
do allow. Put the favourablest Construction therefore upon all Persons and
their Actions, and think as fairly of them as possibly you can, taking in all
appendent Circumstances, and judging by the Rules of ingenuous Candor: For I do
not mean that any of us should call Black White at any rate. Where things are
Evident and Notorious, we must see them in their own Colors, and not stick to
call them by their proper Names. They who call Evil Good, and put Darkness for
Light, are marked out by GOD Himself, in the fifth of Isaiah; and we there find
what Stamp they are of: To pronounce that naught which really is so, is no
culpable Censure, but a commendable Judgment: And they who cannot or dare not
pass it, upon just occasion, proclaim to the World, that they have little
Understanding, or no great Uprightness.

Thirdly, Forbear Aggravating. Epictetus says every thing has two Handles: And
if so, Ingenuity (to mention nothing higher) should teach us never to take hold
of the worst.

Where there are no Faults, be sure to make none: Where there are but little
ones, make them not great: Where there are great ones, make them not bigger
than they are.

Too many go the contrary way, and are violent in it: They love to raise
Mountains out of Mole-hills, and to blow up harmless Shadows into hideous
Monsters: What is spoken in height of Fancy, they draw down to a common Sense:
And what passes in heat of Passion or Dispute, they interpret to be Men's
settled Judgments: What they find amiss in the Speeches, Writings and Carriages
of some, they impute to all of the same Rank in which they stand, it may be to
the whole Church of which they are.

But they who take such a lawless Liberty as this, may make any thing out of
any thing, and transform the beautifullest pieces of Religion into black and
bloughty Profaneness. Thus the Eternal Son of GOD, for asserting his Divinity,
was arraigned of Blasphemy, Matt. 26.65. And for working Miracles by the Power
of the HOLY GHOST, was decry'd for a Conjurer; the Jews averring openly to his
Face, that He cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

And what a Multitude of wretched Aggravators are there in this Age? Such as
busily employ their Tongues and Pens, not only in making bad things worse
(which is an ill work, and speaks them very Corrupt that do it) but also in
perverting things that are good, so as to make them seem Odious and Impious; as
if they took a Pride in letting the World know they have Pestilential Ink, or a
Breath so Virulent, as to be able, in a manner, to blast Holiness it self.

Fourthly, Forbear Reproaching. Use no opprobrious or disgraceful Language; for
as that proceeds from want of Temper, and aloud proclaims us to be sharp and
bitter; so it tends but to the Increase of Gaul and Acrimony: Rather obey the
Apostle therefore, who in the close of this Chapter, charges Christians to put
away all Bitterness, Clamor and evil Speaking: Let no abusive or exasperating
Reflections be made by us, either upon those in Communion with us, or upon any
amongst us or about us: Devilish Papists, Damned Fanatics, Mad Dissenters, or
the like, are words that sound ill, and signify worse; for they that so let
fly against their Fellow Christians, intending basely to brand them, do most
shamefully stigmatize themselves: If they were reputed Carnal, and recorded for
such, who said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.4. what Character must
they come under, who in spite and disparagement to their Brethren, call them by
names of a worse Distinction? Certainly they forget how the Son of GOD, when
His perfidious Disciple came to betray Him, gave him no worse Title than that
of Friend. And how the Prince of the Angels contesting with the Devil; in the
midst of Altercation, durst not bring, (...), a Charge of Reproach against him.

Fifthly, Forbear Revenging. Dearly Beloved avenge not your selves, says the
SPIRIT, Romans 12.19. To do that would be daring and dangerous: For besides that
it is a Breach of the Gospel-Precept, of not rendering Evil for Evil; It is
moreover an Incroachment upon GOD's Right, and a bold Usurpation of His
Prerogative, who has appropriated Revenge unto Himself: Vengeance is mine, I
will repay, says the LORD. And more than once the Psalmist calls Him, The GOD
to whom Vengeance belongs. Not that He has made the Work peculiar to Himself
for any extraordinary Pleasure He takes in it; but because He only is able to
execute it aright; in fitting Instances, that is, and just Proportions: For He
only knows the Malice of Men's Hearts, and the Peevishness of their Spirits, and
the secret Malignity of their Intentions, as well as the true Obliquity and
Baseness of their Actions: Which we being utterly Ignorant of, upon that
account also must forbear Revenge, else we undertake what we are unable justly
to perform; another piece of unwarrantable Rashness and Presumption.

Leaving Vengeance to GOD therefore, who alone can take it in equitable
Measures, and with unerring Exactness; let us give up our selves to the
opposite Duties, as the Gospel requires, and be very Diligent and Exemplary in
them. As we are instructed in the last Verse of this Chapter, Let us be kind
one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as GOD for CHRIST's
sake has forgiven us. And as we are taught elsewhere, If our Enemies hunger,
let us feed them, if they thirst, let us give them drink. Let us do good
against evil, and overcome evil with good; and never requite the worst
Unkindnesses, but with Prayers and Civilities. So we shall conform to the
Primitive Christians, and signalize our selves by a noble Imitation of their
Glorious Patterns; of whom we find it thus recorded, Being reviled, we bless;
being persecuted we suffer it; being defamed we entreat, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.

But if the Spirit of Revenge be so strong in any, that they cannot bridle or
restrain it, I will show them how they may best vent it: Let them seriously
think how many Wrongs, and withal how grievous ones, they have done to GOD,
their Neighbors, and their own Souls; and let their vindictive Humor run out
against their Sins, and be spent upon themselves: So they shall break no Unity.

Which if we would not do, we must Forbear one another at least in the several
Instances mentioned: For Despising Men's Failings, Censuring their Actions,
Aggravating their Faults, Reproaching their Persons, and Revenging their Ill
turns; are almost direct and natural Provocations to Wrath, and Strife, and
Hatred, and Malice. And wherever these Evils rise and rule, there is, there
can be, no room for Unity: There are and must be Heart-burnings and
Animosities, and they have always Jars and Discord in their Train. Unless
therefore we exercise mutual Forbearance in the aforesaid Cases, and that with
all good Care and Conscience, we plainly show we are no Friends to Unity.
Perhaps I might say, we are perfect, cruel Enemies to it, and instead of
healing the fearful Gashes made in it, do stab it to the Heart, and add to its
bleeding gaping Wounds.

As to forbearing Ecclesiastical Impositions, I have said nothing; that is the
Concern of those in Authority, and it is not the part of a Popular Discourse to
prescribe to Governors: Though I cannot but think it would be matter of Joy to
good Christians, to see the Terms of Communion with any pure Church made as few
as they may be, and those few made as easy as they can be, by being stretched
out to the utmost Extent, of a wise, and safe, and most enlarged Charity.

And happy it is, where in framing and receiving of Church-Constitutions,
favorable Indulgence and Condescension in the Rulers, meet with Flexibility
and obediential Compliance in the People: For where the Tempers of both are so
laudable in themselves, and Congruous to each other, they will be sure
Foundations of a solid Unity: Of such a Unity, as by being Pleasing and
Satisfactory in its Conditions, will be either indissoluble, or of lasting
Duration.

And here I beg leave to make one Remark upon what occurs in the Fifteenth of
the Acts: In that Chapter we find the Apostles and Elders together holding a
Council. And after serious and mature Debates, relating to certain Gentile
Converts, they came to this prudent and moderate Determination. It seemed good
to the HOLY GHOST and to us, to lay no greater Burden upon you, than these
NECESSARY Things. Now that Council being the most Apostolical that ever met,
this must be the most Authentic that was ever made, and so the purest
President, if not perfectest Standard for Sacred Impositions, that the
Catholic Church can show, or go by upon Earth. And this Council, and this
Canon, laying no other things upon Christians, but what were Necessary: Hence
it will follow, that if Particular Churches would draw the first and best
Example into Practice; they must take the same Measures, and impose only such
things as are absolutely Necessary in their own Nature, or else upon great and
high Accounts.

And when we find in the Case alleged, that an indifferent thing, Abstinence
from things Strangled, was required as Necessary, to further the Association of
Judaizing Christians with Believing Gentiles: From hence it may be argued with
Parity of Reason, that it is necessary Indifferent things should not be imposed,
where that Imposition may hinder the Coalescence of dissenting Christians with
the imposing Church.

Yet this, on the other side, must be added: That no indifferent things
imposed, nor any thing less than downright Sin in the Terms of Communion with
any Church, can justify our Separation from that Church. And the Reason is
evident, because Separation, where it is not absolutely needful to avoid Sin,
becomes a Sin in it self, by being an unlawful Breach of that Unity of the
SPIRIT, which GOD has so positively and peremptorily enjoined. And where
Separation is thus sinful (as it always is, where we are not forced upon it to
shun Sin) we must choose to submit to any Inconveniences, rather than be guilty
of it. For it is much better that we should be uneasy, than that GOD should be
offended. Much better for us to be incommoded in our Circumstances, than to be
defiled in our Consciences.

Nor may we leave a Church for more Purity's sake, in whose Communion we may
continue without Sin. For besides that upon this Account, we may for ever
separate and sub-divide, and run out Criminous Schisms into an endless Process
or Multiplication: We must be grievously Preposterous in our Procedure. What
sensible Man would attempt to wash his Hands white with Ink? Or go about to
take a Spot from off his Face, by plunging himself over Head and Ears into
Mire? And are not they as little rational in their Enterprise, and not only
more Absurd but Faulty too, that seek to advance Purity by sinning; and that
commit a Crime, to cure an Imperfection? And this is truly the case of those,
who withdraw from one Church in whose Communion they are innocent and safe; to
set up another purer than that. Instead of bettering themselves, they become
really worse; and well they may, and needs they must, because they do evil that
good may come, Romans 3.8.

To check Inclinations of separating upon such an account, it may properly be
considered, that no Church upon Earth is, or can be completely Pure: Some kind
of Drossiness cannot choose but be Inherent in it, as being indeed of the very
Nature of it. And can it consist with Reason, to pull a living Body to pieces,
to rinse its Bowels from such an Impurity as is rather Natural than Noxious?
Especially if we consider, that when all is done, Natural Feculence will still
be necessary, and remain inseparable, unless the Body wherein it rests, be
clarified from it by some mighty Change. And when the Church has undergone the
Change she hopes for, she shall then be a Pure Church indeed. For she shall be
Glorious, not having Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but shall be Holy and
without Blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. But this being the Privilege of her Triumphant
State, it is not to be looked for in any part of her while it is Militant.

As to forbearing Punishment, Care is taken: And I own it is my Hearts desire,
and I nothing doubt but it is Yours also (and even mere good Nature, without
the additional Tenderness of Religion, cannot methinks but prompt all to wish
it) That Penal Laws may never touch the Harmless, but have the Dint of their
Severity turned upon the Obstinate. Penal Inflictions must be improper to lay
upon Men of good Minds, and hurtless Principles; that Innocently go on in wrong
ways merely because they scruple the Right: For such harsh Methods, instead of
inward Satisfaction, the thing they want, do only give them outward Trouble.
And as for honest well-meaning Christians, who are no whit leavened with
Perverseness or Contumacy, and whose Fault lies wholly in their Understanding:
Poor Souls! they are Unhappy enough in erroneous Consciences, and need not be
punished too because they are miserable. Again therefore I wish, that all who
err in Simplicity, may escape with Impunity; and none may smart for what they
cannot help.

Nor needs this Forbearance (which is supposed to make all Cautious
Discrimination betwixt the Tender-conscienc'd and others) be a Ground or
Occasion of Jealousy to the State: For where GOD sees it impartially
exercised, He will find the Government so like his Own, that his watchful
Providence will take due Care that such a Lenity shall rather establish, than
weaken or overthrow it. And so I pass to the sixth Rule.

Live in Christian Love. The Church of CHRIST, in this very Chapter, is
compared to an Humane Body; and elsewhere in Scripture to a Stone Building. Now
as such a Body must have Sinews to knit its Joints, and such a Building must
have Mortar to cement its Stones: So the Christian Church must have Christian
Love to unite its Members. And therefore the Apostle, for preserving Unity, in
the sixth place, exhorts us to Amity. Yea, he gives a broad Hint, that even
Toleration or Forbearance it self, will no farther promote Unity, than as it
proceeds from this Principle, by beseeching us to forbear one another, (...),
in Love.

Love is the very Life, and Soul, and Essence of Unity; so that where the one
is not, the other cannot be: As there can be no Fire, where there is no Heat;
and no Day where there is no Light: As there can be no Music where there is no
Harmony; and no Beauty where there is no Symetry; so there can be no Unity
where there is no Love. Look what the Root is to the Tree, or the Foundation to
the House: What the Basis is to the Pillar, or the Center to the Circle: And
the same is Love to Unity. It cannot be produced, it cannot be preserved, it
cannot be increased or perfected without it.

Here then let us do our part again: Let us Love as Brethren, as we are
counseled from on high; and let Brotherly Love continue. Let us be knit
together in Love, and be rooted and grounded in Love, and walk in Love, as
CHRIST has loved us. And truly though Unity were not the Effect of this; yet
who would not choose, and study, and strive to live in Love, considering how
delectable a thing it is? Delectable, I must own, beyond my Ability of
describing it. Only this let me say, It is an inexhaustible Fountain of
singular Pleasure: A Spring of secret, but high Contentment; and a Source from
whence flows the incessant Streams of a noble Satisfaction. There is nothing
more Soft, nothing more Sweet, nothing more Generous and thoroughly gratifying
amongst virtuous Passions, than an exalted, refined, universal Love. And
therefore GOD has enjoined it, and made it the second great Commandment, like
the First; not only to give us matter of Duty, but to lay a Foundation of
Happiness for us. And truly did we love all the World as our selves, and did
they love us so again (according to the Tenor of the Divine Law) how could we
be Happier here upon Earth, or what could raise us nearer to Heaven? Where, I
dare confidently affirm, that the choicest part of the Saints Felicity, lies in
their Love to GOD, and one another.

In Compliance therefore with the Holy Direction, let us be kindly affectioned
one to another; and let us provoke one another to love. Let our Love be of the
right kind, without Dissimulation: And let it be of a just Extent, reaching to
all without Exception: Only it must be freer and more fervent to some, than it
is to others, according to the Grounds and Measures of a wise Distinction.

And since our LORD bids us love our Enemies; that any are such, must be no Bar
to our Affections. Yea, there is reason enough for that Love, besides His
Command: For if we be his unfeigned Disciples, the worst our Enemies can do us,
be they never so bad, is but to benefit us: To give us occasion to act our
Duties, and exercise our Virtues, and so to improve our Graces here, and our
Glories for ever. And have we not sufficient reason to love the Instruments of
our so great Good? Yea, should any prove such Enemies to us, as to persecute us
to the very Death, they would be but our eternal Benefactors: For even while
they kill us, their kindly cruel Hands would help to set a Crown of Life upon
our Heads, and a Brighter too than other Saints shall wear. So that indeed we
ought not only to love our Enemies, but to love them for the very Injuries they
think to do us; for even by them they advantage us mightily, and while they
design us nothing but Mischief, they do obliquely, and beyond their Intention,
serve our best Interests.

I note but one Rule more which is included in the Text, and it is this: If you
would preserve Unity, be careful to maintain Peace. As that helps to tie us
fast together in one, so without it we inevitably fall into Divisions, as a
Sheaf of Corn falls asunder that has no Band. And therefore the Apostle, as a
true Promoter of the Unity of the SPIRIT, injoyns us to keep it, (...), in the
Bond of Peace. And great reason we have to do so, there being no one single
Duty which GOD has charged upon us more strictly: For in the Holy Writings what
is more forcibly recommended, more peremptorily required, more frequently and
also more earnestly inculcated than Peace? Seek Peace and pursue it. Have Peace
one with another. Be at Peace amongst your selves. Follow Peace with all Men.
If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men. So
that it is not enough for us to accept Peace when it is offered; to embrace it
when we meet it; to hold it when we have it: But when we have it not we must
seek it; when it flees from us we must follow it; and never stop till we
overtake it. Though the Terms be hard, yet if they be reasonable, if they be
lawful, and so possible, Our LORD commands us not to refuse them; His Gospel
binds us to submit to them, and that with all Men. Be they who they will, what
they will, if they be but Men, we must, if possible, live peaceably with them.

And no wonder such solemn Injunctions from Heaven, should be laid upon
Christians to maintain Peace, when it is a thing not only transcendently
Excellent in it self, but attended with many inestimable Benefits: I beg leave
to mention but a few of them.

It defends from many Sins. He that is not at Peace with his Brother, is ready
to be Angry with him without a Cause: To revile him, and call him Racha, or
Fool: To be revenged on him for his Oversights or petty Injuries: To quarrel
him, and fight him (as the unhappy Custom is) it may be to kill him; at least
to Hate him; whereby, in St. John's account, he is a Murderer though he kill
him not. Peace is a good Defensative from these Evils, and from many other
which now I cannot reckon up.

It is a mighty Friend to Justice. Then had thy Peace been as a River, and thy
Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea, says the Prophet, Isaiah 48.18. Where
Peace flows as a River, there Righteousness swells like an Ocean. But if the
River of Peace be dried or damned up, the Sea of Justice will be at a low Ebb.

It fits us for the Enjoyment of GOD's propitious Presence. Live in Peace, and
the GOD of Love and Peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13.11. But He that suffered
not David to build Him a Temple, because he was a Man of Blood; will never make
them Temples for Himself to reside in, that are not Children of Peace. For
GOD's sake therefore live in Peace, that so ye may be Happy in the Fruition of
his Presence.

I might go on and add, it is an Help to Duty; a Safeguard to Truth; a
Furtherance of Love; the Fuel of Joy, a Support of Order; an Encouragement of
Learning, Arts and Sciences; the thing which Seasons and Sweetens all
Accommodations, and crowns the highest Prosperity with Happiness. But I give
only one Hint more of its Worth.

It is a main piece of our future Recompense, and a Branch of the Eternal
Worlds Felicity: To every Man that works good, there shall be Glory, Honor
and Peace, Romans 2.10. Not only a peaceful Mind and Conscience, but a peaceful
State and Condition above. As there shall be no Difference there betwixt GOD
and Man, by reason of a perfect Reconcilement; and no Feuds betwixt a Man and
Himself, by reason of absolute Contentment: So there shall be no Discord
betwixt one Man and another; by reason of a thorough Composure of all things,
and an entire Pacification on all sides, fixing the whole Body of Blessed ones
in a sweet Agreement. As our Sins shall there be turned into Innocence, our
Corruptions into Holiness, our Sorrows into Joys, and our Troubles into
Triumphs: So all our various Enmities and Dissentions shall exspire into
endless Peace and Quietness. O then let us in some measure live now, as we
shall do hereafter: Live here upon Earth for one short Moment, as we must do in
the Heavenly Regions for ever; if at last we be worthy to inhabit them.

I now conclude with one Direction, which if well observed, will conduce
effectually, to the settling of an Happy Peace amongst us.

Let us be sincerely Religious. The Wisdom that is from above, is first Pure,
and then Peaceable, James 3.17. And where this Wisdom, which is true Religion,
prevails in us, and gets the Ascendent over all evil Principles, it will
certainly Impregnate us with its own noble Properties; making us not only Pure
in our Nature, but pacifick in our Temper. And nothing indeed can be more
powerful either to procure or establish Peace, than true Religion. For the
truly Religious mortify their Lusts (from whence come Wars and Strifes amongst
us, both Naturally and Judicially at once,) they subdue their Passions, bridle
their Tongues, bear Affronts, suffer Injuries, shun Debates, obey Magistrates,
submit to Ministers, hate Divisions, love Concord, offend none, oblige all: So
that would every one of us be sincere Christians, no farther Care need be taken
for Peace: It would as certainly be the Result or Product of our Religion, as
it is the Law and end of the same.

And as true Religion would make for Peace (verifying its Character of first
Pure and then Peaceable) so GOD would see that Peace should be the Effect or
Consequent of it. When a Man's ways please the LORD, He makes even his Enemies
to be at Peace with him, Prove. 16.7. So that were our ways sincerely Religious,
and pleasing to the LORD, Peace and we should quickly meet, and after that
should never part; our very Enemies would be unable to ravish it from us. Then
it would not matter in the least, how Numerous, Malicious, Potent, Politic,
Furious, Implacable, our Adversaries are, or at any time prove; for they should
all be at Peace with us: If they would not choose to be so, GOD would make them
to be so; and would some way or other bind them to the Peace, and bind us up in
it.

And when once we are bound up in the Bond of Peace, how fast shall we stand in
the Unity of the SPIRIT, and how securely shall we keep it? Provided, that is,
that we always endeavor it. And as it behooves us all to be (...), diligently
and strenuously endeavoring to keep it by all good Means: So particularly by
the Use of those good Rules now delivered: Which as I dare not, so You must not
call my Rules: For though I have opened and urged them; yet, as has been noted,
they are the Rules of St. Paul, and so the Divine Rules of GOD Himself: Of that
GOD Who makes Men to be of one Mind in an House. Of that GOD who best knows by
what Rules and Means to make the whole Christian Church be as once it was; of
one Heart and one Soul, Acts 4.32.

Which that it may be, let us humbly implore it at the hands of GOD: Let us
make it a daily Petition in our private Devotions: And as often as we can, let
us join with the Church in her Public Prayers, and supplicate for Unity with
becoming Earnestness: Where she prays, in the Litany, That it may please GOD to
give to all Nations Unity, Peace and Concord: And in the Collect for all
Conditions of Men, That all who profess and call themselves Christians, may be
led into the way of Truth, and hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, in the Bond
of Peace, and in Righteousness of Life: And in the Prayer for the
Church-Militant, That GOD would inspire continually the Universal Church with
the Spirit of Truth, Unity and Concord; and grant that all they that do confess
his Holy Name, may agree in the Truth of his Holy Word, and live in Unity and
Godly Love. Where our Church, I say, prays thus for Unity, let us humbly and
heartily join in the Petitions, pouring them out with an elevated Zeal, and the
highest Streins of a most intense and vehement Fervency.

And at present let us beg the invaluable Blessing, in part of that Collect,
which is the last save one, in the Office for the late solemn Monthly Fast:
Which I could wish all Holy Supplicants, that are Lovers of Unity, would
constantly use in their devout Retirements and Addresses to Heaven; till such
time as they either compose or meet with a more pregnant Form.

O GOD the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, our only SAVIOR the Prince of
Peace, look down in much Pity and Compassion upon this Church and Nation. Give
us Grace seriously to lay to Heart the great Dangers we are in by our unhappy
Divisions. Take away all Hatred and Prejudice, and whatsoever else may hinder
us from Godly Union and Concord: That as there is but one Body, and one SPIRIT,
and one hope of our Calling, one LORD, one Faith, one Baptism, one GOD and
Father of us all: So we may henceforth be all of one Heart, and of one Soul,
united in one Holy Bond of Truth and Peace, of Faith and Charity, and may with
one Mind, and one Mouth Glorify Thee O GOD, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.
Amen.

FINIS.

