The LAST DISCOURSE Of the Right Honble the Lord Warestoune, As he delivered it
upon the Scaffold at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, July 22. 1663. being
immediately before his Death. Whereunto is added a short Narration of his
Carriage during the time of his Imprisonment, but more especially at his Death:
All which is very comfortable and refreshing to all those that take pleasure in
the dust of ZION, and favor the Stones of our Lord's broken-down Building
amongst us. By a Favourer of the Covenant and Work of Reformation.

Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no
evil, for thou art with me. Psalm. 23. 4. I say unto you, my friends, Be not
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can
do: but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear Him which, after he has
killed, has power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear Him -- Luke 12.
4, 5. etc. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God -- Acts 7. 59. And devout
men carried Stephen to his Burial, and made great lamentation for him. Acts 8.
2. Printed in the Year, 1664.

Here follows a short Narration of the Lord VVareston's Carriage before and
after the delivery of his last Discourse upon the Scaffold at the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, July 22. 1663.
HIs Carriage all the time from his coming from London, was most convincingly
Christian, full of tenderness of spirit, and meekness toward all, so that all
who were in his company, both in the Ship and at other times, asserted they
were never in the company of a more godly, sincere, fervent seeker of God, and
one that was most sensible of the least tenderness exercised toward himself.
Before he came out of the Ship he prayed for a blessing upon his Majesty, and
upon State and Kirk. When landed at Leith, he enquired for the Ministers of
Edinburgh: To which it was answered, They are all silenced and put out of the
Town: Well (said he) their silence does preach; and truly Mr. Douglas, etc.
might have preached either before State or Kirk.

During the whole time of his Imprisonment the Lord kept him in a most
spiritual tender frame, even to the conviction of some that hated him formerly.
The great thing he most desired was gracious through-bearing, which he said was
only to be had through the supply of the Spirit and intercession of the
Saints: and the thing he most feared, was, fainting in the hour of trial, and
for that cause did earnestly desire that prayer might be fervently put up to
God for him; which was indeed done in all parts of the Land, which had its good
success in God's own way.

When he received his Sentence he did receive it with exceeding great meekness,
to the admiration of all; desiring the best blessings of Heaven to be upon his
Majesty and upon State and Kirk, whatever befell himself, and that God would
give his Majesty true and faithful Counselors, etc.

The nearer he was to his death, he was the more quieted in his mind, which had
been discomposed by Poison, and the drawing of threescore ounces of blood, the
Physicians intending hereby to distract him, or make him an idiot fool. The
night before his death he sleeped very sweetly, and in the morning was very
full of comfort, uttering many sweet expressions as to his assurance of being
clothed with a long white Robe before night; and of getting a new Song of the
Lambs praise put in his mouth. He dined very cheerfully, hoping to sup in
Heaven, and to drink the next cup fresh and new in his Father's Kingdom.

Thereafter he was alone till the time of his being brought forth.

As he was led from the Prison (the streets being very full of people bemoaning
that sad sight) he cried, Your prayers, your prayers. As he was conveyed by the
Cross to the Scaffold, there was a great noise made by the Guards beating off
the people, and battering with their Partizens over his head, which was
somewhat terrible to Spectators, yet not to him; for the Lord kept him very
composed, so that he never did so much as once look about to them, but walked
forwards with them very peaceably, as a Lamb led to the slaughter: and coming
cheerfully to the North-side of the Scaffold, spoke to the people after this
manner; I entreat you be pleased to quiet your selves a little till this dying
man deliver his last words among you. Likewise he desired his Auditors not to
be offended that he was necessitate to make some use of his Paper, for the help
of his memory, which had been fully wasted with long sickness, and the malice
of Physicians, who had taken threescore ounces of blood from him at one time,
and had given him bad Physic (so called he the Poison that was given to him)
thereafter.

Then did he begin this following Discourse, which he delivered with very much
undaunted courage, audaucity, and quiet of mind, without the least appearance
of distemper; but as cheerful as ever he had been at any time formerly, when
giving any public Testimony to the Truth, with which singular piece of honor
the Lord had often dignified him.

The last SPEECH and TESTIMONY of the Right Honorable the Lord WARESTOUNE, as
he delivered it at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, July 22. 1663. immediately
before his Death.
RIght Honorable, much honored, and beloved Auditors and Spectators: That
which I intended and prepared to have spoken at this time and in this
condition, immediately before my death (if it should be so ordered that this
should be my lot) is not at present in my power, being taken from me when
apprehended; but I hope the Lord shall preserve it, to bear my Testimony more
fully and clearly than now I can in this condition, having my memory much
destroyed through much, sore and long sickness, melancholy, and the excessive
drawing of my blood: yet I bless the Lord, (that notwithstanding all these
forementioned distempers) I am in any capacity to leave this weak and short
Testimony.

1. I desire in the first place to confess my sins, so far as is proper to this
place and case; and to acknowledge God's Mercies; and to express my repentance
of the one, and my faith of the other, through the merits of the Lord Jesus
Christ our gracious Redeemer and Mediator. I confess that my natural temper
has been hasty and passionate, and that in my manner of going about, and
prosecuting of the best pieces of work and service to the Lord, and to my
Generation, I have been subject to my excesses of heat, and thereby to some
precipitations, which has no doubt offended standers-by and lookers-on, and
exposed both me and the work to their mistakes; whereby the beauty of that Work
has been much obscured. Neither have I in following the Lord's Work, his Good
Work, been altogether free of self-seeking, to the grief of my own conscience,
which has made me oftentimes to cry out with the Apostle, O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? and to lie low in the dust
mourning and lamenting over the same, deprecating God's Wrath, and begging his
tender Mercies to pardon, and his powerful Grace to cure all these evils. I
must confess withal, that it does not a little trouble me, lie heavy upon my
spirit, and will bring me down with sorrow to the grave (though I was not alone
in this offense, but had the Body of the Nation going before me, and the
example of persons of all ranks to ensnare me) that I suffered my self through
the power of temptations, and too much fear anent the straits that my numerous
family might be brought into, to be carried into so great a length of
compliance in England with the late Usurpers, which did much grieve the hearts
of the Godly, and made those that sought God, ashamed and confounded for my
sake, and did give no small occasion to the Adversary to reproach and
blaspheme; and did withal not a little obscure and darken the beauty of several
former Actings about his glorious and blessed Work of Reformation, so happily
begun and far advanced in these Lands; wherein he was graciously pleased to
employ, and by employing to honor me to be an Instrument, (though the least
and unworthiest of many) whereof I am not at all ashamed this day, but account
it my glory, howevet that work be now cried down, opposed, laid in the dust and
trod upon; And my turning aside to comply with these men, was the more
aggravated in my person, that I had so frequently and seriously made profession
of my aversness from, and abhorrency of that way, and had showed much
dissatisfaction with others that had not gone so great a length: for which, as
I seek God's mercy in Christ Jesus, so I desire that all the Lord's People may,
from my example, be the more stirred up to watch and pray, that they enter not
into temptation.

2. I dare not deny on the other hand, but must testify in the second place,
to the glory of his free Grace, that the Lord my God has often showed, ensured
into and engraven upon my conscience, the Testimony of his reconciled Mercy,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ, pardoning all my iniquities, and assuring
me that he would deliver me also by the Grace of his holy Spirit, from the
spait, tyranny and dominion thereof, and has often drawn forth my spirit to
the exercise of Repentance and Faith; and has often engraven upon my heart in
legible characters, the merciful pardoning and gracious-begun cure thereof, to
be perfected thereafter to the glory of his Name, Salvation of my own soul and
Edification of his Church.

3. I am pressed in conscience to leave here at my death, my true and honest
Testimony in the sight of God and man, unto and for the National Covenant, the
Solemn League and Covenant, the solemn Acknowledgments of our Sins and
Engagements to our Duties, and to all the Grounds and Causes of Fasts and
Humiliations, and of the Lord's Displeasure and Contendings with the Land, and
to the several Testimonies given for his Interests by General Assemblies,
Commissions of the Kirk, Synods, Presbyteries and other faithful Ministers and
Professors.

4. I am also pressed to encourage his doing suffering witnessing People, and
sympathizing ones with those that suffer, that they would continue in their
duties of mourning, praying, believing, witnessing and sympathizing with
others, and humbly to assure them in the Name of the Lord our God, the God of
his own Word and Work, of his Covenant, Cause and People, that he will be seen,
found and felt in his own gracious way and time, by his own means and
instruments, for his own honor and glory, to return to his own Truths,
Interests and Servants, to revive his Name, his Covenant, his Word, his Work,
his Sanctuary, and his Saints in this Nation, yea, even in these three
Covenanted Nations, which were by so solemn Bonds, Covenants, Subscriptions and
Oaths given away and devoted to himself.

5. I exhort all those that have been, or are, enemies or unfriendly to the
Lord's Name, Covenant or Cause, Word, Work or People, in Britain and Ireland,
to repent and amend before these sad Judgments, that are posting fast, come
upon them for their sinning so highly against the Lord, because of any
temptations of the time on the right hand or on the left, by baits or straits
whatsoever, and that after so many Engagements and professions of not a few of
themselves to the contrary.

6. I dare not conceal from you who are friendly to all the Lord's precious
Interests in Britain and Ireland, that the Lord (to the commendation of his
Grace be it humbly spoken) has several times in the exercise of my Repentance
and Faith (during my troubles) and after groans and tears upon these three
notable chapters, viz. the ninth of Ezra, ninth of Nehemiah, and the ninth of
Daniel, together with other suitable Scriptures, even in the very nick of
humble and fervent prayers and supplications to him, for reviving again of his
Name, Covenant, Cause, Word and Work of Reformation in these Covenanted
Nations, and particularly in poor Scotland, (yea, O dear Scotland!) which
solemnly re-engaged unto him, to the good example and encouragement of his
People in the other two Nations to covenant with him also; That the Lord, I
say, has several times given me good grounds of hope, and lively expectations
of his merciful, gracious, powerful and wonderful renewing, reviving again of
all his former great Interests in these Covenanted Nations, and that in such a
way, by such means and instruments, with such antecedents, concurrents,
consequences and effects, as shall wonderfully rejoice his mourning Friends,
and astonish his contradicting and contra-acting Enemies.

I do earnestly recommend my poor afflicted Wife and Children, and their
Posterity, to the choicest Blessings of God, and unto the Prayers and Favors
of all the Lord's Children and Servants in their earnest dealihgs with God and
man in their behalf, that they may not be ruined for my sake, but that for the
Lord my Gods sake they may be favored, assisted, supplied, and comforted; and
may be also fitted by the Lord for his Fellowship and Service, whom God himself
has moved me often in their own presence, and with their own consents, to
dedicate, devote, resign, alike and as well as I devoted and resigned my own
soul unto him for all time and eternity.

8. Now, here I beseech the Lord to open the eyes of all the Instruments of my
Trouble, who are not deadly irreconcilable Enemies to himself and his People,
that they may see the Wrong done by them to his Interest, and People, and to Me
and Mine, and may repent thereof, return to the Lord, and more cordially
maintain, own, and adhere unto all his Interests in time to come. The Good Lord
give unto them Repentance, Remission, and Amendment, which is the worst wish I
do, and the best wish I can, wish unto them; for I can wish no better to my
self.

9. I do most humbly and earnestly beg the Fervent Prayers of all His Praying
Children, Servants and Instruments, wheresoever they be, whether absent, or
present, to be put up in behalf of His Name, Cause, Covenant, Work and People;
and also in behalf of my Wife and Children and their Posterity, and that the
Lord would Glorify Himself, Edify his Church, Encourage his Saints further,
and accomplish his [Good Work] by all his Doings and Dealings, in Substances
toward all his own.

10. Whereas I heard that some of my own Friends have Slandered and defamed my
Name, as if I had been accessory to his late Majesty's death, and to the making
the change of the Government thereupon: I am free, as I shall now answer before
his Tribunal, from any accession by counsel or contrivance, or any other way to
his late Majesty's death, or to their making that change of the Government; and
the Lord judge between Me and mine Accusers: And I pray the Lord to preserve
our present King his Majesty, and to pour his best Blessings upon him and his
Royal Posterity; and the Lord give unto them good and faithful Counselors,
Holy and Wise Councils, and prosperous Successors, to God's Glory, and the Good
of his Interest and People, and to their own Honor and Happiness.

11. I do here submit and commit my Soul and Body, Wife and Children, and
their Childrens Children from Generation to Generation for ever, with all
others our Lord's Friends and Followers, and all his doing, suffering,
witnessing and sympathizing Ones, in the present and subsequent Generations,
unto the Lord's choicest Mercies, Graces, Favors, Services, Employments,
Impowerments, Enjoyments, Improvements and Inheritments, in Earth and in
Heaven, in Time and Eternity: All which suits, with all others which he has at
any time by his Spirit moved and assisted me to make and put up according to
his Will, I leave before the Throne, and upon the Father's merciful Bowels, and
the Sons mediating Merits, and the holy Spirits compassionating groans for now
and for evermore. Amen.

When he had delivered this Discourse at the North-side of the Scaffold, he
went about to the South Side, where he delivered it again with the like
admirable courage, to the astonishment of all. Then did he pray most fervently
(as his manner had always been) with much faith and humility, calling upon
God, as a child upon his tenderhearted father, beginning his supplications
(according to the Rule appointed by Christ for direction in Prayer) thus, Abba,
Abba, Father, Father, accept this thy poor sinful Servant, coming unto thee
through the Merits of Jesus Christ, etc. and when speaking of himself spoke
most humbly, as if he had been the chief of sinners, forgetting the many
honorable pieces of Service the Lord had put upon him, wherein he made him
eminently instrumental for promoting of his Kingdom in the world. Thereafter he
stood very patiently till the Napkin was tied about his head. Now, said this
meek Lamb, you will take it up till I be up the Ladder. Yea, my Lord, that
shall be done. Then said he, How will I get it drawn down upon my face? My
Lord, it shall be done for you, do not trouble your self. Then coming to the
foot of the Ladder he prayed as formerly, resigning God's Interests and his own
soul into the hands of his heavenly Father. Then said one (who had tied the
Cloth about his head) There is no missing of Ministers here this day, Christ
has made good that blessed word, Phil. 4. 19. My God shall supply all your
need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus; And as tribulation has
abounded for Christ's sake, so has comfort been increased by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.
5. For howbeit he had often supplicated for some Ministers to be with him
there, yet they would grant a liberty to none, unless he would have accepted of
those that had broken in upon the Labors of other faithful Ministers, whom he
refused; neither would he have any that approve of, or seem to connive at the
present defection; so that no Minister was upon the Scaffold. Then came the
Executioner, desiring him to forgive him; to whom he answered, The Lord forgive
thee, poor man, which I also do; and giving to him some money in a cloth, bad
him do his work aright. After this, one desired the Executioner to go up to the
head of the Ladder; said he, I must go up with him, else he cannot get up. Nay,
said he again, Go you up, and do not offer to touch him till it come to your
own work, for we shall get him helped up: so the Executioner went up. Then he
was conveyed by some in side-mourning to the head of the Ladder, who staid with
him, and spoke with him all the time he was upon the same. As he ascended he
said, Your prayers, your prayers, I desire your prayers in the Name of the
Lord, so great had always his esteem been of Prayer. As the Cord was going
about his precious neck, (being told that many precious Friends were looking
on, which seemed to refresh him; for he answered and said, Is there indeed! and
considering that his cheerfulness did much tend to the credit of the Work of
God for which he suffered) he cried out with a very loud and cheerful voice, I
beseech you all (who are the Lords People) not to scar at suffering for the
Interests of Christ, because of any thing you see fall out in these days as to
the Sufferings of his Servants; but be encouraged to do, and endure, in
suffering for him, and his Interests; for I assure you in the Name of the Lord
he will bear all your charges. The Cord being about his neck, he spoke to the
same purpose again; I pray you that are the Lord's People, be encouraged to do
and suffer for the Interests of Christ, yea, even for the smallest point of
Truth, in your several stations; for he may revive his Work by a very
unexpected mean: And I do again assure you in his Name, he will furnish all
your expenses, and bear all your charges; and he has graciously comforted me.
Then he enquired if the Executioner was ready? Yes, if your Lordship be: then
said he to the man, Do your Office; and so cried out again, Your prayers, your
prayers, etc. and with unspeakable composedness and tranquillity of mind,
cheerfully committing himself into the hands of his tenderhearted heavenly
Father, the Executioner turned him off the Ladder; at which sight there arose a
very lamentable Cry of many thousand Spectators. Immediately thereafter he
lifted up his two precious hands to Heaven (as they had been often lifted up in
prayer, not only in the daytime, but also in the silent watches of the night)
and without the least motion, trembling or shaking of body, which is most
ordinary in that condition, peaceably sleeped away to glory. One of his Sons
standing on the Scaffold, weeping, one present took him by the hand, and said,
Sir, be encouraged, for you are very highly honored this day. Within a little
thereafter he was taken down by Friends that received his body, as the Cord was
cut. The Executioner came to take off his Head, and being timorous and seeming
as somewhat afraid, he was desired to put away fear and do his work cleanly: so
this precious Head was taken off at one stroke, which was afterward set upon
the Nether-Bow Port, where it stands by the blessed Head of that precious and
cleanly Martyr, and slain yet witnessing Witness of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mr.
James Guthry, sometime Minister of the Gospel at Sterling, upon the South or
right hand of which does the Head of this latter Martyr stand; so that these
two Worthies who in their lifetime had always been together, as to those
actings that tended to the carrying on of the Work of Reformation, wherein they
so sweetly agreed, in their death were not divided; but the Heads of these two
Worthies, who had witnessed for Christ while living, stand there together
confirming the same when dead, and ought to put all the People of God in mind
of the Truths they held while living and walking together, which they sealed
with their blood, as true, at their death; according to that saying of worthy
and eminent Mr. Guthrie at his return to the Prison after the receiving of his
Sentence, having told that his Head was to be set upon the Nether-Bow, and
being enquired by his nearest friend, what should it do there? he answered,
Even to Preach; and indeed these Heads do preach there: and this was very
comfortable to him when he heard in his Sentence that his Head was to be set up
by the Head of that faithful, true and steadfast Witness. His Body was carried
to the Grey-Fryar Kirk-yard, accompanied by many clothed in deep Mourning, but
by many more Heart-Mourners to the number of some thousands, and was buried in
the Iohnstouns Isle, where it rests and sleeps sweetly, united unto Christ, as
in a secret cabinet and retired chamber, whereof our Lord Jesus keeps the
key, till the Resurrection; at which time it shall be raised a glorious shining
Body; being changed and made like unto his glorious Body, Phil. 3. 20, 21. Thus
a Prince and Great man in Israel did fall that day; so that Sampson, whose hair
had been cut, and his strength (as concerning his natural abilities) much
wasted, was there restored; and whereas he was brought forth that they might
have a day of spott of him (imagining that he would be afraid to dye) having
pulled out his eyes in that his Memory after the letting of his blood, and
giving him the poison, was so much wasted, that he knew not whether he was
Englishman or Scots-man, French man or Dutchman, nor whether Genesis or
Revelation did begin the Bible, nor whether he had or wanted Wife and Children,
and so did not remember, even when in Prison, what the behavior of one should
be upon a Scaffold, but as he was told, which he presently did forget again, as
also he did forget any thing else was told him, though often repeated in one
quarter of an hour; yet that day, and about the time of his suffering, he was
so fully restored, as that there was no missing of what had formerly been taken
from him; and the Lord, the high Supreme of Heaven and Earth, showed his Power
from on high; and by commanding and giving strength out of Zion, made his
precious Servant prove a Sampson indeed, by a most glorious, undaunted,
cheerful, heartsom Carriage and faithful Testimony, as one undervaluing all
that man could do unto him, behaving himself at his death like good old
faithful valourous Warestoun, who being so full of magnanimity, gave as sore a
dash and stroke to the Prelatical Interest, (yea, even to the conviction of the
owners thereof) and did as much confirm, strengthen, cheer up and admirably
inhearten them that desire to abide in the Truth, as ever he had done by his
former Testimonies, Sealing all with his own blood that formerly he had owned
and professed: yea and this was a return of a desire of his own, written in a
Letter to a Friend many years before, speaking of a particular Testimony for
the Covenant, and having showed how the Lord had kept possession in Scotland,
by the Testimonies of his People against Defection (from generation to
generation) he adds -- O that my blood at the Cross of Edinburgh might seal
this Testimony, in prosecution of all the former; meaning those Testimonies
that had been formerly given from time to time against Defection in the
preceding ages, which he had mentioned in the Epistle foresaid. Thus the Lord
in his own time and way did graciously fulfill that his desire: and by his so
strengthening him, making thereby the hearts of strangers sad, and reviving the
spirits of his fainting People; did give therein a most signal, evident and
rich return of the many supplications which had been put up to the Lord for
him, during the whole time of his trouble and imprisonment; which is a great
encouragement to pray, for it is not in vain; yea, it is not in vain for the
house of Jacob to seek his face, who is able to comfort the most dejected,
heartless mourners in Zion: as also this dealing of the Lord with his suffering
Servants, whom he so wonderfully encourages, is an excellent encouragement to
the Godly in such a day as this, to obey the Exhortation which is in the close
of the first particular in the foregoing Discourse for guarding against
temptation. The good Lord bless these bloody preachings to his People, to make
them walk in his way, whatever difficulties appear therein; that the Cloud of
Witnesses may not be a standing Witness against us, Amen.

Advertisement to the Reader, concerning this and the two Discourses of the
former honorable and precious Witnesses, formerly printed.
THe last words of dying men, being much set by of their affectionate
Relations; surely the last words of dying Witnesses for the Testimony of our
Lord Jesus Christ, should be had in very singular account, and that especially
upon these three Considerations.

Cons. 1. Dying sober men, and more especially dying Christians, but most of
all dying, testifying, sealing, confirming Witnesses for Christ, must be most
sober, and know well upon what grounds they do express their minds, being
immediately thereafter to give in their last accounts; and for that cause must
take good heed how they put that last crowning Masterpiece of Work (wherein
his Glory is so much concerned) well and cleanly off their hand, that they may
hope through Grace to be accepted of him, and even as to that last discourse to
have him say unto them, Well done good and faithful Servant, etc. Cons. 2. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, that non-such faithful, tenderhearted, and (in the worst of
times) worthy to be followed Master, having staged them before so many
Witnesses for his sake, does (for the glory and honor of his Majesty, and for
the commendation of the hardest pieces of his Service to the hearts of his most
fainting People, and for the astonishment of their Adversaries) bestow most
large furniture upon them, suitable to the great and honorable piece of Work
given them to perform. Yea, if ever the fulfilling of that promise, Matthew. 10.
19. may be expected, In that hour it shall be given you what ye shall speak;
for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father. Without all doubt
it is then to be expected, when sealing his Truth on a Scaffold or Pillory for
his sake: Comforts run most sweetly and abundantly in that hour. When Jesus is
to suffer, Luke 22. 43. an Angel is sent to comfort him. When Stephen is to
deliver his last speech and to suffer, he is filled with the holy Ghost, so
that all that sat in the Council looking steadfastly on Stephen, saw his face as
if it had been the face of an Angel; his soul was so warmed by the Love of God
that he looked both his Adversaries and the tempestuous approaching Storm out
of countenance: O but when he is to be stoned he gets a larger sight, he saw
the Heavens opened, and his majestic glorious Master, the Light-giving Diamond
of Heaven, standing at his Fathers righthand, Act. 7. 55. If his face was as
the face of an Angel, chap. 6. 5. O how cheerful has his countenance and
lovely smiles been now? I think I see him smiling on Heaven while the stones
were going about his ears: and this he got, no doubt, as for himself, so to
hearten all those that were to come after, he being the first Martyr after
Christ; and no Martyr or slain Witness has left a discouraging report behind
them of a suffering lot since that day; but all have had an increase of Comfort
from Christ as Trouble for Christ's sake increased unto them: they had more
Comfort when in Prison than formerly; more strength when before the Council
than oftentimes in the Prison; but most of all upon the Scaffold at their
suffering, according to that comfortable experience of the Apostles, 2 Cor. 1.
5. As our Tribulation abounds for Christ, so does our Consolation abound by
Christ; they have not all in hand, ere they enter in a suffering condition,
that is needful to carry them through, but the Lord lets it out to them as need
requires, which is very comfortable to such faint-hearted ones, as think they
will never have courage to suffer; for the Apostle adds, ver. 7. -- our hope of
you is steadfast, that as ye are partakers of the Suffering, so shall you be
also of the Consolation, i. e. as you share of such sufferings as we meet with,
so shall ye also have a share of such Consolations under your Sufferings as the
Lord allows upon us. Thus the Lord does to this very day, as our eyes have
seen, our ears have heard, and our tongues have been made from such infallible
experiences to confess to God's Glory and our Comfort. And as this
Consideration is very comforting and quieting to our mind, so also should it
make us have a very good esteem of Scaffold-Sermons, seeing it is the Lord
enableth them by his comforting presence to speak. Cons. 3. The Lord has a
very great care of what his staged dying Witnesses say, and that they speak
nothing there but what is true; he orders the whole matter of the Discourses
of sincere Witnesses; so that as they are Witnesses for Truths as formerly
owned by them, so are they Witnesses in like manner, as to what they deliver at
their death, concerning those Truths for the time to come: they are sealing
Witnesses as to what expectation they give the People of God ground to have for
the time to come, whether as relating to the punishment of them that oppose or
fail away from those Truths, or as to the encouragement of the owners of, and
sufferers for the same: Hence is it that some faithful dying Martyrs have
adventured to say much more, and been more peremptory in their encouraging the
Lord's People on the Scaffold, than in their written Discourse ere they were
led from Prison: He changes their premeditations when they come to the
Scaffold, and gives them what is his mind in that hour. So he did with his
faithful and constant Witness Mr. Ia. Guthrie, that which was written in his
discourse by way of hope (as it is also in the printed discourse) was delivered
on the Scaffold by way of full assurance, thus; Howbeit our Cloud may be long
or dark, yet I am persuaded, that the Lord shall once more shine with the
glorious Light of the Gospel upon these Lands, etc. And the Lord did (in a
manner) confirm this from Heaven; for whereas there had been a very thick Rain
from the time of his coming upon the Scaffold till he had uttered these words,
and then with that very Assertion of his Assurance (as if it had been in one
moment) the Rain was ceased, the whole Firmament of Heaven cleansed of all
Clouds, and the Sun shining as clear as if it had been after an Eclipse, and so
continued til setting. This diverse faithful Witnesses did observe, as an
encouragement to wait for the performance thereof. So we may see that as he
gives quiet and peace of mind (anent their owning these Truths formerly) and
power to suffer for the same; He likewise gives Light and strength of Faith as
to what they say of God's owning the same for the time to come, and so are
dying sealing Witnesses of what they encourage the Lord's People to look for:
It Is true, the thing they witness for the time to come consists most in the
strength of Hope, which God orders beyond their most lively apprehension; and
what they own as to what is past, has the more clearness in this respect, that
there is a certain infallible knowledge of the truth of it, being according to
the Word of God, and already come to pass. We will find something in Scripture
to confirm what we have said in this Consideration; for we will find that what
has been asserted by suffering dying Witnesses has most speedily come to
pass. 2 Chronicles. 24.20. Zachariah told the children of Israel, Because ye have
forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you; and for this he was immediately
stoned, and the Lord sealed his word very speedily thereafter, for ver. 24. the
Assyrians coming with a small company against them, the Lord delivered a very
great multitude into their hand, and so without delay in their sight sealed the
words of his dying Witness Zachariah. And why his word sooner than Isaiahs,
Ieremiahs, Ezekiels, etc.? for by them he pleaded much longer as would seem
with his Apostatizing Church, it may be, that he might show that whatever fail,
the words of dying Witnesses shall not fall to the ground.
Obj. But some may object here and say, Simple Instances from Scripture cannot
prove an Assertion of this nature; and besides, this of Zachariah and others of
this kind, were Prophecies directed from God by the Ministry of the Prophets,
and so could not but come to pass.

Answ^ It is true, Instances cannot prove such Assertions, neither is it our
intent to seem to make it infallibly out; neither to bid the People of God lay
such weight upon these sayings, as they must lay upon the Prophecies which are
written in the Scriptures, being the ground of our Faith: for though such
sayings may be true Prophecies, whereof we may in moderation look for the
accomplishment, as that of Mr. John Wishart concerning Cardinal Beaton, was a
true Prophecy; Yet we are not infallibly assured that these are Prophecies,
till they be accomplished: all we attempt here is to give the People of God
ground of expectation of good in the latter end (whereunto the knowledge and
consideration of his ordering his Servants discourse at their death very much
conduces, and to give the Lord his own free latitude to do or forbear in these
things, as he in the depth of his Holy Wisdom sees expedient. But, 2. howbeit
these were Prophecies directed from God, and so could not fail; yet we find
also that the Assertions of slain dying Witnesses, were frequently more
speedily accomplished than most of other Prophecies, as is clear in the
forementioned Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20,24. Howbeit, I say, this which ye will
find clear; yet I am not meaning that we should still look for a speedy
accomplishment of Scaffold-discourses, all I plead for from this is, that the
Lord hereby seems to give us ground to think that such discourses will be
fulfilled in due time; for other Prophecies were as true as that of Zachariah,
but his soonest fulfilled: And if it be not lawful for us to conclude speedy
outgates, because of such discourses, yet that he will fulfill these words we
may (in sobriety) expect. It is true also, some other Prophecies were as soon
fulfilled as Zachariahs, as Isa. 37. 33,34. was fulfilled, ver. 36. But this
and the like, were Prophecies of Mercy and Deliverance to a humbled broken
People, and for the speedy fulfillment whereof these Reasons may be given. 1.
God delights much in Mercy, and makes haste in fulfilling gracious Promises. 2.
There was a present necessity of the fulfillment thereof, both in respect of the
Lord's People, who were humbled before God, and immediately to be ruined, if he
had not fulfilled his Word. 3. The Promise or Prophecy was made as to that
instant of time; for if it had not been fulfilled at the instant whereunto it
did relate, it could have been no Prophecy; for when a Prophecy comes of
something to be done at such a time (where no condition is expressed nor
understood) it must be fulfilled at that time, else it could not be said to be
a Prophecy; such was Isaiah's, Isa. 37. 33,34, etc. But that which we speak of,
is, as relating to the threatenings uttered by dying Witnesses, and such as
could have been suspended as well as others, without any apparent hurt to the
truth of Prophecy, yet is quickly fulfilled, yea, sooner than other Prophecies
of the same nature; yea, and possibly for this very end, to put a tincture of
respect beyond ordinary upon the words of dying Witnesses: for, as we have
said, consider the prophetical denunciations of wrath by Znchariah, a dying
slain Witness, and the prophetical denunciations of wrath by Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
etc. and why comes Zachariah's Prophecy sooner to pass than Ieremiah's, this
not being limited to a certain time, and therefore might have been suspended as
well as Ieremiahs, without prejudice to the Prophecy? I know none but this: 1.
It was the Lord's pleasure, and 2. to show his respect to dying Witnesses, that
he would have what they say taken especial notice of.

2. Likewise this Consideration may be confirmed by the Lord's accomplishing
the last words of his Servants, both in the primitive and latter times, we
shall only mention one instance more, and that is the prophetical discourse of
godly and famous Mr. Geo. Wishart, who as he had much of God's mind in his
lifetime (as is clear in the history of his life in Mr. Clarks Martyrology) so
was his last words well ordered by the Lord, for when he was burning in the
fire at St. Andrews in Scotland, and seeing the Cardinal looking out at a
window, feeding upon the sight of this sad tragedy, prophesied that he should
be thrown out at the same window ere long; and as he said, so the Lord brought
it quickly to pass, to the great joy and comfort of his People.

3. This may help to confirm what we say in this Consideration anent his
ordering and directing the last discourses of his suffering Servants, viz. It
very much tends to the clearing of their Cause, as being his, when he
fulfilleth their Scaffold Discourses: and as they are tender of his Glory,
laying down their lives for his sake; so is he tender both of his own and their
credit, that they may not bring the imputation of deceived witnesses upon
themselves at death: and, as it was formerly asserted, if ever the
accomplishment of that promise can be expected, or is fulfilled at any time in
this world, Mat. 10. 19. It shall be given you at that same hour what ye ought
to speak; it may be expected by, and is fulfilled unto his dying Witnesses on
the Scaffold. For when (I pray you) is it to be expected if not then? and how
often has he made the truth of that appear which he adds, for it is not ye,
-- but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you? and who can say that
ever the Lord suffered his suffering, testifying, sealing, confirming and dying
Witnesses to be mistaken in their last discourse? yea, which may confirm it yet
more, let me see the man in all the world (friend or foe) that can bring an
instance of one dying, witnessing Martyr, who spoke that at his death, which
the Lord did not (in due time) some way or other accomplish; yea, I defy to
bring me one faithful slain Witness that was suffered to be in a mistake at his
death and in his last testimony, even from Abels days to our own time? and let
them that judge this a rash impertinent expression, see how they will clear
themselves of denying that promise of our Lord, it shall be given you in that
same hour what ye ought to speak; and so I leave it to the Lord to defend.

Now by all this it may appear that he reveals secrets to dying Witnesses,
which he keeps up from many others who are also dear unto him; so that howbeit
their words be not to be esteemed of equal weight with the written and
infallible Scriptures ( a surer Word than if a voice were speaking from Heaven,
2 Pet. 1. 9.) yet their sayings, while dying for, and in the Lord, do give good
encouragement unto them that remain alive, and so to be much esteemed by them.
And truly the consideration hereof, together with his fulfilling (or at least
having ever hitherto fulfilled) the words of his slain Witnesses, together with
what our Lords slain Witnesses have asserted for the time to come, concerning
his reviving of his now languishing dying Work, is very encouraging to exercise
patience, and not to faint while meeting with dark and tempestuous
dispensations: and first consider what our Lords first honorable slain Witness
spoke at his death, viz. These times will be either times of great suffering,
or great sinning; and they that will be free of sinning shall not escape
suffering, and they that will shun suffering shall not escape sinning, there is
a Dilemma in the matter; sin or suffer. And truly for my own part I may think
it a mercy that I have been so hardly dealt with; for if I had met with more
favor as others have, I might have sinned as others have done, and as more
will yet do if the Lord do not prevent. And is not this sadly evidenced! O what
dreadful defection and apostatizing from the Truth since that day! Have not
many confirmed that Prophecy against themselves, Psalm. 2. 2, 3. breaking the
Lord's bonds and casting away his cords? Have not many since that day
(notwithstanding the sealing of these Truths by the blood of his Witnesses)
declared that God's blessed Work was but a Rebellious Combination? and this
they have subscribed with their hands, howbeit it was a precious mean of
prospering the Father's pleasure in the hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
his seeing the fruit of the sore travel of his soul to his great comfort, Isa.
53. 10, 11. If it had been but a combination of men, could so many souls have
been converted while it was on foot? Nay, blessed be our God, he has put it
out of doubt among us, by making his Son's Kingdom flourish more in its time
than ever since the Apostles days. Our Lord has said, Ioh. 5. The works that
I do, bear witness of me. It Is dangerous calling the work of the holy Ghost a
Combination of men, and his operation upon souls the fruit of Rebellion: it is
the sin against the holy Ghost to say, he casts out Devils through Beelzebub,
Mat. 12.24, 31. and calling the effects and fruits of Reformation, the effects
of an unlawful Combination, comes near to this sin. Now this work, this blessed
work is condemned, and the Covenant that opened the door thereunto is abjured
by many, whereby they have renounced their share and interest in the Covenant
and Work of Reformation, and of what too-look they seemed to have unto the
comforts attending or following upon the same, which is a dreadful business;
for our Covenant is nothing else but a solemn express declaration of our being
satisfied with the Covenant of Grace, and that upon the conditions whereupon
the Lord offers it unto us; 2. our formal express national acceptance thereof
upon these terms; and 3. our promising and engaging by his grace to fulfill
these conditions, under the hazard of forfeiting and losing our interest in
that Covenant and all its blessings, privileges and advantages. And howbeit a
chief and main Article in the Covenant of Grace by the Lord's engaging to make
us fulfill our part of that Covenant, yet he never tenders mercy to us but upon
condition of our taking and owning him for our God, Head, and Lord in Jesus
Christ, and that we will worship him according to his own appointment in his
Word: and if you compare our Covenant with the Duties God requires of his
New Testament Church, ye shall find nothing whereunto we are obliged in it, but
that which God requires of us, as the conditions upon which he is content to
agree with us in the Covenant of Grace, and therefore quaeritor (which to me is
no question) whether to abjure the Covenant that binds us to fulfill the
conditions of the Covenant of Grace, be not indeed to abjure, upon the matter,
the Covenant of Grace it self, seeing they say they will not fulfill the
conditions thereof? O horrid desperate work! they have quitted their share of
all the comforts attending this Covenant, for time and eternity; for this is no
such breach, as is committed through weakness, ignorance, etc. this is a clear,
deliberate, formal, express up-giving with him; and to make all sure, they have
given under their hands that they judge themselves obliged not to keep the
same; and have given him assurance that he needs expect no better at their
hands hereafter; for they declare they judge all such Promises and Engagements
to serve him, utterly unlawful, and this is their last answer to him as the
desperate result of all the pains he has taken on them. Now as this part of
this honorable Witnesse's discourse is accomplished, so I hope shall the rest
in due time as to what he said for encouragement to the Lords People. 2.
Faithful Mr. Guthrie, who had much of the Lord's mind in his lifetime, gave
very great ground of comfort, to them that lament after the Lord, he will yet
again revive his Work in Britain and Ireland by the power of His Spirit, for he
has not cast away his People, etc. and the Lord seemed to confirm this from
Heaven. 3. This blessed Witness gave also much ground of encouragement, and it
will be the more comfortable, if we consider that he did it, as a duty
whereunto he was pressed in soul, viz. to comfort the Lord's People in the
assurance of his appearing for his Word, his work, his C^use, his Covenant; and
that in such a way, by such means and instruments, with such antecedents,
concurrences and effects as shall wonderfully comfort his People, etc. see page
7. Now may not this threefold Witness, together with the consideration of the
Lord's guiding the last ^ealing and Scaffold-discourses of his Witnesses,
encourage the Lord's People to exercise patience in waiting for him, who will
fulfill his Word? for in Mount-Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as
the Lord has said, Joel 2. 32. And here I cannot pass by an expression of this
Witness in a Letter formerly mentioned, page 12. viz. Shall we not account the
taking and renewing of the Covenant, in the years 1580, 81, 90, and again 1638,
and then again 1643 and 48, as good as a threefold Proclamation of the Lords,
[even so I take her, even so I take her] into an indissolvable Match: and this
threefold Proclamation is sealed by a threefold witness, who confirmed and
subscrived the same with their blood, venturing upon death and eternity with
all cheerfulness and tranquillity of soul, owning and avowing the same: and
truly they were known to have more of God's mind, and had nearer access unto
him than all their opposers. Certainly this must be a very good Cause that
gives so much quiet, peace and joy to the owners thereof at death, for they
are ravished and transported with inexpressible joy that ever they were made
instrumental for God in carrying on that Work, and helped of him to suffer for
the same: And upon the other hand, the work that is now carried on in the Church
must be very bad; for the owners of it dare not own it at death, but are
discouraged when they cannot mend their folly: some of them have cried out on
deathbed, O do you think there may be mercy for abjuring the Covenant? for ten
thousand worlds I would not endure that one hour which I endure night and day,
if I could shun it, etc. they would gladly die in Covenant with God though they
will not live so. Good Lord keep all his People, and me also, from owning that
cause in our life which we dare not own at death, yea, and which the very
owners thereof would disown at death; and no wonder, for they dare not look God
in the face; The good Lord give repentance speedily to any of them he minds to
save, that they may come out of that dangerous, desperate and soul-destroying
condition, wherein they cannot expect to be saved.

FINIS.
Let the Reader take notice, that these faithful Witnesses very heartily prayed
for the Kings Majesty and his succession, pressing also Loyalty upon us, who
still have held that to be our duty, according to the Covenant and our
Confession of Faith, is a sufficient proof of the Covenant parties esteem of
Monarchical Government, Yea and that in the person of our dread Sovereign as
Gods Ordinance, and may sufficiently clear them of all false Calumnies cast on
them by the Prelates, who have still labored to make themselves great by
begetting a misunderstanding betwixt his Majesty and his best subjects.

ERRATA.
Page 8. line 24, read unfriends. P. 16. l. 7. r. Mr. George etc. P. 15. l. 21
r. but what.


