Dr. STILLINGFLEETS PRINCIPLES OF PROTESTANCY Cleared, Confuted, and Retorted.
AND THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH Asserted; And that the same
Church alone is the whole CATHOLIC CHURCH.

IN A Letter from a Catholic Gentleman to a Protestant Knight.

Printed in the Year, 1673.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
NOtwithstanding the Multiplicity of Learned and solid Answers to Dr.
Stillingfleets Principles of Christianity, I thought fit also to publish this
Short and Substantial Piece (though neglected by the Author) as more
particularly suited for men endowed with strength of Reason and Judgment, yet
not much versed in Book-Learning.

SIR,
ACcording to your desire, I have perused Dr. Stillingfleet's Discourse of
Idolatry and his Principles of Protestancy; To deliver my Opinion of either,
seems to be superfluous, it being credible both are answered in England ere
now. But because you press me to it, and the Answer may be as long expected
here, as the Book has been, I will venture to give my Judgment of Dr.
Stillingfleet; and do confess ingeniously, that of all Protestant Writers I
ever read, I take him to be not only the wittiest, but the wisest; especially
where he rallies and endeavors to make the Roman Religion, ridiculous. For to
imagine that rational men can be moved by serious Discourses, to believe, that
God would send Martin Luther, John Calvin, Martin Bucer, Thomas Cranmer, etc.
to reform Christianity (their lives having been so scandalous and
un-christianlike) or that he would oblige the world to credit such vicious men,
without showing any Credentials, or Miracles, to confirm their Testimony, and
new sense of Scripture; is to make God take a new and unreasonable Method.
Therefore Dr. Stillingfleet had very good Reasons not to insist upon this old
and ordinary way of his Protestant Controversers; he fixed upon a better for his
own purpose, which is, to rail at the Saints, and rally us out of their
Religion and Miracles. But notwithstanding the judicious choice of his new
Method, I humbly conceive he has overshot himself by aiming so high, and
letting his arrows fly against so ancient a Patriarch as St. Bennet, of whose
supernatural gifts and Miracles, never any one doubted that believed so
authentic an Author and Doctor of Gods Church as Bishop Godwin in his
Catalogue of Bishops, etc. p. 3. says, That blessed and holy Father, S.
Gregory was the o^casion of Re-planting the Christian Faith in our Country.
The same says D. Whitaker contra Durcum, lib. 5. p. 394. M. Bell in his Survey
of Popery, p. 187. terms him, S. Gregory s^rnamed the Great, the holy and
Learned Bishop of Rome. D. Humphrey in his ^esuatism, par. 2. page 624. says.
Gregory both in Name, and in very Deed Great, was ind^ed with many Gifts of
divine grace. S. Isidore de Scrip^. Ecclesiast. c. 27. says, Gregory Bishop of
the Apostolic See of Rome, etc. was by the grace of the holy Ghost so greatly
endued with light of knowledge, as no Doctor of this present Age or in tim^s
p^^t was equal to him. S. John Damas^en speaking of his Dialogues, and the life
of S. Bennet, which S. Gregory writ, says, Let Gregory that wrote the Book of
Dialogues, Bishop of the elder Rome, be brought forth, a man as all know, that
was renowned both for holiness of life and learning, etc.
St. Gregory the Great, who writ his Life; And truly Dr. Stillingfleet is the
first Protestant Doctor I heard of did except against St. Gregory's sincerity
or sufficiency in relating matters of fact or faith. He might think fit to make
bold with S. Ignatius because he was Founder of the Jesuits with St. Dominick
also because he invented the Inquisition; But to think that his Raillery could
reach to discredit the Miracles and Sanctity of S. Bennet, and the Testimony of
S. Gregory the Great is an unpardonable Crime. And yet D. Stillingfleets
Friends (and his Enemies) may excuse the heinousness of this Crime, by the
impossibility of Defending his Cause, otherwise then by facing us down, that
all the Roman Catholic Prelates and Preachers since the Primitive times, were
either so witless, as to be seduced by foolish Saints and feigned Miracles; or
so wicked, as to conspire (against Gods known Worship and plain Word) to damn
themselves and posterity. And withal, were so obstinate in adhering to the
Errors of Popery, that in whatsoever Age any Preachers began to reform that
Doctrine, they were suddenly cried down and condemned as notorious Heretics,
by the Prelates and Councils of the then visible Church. But leaving this to the
Answerers of D. Stillingfleets Book, I will pass to his Principles.

Dr. Stillingfleets PRINCIPLES Cleared, Confuted, and Retorted.
Of his Six Principles pretended to be agreed upon on both Sides.
TO his three first Principles I have nothing to say.

D. Stillingfleets Fourth Principle is.

That in order to man's obeying the Will of God, it is necessary that he Know
what it is, for which some manifestation of the Will of God is necessary both
that man may know what he has to do, and that God may justly punish him if he
do it not.

Principle V.

Whatever God reveals to man, is infallibly true, and being intended for the
Rule of man's Obedience, may be certainly known to be his Will.

HIs Fourth Principle must be examined before any Christian can agree with him
in it: If he means that in order to man's obeying the Will of God, it is
necessary that he know what it is, with clear or undeniable Evidence the
Principle is false; it is sufficient that he knows what Gods Will is, by
Credible Testimony, or public authority, though the infallible certainty
thereof does not clearly appear. So children are bound under pain of damnation
to honor their Parents, and Subjects to obey their Sovereigns, though no
infallible certainty appears that they are their Parents, or Sovereigns. In
like manner though no undeniable certainty appears to us that God speaks or
declares his Will by Scripture, or by his Church, yet we are bound under pain
of damnation to believe, that what is proposed and commanded by them, is the
Word and Will of God, and accordingly we ought to obey.

The reason of this assertion is, that man's understanding being imperfect, its
assent is more frequently directed by outward signs to the truth, than by any
immediate sight of the same. And therefore, even in things of greatest concern,
we are accustomed (and indeed for want of better evidence, forced) to rely upon
the Tradition, Testimony, and Information of others; and thereupon to ground
our judicial decrees, and Sentences both in Church and State. This Custom being
agreeable to reason and the Law of nature, it cannot be against either to
conform ourselves thereunto in supernatural Mysteries, or matters of Faith;
seeing we understand less of these than of any others; Therefore not only the
Fourth Principle, but the Fifth also which Dr. Stillingfleet pretends to be
agreed unto on both sides, are false, inasmuch as they suppose that a clear and
certain knowledge of Gods Revelation and Will is necessary for believing the
one and obeying the other.

Besides, it is a prerogative due to Superiors, not to be obliged to signify
their will and pleasure to their Subjects by themselves immediately, but may
and do appoint their subordinate Officers to publish and proclaim their
commands, either by word of mouth or writing And though Dr. Stillingfleet (in
his seventh Principle) seems to grant, God ought to enjoy this Prerogative, yet
(if he proceeds consequently) he must deny it, seeing there can be no clear
undeniable certainty of Gods revealing or commanding, when he trusts his
Revelations and Commands to the proposal and Ministry of others, though
confirmed by such Miracles as Christ himself and his Apostles wrought; because
such Miracles do not clearly demonstrate that themselves are supernatural (as
is manifest by the obstinate lews, who artributed them to Beelzebub) or that
the Doctrine confirmeed by them, is Divine; or that the words uttered or written
by men, is the Word of God. If therefore a clear certainty or Demonstrative
Evidence of Gods Will and Revelation be requisite for Christian Obedience and
belief, we deprive God of that Prerogative which is inseparable from
Sovereigns, and consists in the Obligation of their Subjects to believe and
obey them, when they speak and command by subordinate Officers, though these
show no clear or undeniable evidence for their office; some signs Gods
Ministers must show as Seals of their Commission, which may create (even in the
most serupulous) a moral certainty of Divine Truth and Trust reposed in them;
but no such undeniable evidence of Gods revealing and commanding by them as D.
Stillingfleet and all Protestants are forced to exact, by not contenting
themselves with that moral certainty and evidence of supernatural signs which
is visible in the Roman Catholic Church.

And truly by exacting greater evidence of Gods Revelations then appears by the
signs of the Roman Catholic Church, Dr. Stillingfleet destroys all Religion,
and the nature of Christian Faith, which according to S. Paul, Heb. 11.
involves obscurity, or the Not-appearance of the Truth of Mysteries believed:
And reason, dictates that belief or faith, being by its own nature and
primitive notion but an imperfect sight, whereby we make a shift to supply the
want of clearer knowledge, to make it compatible with a clearer certainty of
the truth believed, or with more then a moral evidence of Gods Revelation
(which is certainly and clearly connected with the truth believed, because it
cannot deceive, nor be deceived) is to maintain, that we want, and do not want
that clearness of knowledge whereof Faith does suppose us defective, and
supplyeth the defect: These Premises being thus proved, there can be no
difficulty in discovering the fraud and falsehood of D. Stillingfleets
Principles and Conclusions; and therefore granting his sixth, last, and common
Principle, I will proceed to his particular Propositions, mentioning only such
as I do impugn.

Dr. Stillingfleets Faith of Protestants reduced to Principles, is False;
The Roman Catholic Faith Resolved into the Inconsistency of its Falsehood with
Gods Veracity.
Proposition IV.

Nothing ought to be admitted for Divine Revelation, which overthrows the
certainty of those Principles which must be antecedently supposed to all Divine
R^velation, for that were to overthrow the m^ans whereby we are to judge
concerning the truth of any Divine Revelation.

Proposition V.

There can be no other means imagined whereby we are to judge of the truth of
Divine Revelation, but a faculty in us of discerning truth and falsehood in
matters proposed to our belief, which if we do not exercise in judging the
truth of Divine Revelation, we must be imposed upon by every thing which
pretends to be so.

Proposition VI.

The pretense of Infallibility in any person or society of men must be judged
in the same way that the truth of Divine Revelation is etc.

DR. Stillingfleets first and second Proposition may pass, and his third also,
if the word certain be rightly understood; but his Fourth Proposition, if
therein he supposes that every one is to be judge concerning the truth of
Divine Revelation, is false; as also the Fifth, wherein he makes our humane
Understanding a sufficient faculty, nay, the only means of discerning the truth
and falsehood in matters proposed to our belief, and of Divine Revelations. For,
the Objects of Divine Revelation are frequently Mysteries so sublime, that they
far exceed all humane or natural capacity: how therefore can their truth or
falsehood be judged of by natural reason, above its own reach? And as for the
Divine Revelation it self, all Divines grant its Existence (and by consequence
its truth) cannot be known by natural reason, and therefore say, that albeit
you may prove the Existence of God by natural reason, yet you cannot by the
same faculty prove the Existence of any one of his Revelations, because these,
taking their denomination from the exercise of Gods liberty, are no subject for
humane demonstration, or concluding discourses, unlets you will consine Gods
free choice to one of those many contrary Decrees he might have fixed upon, ab
aeterno. But of this Subject more in the Confutation of his sixth Conclusion.

To make every man's private judgment the touchstone of what is Divine
Revelation, for fear (forsooth) of being imposed upon by every thing which
pretends to be so, is to take too much upon our selves, and savours more of the
private Spirit, then of that pious affection and profound submission, wherewith
St. Paul bids us captivate our understandings to the obedience of faith. But
surely Dr. Stillingfleet does not consider what ill use himself makes of his
discerning faculty, when he judges that the Protestant Reformation is Divine
Revelation; let him reflect upon the incredibility of Gods permitting his
Church to lurk in deserts, or to lie in Errors from the Primitive times until
Martin Luther's appearance, Anno 1517. he will find there is very little
judgment exercised in giving that man, or any of his Comrades so much credit,
as to forsake the sense of Scripture, which the Church. Then, and for many
preceding Ages held, for new fancies and inventions of Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, and other debaucht Priests and Friars, without any other warrant for so
great an undertaking but their own word, impudently pretending that they were
sent and inspired by God to plant a Doctrine suitable enough to the lewdness of
their own lives, and confessedly Luther tom. 5. Witenb. in Galat. c. 1. fol.
290. and in Coll q. Mensal. fol. 273. and tom. 7. Witenb. An. 1558. in lic. de
missa privata, fol. 443.228. says, Do thou O sole man take upon thee so
great matters? What if thou being but one, offendert? If God permit so many,
and all to err, why may he not permit thee to err? Hitherto appertain those
Arguments, the Church, the Church, the Fathers, the Fathers, the Councils, the
Customs, the multitudes and greatness of wise men, whom do not those clouds
and doubts, yea, these seas of examples overwhelm?
contrary to the sense and practice of the greatest Doctors and Saints of Gods
Church. A man that can believe this, may be credulous enough to think he can
persuade the world to look upon all Miracles as mistakes and upon the Saints
that wrought them as fools and phanaticks. But if Dr. Stillingfleet will secure
him elf and all Protestants from impostures, let him enquire into the motives
and Miracles which induce us to believe that the Roman Catholic Church is
infallibly assisted by God in delivering and interpreting his Word, and
Revelations.

He will not then presume to make every man's private Judgment (according to
his 5. and 6. Proposition) the only balance of so weighty an affair, neither
will he prefer his own particular opinion before the public Testimony and
constant Tradition of Christendom for many Ages, especially if he will examine
whether Gods Veracity, Goodness and Providence be consistent with permitting
fraud or falsehood in that Doctrine which a Church (in all appearance)
miraculous, and supernaturally qualified, proposes as divine: Whether the
Miracles of the Roman Catholic Church be true or false, we dispute not at
present, but only averr, that seeing so many See S. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 22.
c. 8. where amongst other Miracles he tells, how that in the presence of him
and others, a devout woman called Palladia, was suddenly cured by praying to
St. Stephen, and at his Monument his words are, Ad sanctum Martyem crare
periexerat, quae mox ut cancellos attigit, sana surrexit. S. Malachias Miracles
you may see in his life written by S. Bernard, who says, in what kind of old
Miracles did not Malachias excel? he wanted not Prophecy, not Revelation, not
the gift of healing; and to conclude, not raising of the dead; and relates them
particularly, as also how himself assisting at Malachias his death, got his
blessing; and after he expired, took his hand, and laying it on the withered
and useless hand of a boy then present, he was restored to perfect health;
because in the dead Saint says S. Bernard, lived the grace of curing diseases.
All these and other more ancient and modern Miracles (as those of S. Bernard
himself) are by the Century Writers, Ostander, and most Protestant Authors,
said to be cheats, delusions, or enchantments, See Ostander for one, in Epit.
cent. 12. page 310. Partim permissione Dei praestigiis Satanicis effecta
existimo; not, says he, that I think S. Bernard was a Magician, but it is
likely Satan wrought such Miracles to confirm Idolatry, and the worship of
Saints, etc. See S. Xamir his Miracles wrought to convert the Indians and
Japonians to Popery, himself being a Jesuit.
wise and wary men in every Age for at least a 1000. years, and after a severe
Scrutiny and serious study, have judged our most authentic Miracles true, if
all these men should be mistaken, none can be condemned for following their
judgment; And all prudent and learned men must confess it is a mystery not
intelligible, how the infinite Veracity of God can be infinitely averse from
fraud and falsehood, if he permits both the one and the other to be countenanc't
and promoted by apparent Miracles, so plausibly fathered upon the Divine
Omnipotency, that such as pretend them to be counterfeit, cannot discover the
fraud nor disprove the fact; nor find out any natural cause to work such
prodigious effects; and therefore are forced (im^^^ting the obstinate Jews) to
attribute them to the power of Beelzebub, or to the craft of those very Monks
which (they would have the world believe, were madmen; and yet now make them
so witty, as to contrive the cheat so cunningly, and to counterfeit
supernatural Miracles so naturally, that our Protestant Adversaries have been
hitherto as unsuccessful in discovering any fallacy in them (I mean still those
which moved the Popes to canonize Saints) as the first Reformers Luther and
Calvin were unfortunate in being convicted of Folly and Forgery in imitating
them, when the one attempted to cast out the devil in Germany, and the other to
revive the dead in Geneva.

Proposition XIV.

To suppose the Books so written to be imperfect, i. e. that any things
necessary to be believed or practiced are not contained in them, is either to
charge the first Author of them with fraud, and not delivering his whole mind;
or the Writers with insincerity in not setting down, and the whole Christian
Church of the first ages with folly in believing the fullness and perfection of
the Scriptures, in order to salvation.

Proposition XV.

These Writings being owned as containing in them the whole Will of God, so
plainly revealed, that no sober Enquirer can miss of what is necessary for
salvation, there can be no necessity supposed of any infallible Society of men
either to attest or explain these Writings, etc.

Proposition XVI.

There can be no more intolerable usurpation upon the faith of Christians, then
for any person or Society of men to pretend to an assistance as infallible in
what they propose as was in Christ or his Apostles, without giving any equal
degree of evidence that they are so assisted, as Christ and his Apostles did,
viz. by Miracles as great, public and convincing as theirs were, by which, I
mean, such as are wrought by these very persons who challenge this
Infallibility, and with a design for the conviction of those who do not believe
it.

The 7.8.9.10.11.12. and 13. Propositions, and but so many Prefaces to induce
us to believe the 14. which says, that if all things necessary to be believed
or practiced, are not contained in the Holy Scriptures of the New and Old
Testament, it follows that God was fraudulent in not delivering his whole
mind, or that the Writers were insincere in not setting it down, and the whole
Christian Church of the first ages, fools, for believing the fullness and
perfection of the Scriptures, in order to Salvation. These consequences suppose
(but it is not proved) that God promised or decreed to deliver his whole mind
so plainly in the Scriptures concerning all things necessary for Salvation,
that every one may easily understand his meaning, and that the Primitive Church
believed so: But this agrees not with the Records of Antiquity, nor with the
words of S. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.16. saying, that in S. Paul's Epistles there were
some things hard to be understood, and easily wrefted by men to their
damnation: And is further demonstrated to be false, by the continual
contestations of Protestants against the Roman Catholic sense of Scripture
about Image Worship (whether it be prohibited in the Second Commandment) and
many other Controversies, as the Real Presence, etc. For if Scripture (or Gods
meaning therein) were as plain as is pretended in the 15. Proposition,
conscientious, sober and learned men could not differ so irreconcileably in the
true sense thereof. Wherefore nothing is more clear to men in Scripture, then
that Scripture is not clear, and that God did not intend it for the only Rule
of Salvation; and by consequence, that it is not repugnant to the wisdom and
goodness of God, not to set down all his will in writing in the Law of grace,
or not agreeable to the same, that God make men insallible in writing so much
of his will as is contained in Scripture (or even all that is necessary for
Salvation;) though that writing be not clear to every sincere and sober person,
it is sufficient it may be explained to every man by the Doctors and Pastors of
the Church; according to that of Deuteronomy. 17.8. Thou shall go to the Priests to
enquire, and they shall show thee. Deuteronomy. 33.10. They shall teach thy Law. Neh.
8.8. They caused the people to understand the Law. And Mat. 23.2. They sat in
Moses chair, all things therefore, etc. which last Text does not agree with the
Proposition, saying, that for some ages before Christ there was no body
infallible among the Jews, to attest or explain to them the Writings of Moses,
or the Prophets. As for the Testimonies of the New Testament, see Mat. 7.24.
and 13.19. and 24.14.16. and 28.19. and Mark 16.15. and Matthew. 18.17. etc.

But Dr. Stillingfleet will demonstrate by his 16. Proposition, That the
Roman Catholic Church is intolerable by its pretending to Gods infallible
assistance in proposing matters of faith. And why so? Because forsooth every
Preacher of that Church does not work as great Miracles as Christ and his
Apostles. Does every Protestant Preacher work such Miracles? Did you Dr.
Stillingfleet? Did any of your Church, or Reformation, ever work a Miracle? If
not, why do you expect or exact that any should believe your Reformation, or
that your Church is assisted by the holy Ghost? If all rational persons must
grant, that Miracles are necessary to plant any new Doctrine pretended to be
divine, how much more necessary must they be to reverse the old, and reject
Doctrine held for many ages as Divine and confirmed as such by so many
Prodigies, against whose supernaturality our adversaries have no other
Arguments then their own arbitrary Interpretations of Scripture, and those
things which the Jews objected against the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ and
his Apostles? This much we may at least exact and expect from Dr Stillingfleet,
that he will either confess the truth of our Doctrine and Miracles, or confute
them by some better reason then by a bare supposition, that they are against
Scripture; or by rashly averring they are but tricks of covetous Monks and
crafty Dr Field in his Treatise of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 48.
Jesuits. Other Protestant Writers confess ingeniously that our Massing
Priests and Jesuits have wrought many true Miracles in the Indies, Japan,
Congo, and China, converting those Nations to Popery. And Mr. Hartwell M.
Abraham Hartwell in his Report of the Kingdom of Congo, edit. An. 1597. in his
Epistle to the Reader. Simon Lythus in Respons. altera ad alteram. Gretseri
Apol. page 331. Daneus contra Bellar. page 781.
speaking of the Conversion of the Kingdom of Congo, says, Shall this Action,
which tends to the Glory of God, be concealed, and not committed to memory,
because it was performed by Popish Priests, and Popish means? God forbid.

If Dr. Stillingfleet thinks that his Church, or the Reformation by not
pretending to Miracles, or Infallibility in proposing matters of Faith, be a
more certain and safe Guide to Salvation, then the Roman Catholic Church, that
with undeniable moral evidence pretends to both, few considering and
conscientious persons will be of his opinion; it being a clear principle in
Moral Theology, That in matters of Eternity we are bound to choose the surest
way; and no prudent man will deny, but that it is a surer way to Heaven, to be
directed by a Guide that pretends to be certain of that way, and produces
moral evidence for that certainty, then to follow a guide that plainly
confesses his own uncertainty of the way, and has nothing to say against the
moral evidence and assurance of the other, but railing Raillery, or turning to
Ridicule such forged and incredible Miracles as we our selves discover, and
punish.

To conclude, it is not necessary that every particular Doctor or Preacher of
the Faith, show or work a Miracle, it is sufficient that any one of that Faith
do it, or did it, to prove the Faith and Infallibility of the Roman Church: If
this be credibly reported to the dissenters, they are bound to believe it and
become Roman Catholics. Herod never did see any of Christ or the Apostles
Miracles, at least many of the Jews did not, and yet they who heard them
credibly reported, were obliged under pain of damnation to believe the
Christian doctrine, because they were credibly informed that it was confirmed
by Miracles; So that it is a rash mistake to maintain, that no Protestant is
bound to submit to the Authority and Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church,
unless he be convinct first by seeing a Miracle; Such things as are owned to be
Miracles by our Church, are so well examined, and so authentickly proved, that
any one may prudently believe them; for though perhaps none now living did see
them, yet many credible persons that lived when they were wrought, did see
them, and we may rely upon their sight and search with as much Reason and more
Religion, then upon our own, according to Christ's saying to S. Thomas, Blessed
are they who have not seen, and yet believed.

Proposition XVII.

Nothing is more absurd then to pretend the necessity of such an infallible
Commission and assistance to assure us of the truth of these Writings, and to
interpret them, and at the same time to prove that Commission from those
Writings from which we are told nothing can be certainly deduced, such an
assistance not being supposed; or to pretend that Infallibility in a body of
men, is not as liable to doubts and disputes as in those Books from whence only
they derive their Infallibility.

The 17. Proposition is a gross or wilful mistake of the Roman Catholic
Doctrine; We do not ground the Infallibility of the Church upon the words of
Scripture which assert it, but upon an impossibility or incredibility, that God
would permit such a Church as the Roman Catholic, qualified with so many
seeming supernatural signs of his favor and seals of his Divine Commission,
as our Miracles, Sanctity. Conversion of Nations to Christianity, etc. upon an
Impossibility: I say, that God would permit a Church so apparently qualified
with supernatural Marks of Divine See Father Thomas Bartons Treatise of
Religion and Government, edit. 1670. where he clears this point, as also the
obscurity of Christian faith.
Authority, to lead men into any error, when it pretends to propose and
declare Gods Revelation; This we say is not compatible with Gods Veracity, or
with his infinite sincerity or inclination to truth, and averseness from
falsehood, whether in fundamental, or not fundamental points of faith. For, even
amongst men he that is very sincere, or much inclined to truth, and averse from
falsehood, will not permit any one (if he can help it) to abuse his name or
authority by counterfeiting his Commissions or Seals, much less can it be
imagined by any sober person that God who is sincerity and truth it self, would
permit (he being omnipotent) the Roman Catholic Church to abuse his sacred
Name and assume his authority by counterfeit Seals, or false Miracles, and
thereby to seduce the world for so many ages as that Church has been prudently
taken to be the sole true Church of God. So that you must grant 1. The
Roman Catholic Miracles (approved of in the Bulls of Canonization of Saints)
to be true, and by consequence it self to be infallibly assisted by God,
independently of, and antecedently to any words of Scripture; and if the
Miracles be true, there can be no dispute of the Truth of its Doctrine, or of
the authenticknesse of its Commission. 2. You must grant, that if its Miracles
were false, there could be no proof or faith of Gods Veracity, this being
inconsistent with the permission of a cheat so apparently supernatural. We
resolve therefore Christian and Catholic Faith into this Assertion or Assent
and Assurance; Gods Veracity being Infinite, I do most firmly and undoubtedly
believe, that God will never permit any falsehood to be proposed as his Word or
Revelation, with such appearance of Miracles, and such signs of his
approbation, as the Roman Catholic Church proposes its Doctrine and
Infallibility: And therefore whatsoever the same Church does propose as Gods
Word or Revelation, I do most firmly and undoubtedly believe as the real Word
and Revelation of God. To this universal Assent or Assertion are reduced all
the particular Assents or Articles of Catholic Faith, without any kind of
that circle which Schoolmen so much dread in the resolution of faith: Neither
is there any circle in proving the evident credibility of the Roman Catholic
Church by its Miracles, and the truth of its Miracles by the approbation of the
same Church. 1. Because we prove the Credibility of the Church by the sole
moral appearance that our Miracles are Divine, before they are believed to be
Divine by supernatural faith. 2. Because both the truth of our Miracles, and
the Infallibility of our Church are proved by the Infiniteness of Gods
Veracity, which is not consistent with a permission of our Miracles being
false, or of our Church being fallible, as has been hitherto declared.

As to the Second part of the 17. Proposition, it is manifest to common sense,
that doubts and disputes are with more ease and clearness resolved by an
infallible body of men, then by an obscure (though infallible) Writing: Men may
hear, and answer difficulties and doubts, a Book (even the Bible) cannot,
because we prove it is obscure (even after all conferences of texts, and
Examinations of the able Scripturists) by reason of the differences in opinion
concerning the true sense thereof.

The 18. Proposition is grounded upon the falsehood of the 17. and therefore
needs no other confutation; but as to what it says, God had promi^ed to
particular men who endeavor to understand Scripture, that either they shall
not err, or if they shall, they shall not be damned for it, is but a fancy of
Dr. Stillingfleet, without any proof or color of truth, and contrary to
Christ's commands of hearing and obeying the Church.

The 19. Proposition contains only a false supposition confuted in the 17. and
an inclination in D. Stillingfleet to the private spirit, against the public
Testimony of the Church.

Proposition XX.

No man's faith can therefore be infallible, merely because the Proponent is
said to be infallible, because the nature of Assent does not depend upon the
objective infallibility of any thing without us, but is agreeable to the
evidence we have of it in our minds; for Assent is not built on the nature of
things, but their evidence to us.

The 20. Proposition wants explanation: There are two sorts of Assent, one is
grounded upon clear evidence of the truth assented unto, and is an intellectual
sight thereof, the other is grounded upon authority, that is, upon the Author
or Speakers Veracity or Inclination to truth: The first kind of assent is
agreeable, and bears proportion with the evidence we have of it in our minds,
and is infallible if the evidence be clear, as it is in some undeniable
principles, and in their immediate Conclusions: But the assent built upon
authority (which is Faith) depends in its Infallibility upon the
infallibility of the Infallible Author or Proponent apprehended to be so by us
and this independently of any Evidence we have of the truth or nature of things
without us; and therefore this 20. Proposition is absolutely false.

Proposition XXI.

It is therefore necessary in order to an Infallible Assent, that every
particular person be infallibly assisted in judging of the matter proposed to
him to be believed, so that the ground on which a necessity of some external
infallible Proponent is asserted must rather make every particular Person
infallible, if no divine faith can be without an infallible Assent, and so
renders any other infallible useless.

The 21. Proposition is also false, it being only a consequence from the
former. A fallible person may give an infallible assent in matters of faith,
because the truth and assurance of such an Assent is not to be measured by any
inward evidence the Assenter has of the matter of Mystery believed; but
(supposing the outward appearance of the supernatural signs of the Church) by
the grace that God gives to assure us, that himself is the Author of the
Doctrine so proposed: And though the appearance of the signs of the Church
exceeds not a moral certainty of God being the Author of the Churches
Doctrine, yet our assurance of that same truth is more then moral, because we
build not the assurance and certainty of our Catholic faith, or of the
Infallibility of the Church, upon those motives of eredibility, and the outward
appearance of their connection with the Truth, but upon Gods Veracity, Goodness,
and his aversness from any falsehood; which is so great, that we do as firmly
believe he will no more permit a Church so likely to be his, as the
Roman Catholic Church is, to err, and lead us into any falsehood, then he
would own himself Author or Countenancer of that falsehood and fraud.

Proposition XXII.

If no particular person be infallible in the assent he gives to matters
proposed by others to him, then no man can be infallibly sure that the Church
is infallible, and so the Churches Infallibility can signify nothing to our
infallible assurance, without an equal Infallibility in our selves in the
belief of it.

The 22. Proposition signifies nothing, if you will reflect upon what has been
now said; every faithful is infallible inasmuch as he agrees with the Doctrine
of the Church, and the Churches Infallibility is one point of that Doctrine.

The 23. Proposition is composed of absurd sequels from the former.

The 24. 25. and 26. Propositions have not any thing worth our taking notice of.

Proposition XXVII.

The nature of certainty does receive several names, ei^^^^ according to the
nature of the proof, or the degrees of (...) Thus moral certainty may be so
called either etc.

(...) the 27. Proposition the Author declares, that ^^^^stianity is morally
certain, that is, it implys a firm As^ent upon the highest evidence that moral
things can receive: This seems to involve a contradiction; How can our Assent
be sufficiently firm for Faith, and exclude all doubts and fears of Falsehood
(as Christian Faith must) if its certainty be only moral, though in the highest
degree of moral certainty? For, the highest degree of moral certainty does not
include an absolute impossibility of the contrary; So that Dr. Stillingfleet
must confess it is possible his Faith may be false, and the Scriptures a Fable,
though he be morally certain in the highest degree it is not so.

Hence follows against the 28. Proposition, that a Christian having no more
then moral certainty in the Highest degree that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, his Faith cannot be resolved into the Veracity of God, as the ground of
his believing; because the Veracity of God excludes all Fallacy and possibility
of Falsehood, and includes not only the highest degree of moral, but of
Metaphysical certainty, and by consequence every assent of Faith grounded
thereupon, and reduced thereunto, must be of the same nature.

The 29. Proposition confines Gods Revelations to Scripture only without proof
or pretext for so bold an assertion, as we have manifested in confuting the 14.
Proposition.

Proposition XXX.

There can be no better way to prevent men's mistakes in the sense of Scripture
(which men being fallible are subject to) then the considering the consequence
of mistaking in a matter wherein their salvation is concerned; and there can be
no sufficient reason given why that may not serve in matter of faith which God
himself has made use of, as the means to keep men from sin in their lives,
unless any imagine, that Errors in opinion are more dangerous to men's souls then
a vicious life is and therefore that God is bound to take more care to prevent
the one then the other.

This 30. and last Proposition does not agree with the 15. and 18. For in the
15. the Author maintains, that no sober Enquirer into the Scriptures, can miss
of what is necessary for salvation, and from thence concludes there can be no
necessity supposed of any infallible Society of men (or of the Church of
England) to attest or explain Scripture; To what purpose then are Bishops,
Deans Chapters and Pastors, or at least their Revenues and Tithes? May not this
bring Dr. Stillingfleet, under the suspicion and censure of being rather a
Prevaricator then Assertor of the Church of England, and an Impugner of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy? His 18. Proposition also destroys this 30. as you may
see by comparing both: in the 18. he says. God has promised to them who use
their best endeavors or means to understand the Scriptures, that either they
shall not err, or they shall not be damned for it. From whence it follows.

1. That Scripture is obscure even in matters necessary for salvation, contrary
to the 15. Proposition.

2. That they need not fear being damned, and therefore need not be concerned
for erring, which is contrary to this 30. Proposition, and indeed to all
Christianity, whereof St. Paul says, it is one of the first principles, that
without faith it is impossible to please God, and that Faith is the substance
and foundation of Religion, and hopes of salvation: In this sense it is certain,
that errors in opinion are for more dangerous then a vicious life is, both
because here ie is the worst of vices, and because it is more difficult to
recover true Faith once lost, then to repent of any other sins. You have seen
D. Stillingfleets ^rinc^ples cleared and confuted; Now you shall see them
retorted against himself in his own Conclusions.

Conclusion I.

There is no necessity at all or use of an infallible society of men to assure
men of the truth of those things which they may be certain of without it, and
cannot have any greater assurance supposing such Infallibility to be in them.

Conclusion II.

The Infallibility of that society of men who call themselves the Catholic
Church, must be examined by the same faculties an man, the same Rules of trial,
the same motives by which the Infallibility of any Divine Revelation is.

Conclusion III.

The less convincing the Miracles the more doubtful the Marks, the more
obscure the sense of either what is called the Catholic Church or declared by
it, the less reason has any Christian to believe upon the account of any who
call themselves by the name of the Catholic Church.

Conclusion IV.

The more absurd any Opinions are, and repugnant to the first Principles of
sense and reason, which any Church obtrudes upon the faith of men, the greater
reason men still have to reject the pretense of Infallibility in that Church as
a grand Imposture.

Conclusion V.

To disown what is so taught by such a Church, is not to question the Veracity
of God, but so firmly to adhere to it, as to what he has revealed in
Scriptures, that men dare not out of love to their souls reject what is so
taught.

THe First Conclusion has been retorted in the 30. Proposition against the
Church of England (which Dr. Stillingfleet undertakes to maintain) because if
an infallible Church be superfluous, much more superfluous must the Church of
England be, that is confessedly fallible. Nay it must be dangerous, because by
the Laws of the Land which confirm it, and by the Benefices and Revenues that
enrich it, men may be induced to follow false doctrine, whereunto (as a
fallible Church) it may lead them.

The 2. Conclusion deprives the Church and State of England of all hopes of
peace and quiet; because if a Church pretending (with good grounds) to
Infallibility, must be judged and censured by every private man's (...) and
discretion, much more a Church that acknowledges to be fallible, and yet both
reason and experience demonstrate, that no Church or Commonwealth can be
peaceable, wherein every private person is permitted to be a Judge of its Laws,
or of its Religion.

The 3. Conclusion absolutely destroys the Church of England because it does
not as much as pretend to Miracles, nor supernatural visible marks, nor to the
name of the Catholic Church; and by D. Stillingfleets consequence no Christian
ought to believe upon the account of (...) Church.

The 4. Con^^^sion is also destructive to the Church of England because nothing
is more repugnant to the first principles of sense and reason, then that a
Church confessedly fallible should pretend to direct men to the in^allible
certainty of Christian Faith; and that men (...) be compelled by Laws and
penalties to hazard their salvation by following a guide that owns not to be
fully assured whether his own Doctrine be the right way to Heaven.

The 5. Conclusion makes it lawful for every man to reject the authority of the
Church of England, and to make himself sole Judge of the Scriptures, and all
this out of love to his soul, and out of reverence to Gods Veracity, which is
(in equivalent terms) to make Dr. Stilling fleets Religion inseparable from
Heresy and Rebellion, and inconsistent with the safety of any State or
Sovereign.

Conclusion VI.

Though nothing were to be delivered as the Will of God, but what is by the
Catholic Church declared to be so, yet this does not at all concern the Church
of Rome, which neither is the Catholic Church, nor any sound part or member
thereof. From all which it follows, that it can be nothing but wilful
Ignorance, weakness of judgment, strength of prejudice, or some sinful passion,
which makes any one forsake the Communion of the Church of England, to embrace
that of the Church of Rome.

This 6. Conclusion I shall endeavor to confute by proving that the
Roman Catholic Church alone, is the whole Catholic Church: In order whereunto
I will set down these few Propositions.

1. That there is. and always has been, upon earth, a visible Catholic
Church, otherwise Christ would not have commanded us to repair to it in our
differences, nor the Apostles have made it an Article of our Creed.

2. The Catholic Church must have some visible and supernatural signs (far
exceeding all others in the appearance of being such) whereby it may be
discerned from all ^agan and Heretical Congregations pretending to be a part,
or the whole Catholic Church. If this be not granted, no man is obliged to be
of any Church, nay rather all men are obliged to be of no Church, because not
having any signs to prefer one Church before the other, none could know which
is the true one, and therefore it is a hundred to one, at least, they would fall
into some Heretical Congregation, there being so many, and the true Church or
Congregation but one.

3. That no supernatural signs or Miracles can be visible and wrought for
conrfimation of doctrine in any Congregation but in that one which is the true
Church, because the signs or Miracles which Christ said would follow the
Believers, Mark 16. or the true Church, are of the same nature of Christ's
Miracles, and in order to gain credit for the testimony it gives of it self and
his doctrine: and God being the Author of truth and concord, cannot give
supernatural signs of his trust or truth to any two or more dissenting
Churches, for if he did, the wisest course (as I said) learned and pious men
could take, would be, to turn Scepticks, and not believe in God. Hence also it
follows

4. That the Catholic Church cannot be composed of any two Congregations
dissenting in any one point, which eith^r holds to be an Article of Faith
fundamental, or not fundamental: the reason is, because if they be of equal
authority men ought rather to suspend then submit their judgments to either of
those Congregations: and though both should agree in fundamental Articles, yet
because God (being truth it self) is as contrary to small as great un^ru^hs or
errors, he can no more permit the Testimony of his Church and his Miracles, to
confirm a little then a great untruth, and so it must be infallible as well in
not fundamentals, as in fundamentals.

5. Gods being of infinite Veracity (as has been proved in my confutation of
Dr. Stillingfleets 6, 16, 17. Propositions) cannot permit any false Church to
have or show so credible an appearance of true Miracles, as has been always
and now is pretended to be in the Roman Catholic Church; They are so
convincing, that our adversaries can as little prove the fraud, as deny the
fact; They are so frequent, that there is scarce a Country in Christendom,
wherein they have not been wrought: They are so authentic (I speak only of
such as are approved by the Bishops of Rome, in order to the canonization of
Saints) that there cannot be a more narrow scrutiny into the nature and cure of
the disease, nor into the sincerity and sufficiency of the Witnesses, and the
severity of our judgments against such as we find to be cheats and Impostors,
is notorious; even in Ireland, where our Ecclesiastical discipline is
restrained by the Laws, we have ventured to silence James Finanghty (a simple
ignorant Priest) because himself and he who caused them to be printed, were so
weak as to fancy they were true Miracles.

I know Dr. Stillingfleet may object against this Proposition, the Miracles of
Antichrist, but his Miracles will not be of the same nature with the Miracles
of Christ, and ours; he will not convert Nations to Christianity, by imitating
the Apostles humility, poverty and chastity, as the Apostolical men of our
Church have done in all former ages, and even in this; Witness both the
Indies, Brasile, Ethiopia, Persia, Japan, and China. Besides, though
Antichrist's Miracles could be in appearance as palpable, and as plausible as
ours; yet (besides the precedence and prediction of ours as true) the
particular circumstances wherewith Scripture has described that man of sin,
and the warning it has given us, not to believe his Miracles, do so discredit
him and them, that no man who will reflect upon the Scriptures words and recurr
to God for help will be deceived by Antichrist's Impostures, and lying
Prodigies.

True it is, that according to See D. Stilling fleets Answ. page 469.
D. Stillingfleets Principles (making every particular person Judge of Divine
Revelation, and admitting nothing as such that he thinks does contradict sense
in its proper object) Antichrist's Miracles must be judged true Miracles, and
by consequence his Doctrine must be embraced as Divine Revelation: For upon
this account alone does Dr. Stillingfleet deny the Miracle and Mystery of
Transubstantiation, notwithstanding the clearness of Scripture for it; being
impossible to express that Truth, or any other, in more clear terms, then by
Christ's saying, This is my body; so likewise it must be concluded from Dr.
Stillingfleet, Principles, that though Christ tells you clearly. Antichrist's
Miracles will not be true Miracles, yet if your eyes tells you (that is if you
see a man lie like dead, and afterward see him stand and move by Antichrist's
command) you must prefer this evidence of sense in its proper object, before
Christ's clear words and Revelation: For, the proper object of sense goes no
further then to the outward appearance or accidents; it does not penetrate to
the substance of bread or wine, much less to the life or soul of a seeming dead
man; and by consequence men may be mistaken in the substance of both, though
they rely upon senses evidence in its proper object, which is only the species,
or outward appearances, or (if you will follow the modern opinion) certain
impressions made upon the Organs of our senses; and this may be performed by
Antichrist, or by any other that the devil has a kindness for, without any
concurrence or real existence of the Object you fancy to see hear, smell,
touch, or taste; and of this we have sufficient proofs and examples in visions
and apparitions both of good and bad spirits, both in sacred and profane
History.

We ought not therefore to attribute so much to the evidence of sense in its
most proper Object (it cannot have evidence in any other) as to wrest the words
of Scripture from their literal and plain sense, in the Mystery of
Transubstantiation, seeing we must confess that Antichrists false Miracles will
have no other color of truth but what will be grounded upon the Evidence of
sense in its most proper Object; and if this Evidence ought not to prevail in
favor of Antichrists Miracles, I see no reason why it ought to prevail against
Christ's words, This is my body.

As for matters of faith that suppose matters of fact, the certainty of their
belief does not depend so much upon the senses evidence of the fact, as D.
Stillingfleet imagines, page 469. For, we do not believe that any of the
Apostles, or others, did see Christ in the very act or instant of his
Resurrection, though they did see him a little after, but they did not see the
Resurrection it self; and though they had seen it, the assurance of their faith
must have been grounded upon divine Revelation, not upon that sight, So that
not only succeeding ages, but the Apostles themselves believed Christ's
Resurrection with Christian faith, not because they did see him revived, but
because he told them, he was the very same Christ that had been dead, and this
his assertion is confirmed by the same signs and testimonies whereby the other
mysteries of Faith are.

Conclusion.
SEeing therefore the whole Catholic Church cannot be composed of many or any
two dissenting Congregations in any point of Faith, whether fundamental, or not
fundamental, and that the same Catholic Church must have supernatural signs
and Miracles whereby it may be discerned from all Heretical Congregations; and
that no other D. Do^ ham in (...) Treatise^ Antichr^ l. 1. c. 7. p^ 111. sait^
Neither Turks, n^ Jews, no^ any other Church of Christian but only the Pope and
Church of Rome do vaunt of Miracles.
Christian Congregation, but the Roman Catholic does as much as pretend to
supernatural signs and Miracles, and that this pretense of Miracles in the
Roman Catholic Church is so well grounded, that the wisest and wariest men of
the world for many ages (and in this also) did take it to be good and
sufficient evidence to build thereupon their hopes of salvation, and that such
as deny the sufficiency of this evidence cannot dispute it otherwise then by
saying (contrary to universal Tradition and to the Testimony of all Histories)
that they who believed and wrought our Miracles were cheats or madmen, and
that there can be no greater madness then so rash an assertion; seeing, I say,
all this has been made out in my Propositions, I hope it may be evidently
concluded, that the Roman Catholic Church, and only the Roman Catholic
Church, is the whole Catholic and true Church of God. From whence must follow
the quite contrary of D. Stillingfleets Principles and Conclusions.

This Sir, is my Opinion of a Book so much applauded by those that understand
not its Principles, nor the inconveniences it may draw upon the Religion and
Revenues of the Church of England, by making that Church as useless for saving
souls, as its Revenues are thought by Statesmen necessary for supporting the
State: I am,

March 17. 1671. Yours, J.W.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the Page on the backside the Title, line 3. for Principles of
Christianity, read Principles of Protestancy. page 6. line 14. read
confirmed, p. 10.. l. 10. r. which the Church then, and for. p. 12. l. 5. r. S.
Xavier.


