Dr. STILLINGFLEET STILL AGAINST Dr. STILLINGFLEET: OR THE EXAMINATION OF Dr.
Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet EXAMINED.

By J. W.

LUKE XIX.XXII. By thine own Mouth I Judge thee, Naughty Servant.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXV.

The Preface.
AFter eighteen Months silence, Dr. Stillingfleet was pleased to publish an
Answer to a Treatise of a sheet and a half, penned by me with this Title, Dr.
Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet: wherein I laid open the palpable
Contradictions committed by him, in charging the Roman Church with Idolatry,
danger of Salvation in her Communion, Fanaticisme, and Divisions in matters of
Faith; endeavoring by this way to compel him to be his own Executioner, St.
ag. St. page 14.
and to make havoc of his Arguments with his own Weapon.

Hence the Dr. took a fancy to frame of me the following Character. Pref. Genesis
page 3.
Forthwith there starts up a young Sophister among them [Catholicks] and bids
them be of good heart; for by letting fly at him some Squibs and Crackers, he
did not question, but he should put this Monster [Dr. St.] into such a rage, as
to make him fall upon himself: which design being highly approved, in a short
time came forth that dapper piece, called Dr. Stillingfleet against Dr.
Stillingfleet. It was a notable plot, and cunningly managed, as the Reader may
see (and clearly too) by the following Answer to it.

In one place he terms all his Adversaries Books so many empty vessels, Pref.
Genesis page 6.
thrown out for him to play with. In another place he calls my Answer, and the
Answer of that Learned Author N. O. two elaborate Pamphlets; Pref. p. 1.
charging me in almost every leaf with Disingenuity, or Sophistry, or both.
Sometimes he fancies me to be one of the Romantic Knights, page 13.
which do hurt nowhere, but in paper, and their own imagination. At another
time he Parallels me with a Juggler. Page 47.
Now he styles me a half-witted man, and a man without Sense: Page 50.
then a Popish Leviathan, and then a Pusionello; affirming, that any man, whom
I encounter, must be accounted a Giant. Page 4. he says, that his Adversaries
have beaten nothing but the Air, and themselves, p. 2. that they have not said
one wise word, in a just Vindication of their Church from Fanaticisme; and p.
51. that they plunge those, who rely upon their word, into the depths of
Atheism. p. 59. he compares the Roman Church with the Augean Stable. p. 10. he
avers, that what I say is a base suggestion, and a sly insinuation. p. 8.
absurd, silly, and idle stuff. p. 39. vain, and sophistical talk; p. 64. that I
designed nothing but Sophistry, and trifling: and p. 43. that I sought for
nothing but words, to raise Cavils upon. In fine, he closes up his Answer to me
in Don Quixots style, Page 68.
Go thy way then for the Eighth Ghampion of Christendom: enjoy the benefit of
thy illustrious Fame: Sit down at ease, and relate, to thy immortal honor, thy
mighty exploits: only when thou have done, remember, thou have encountered
nothing, but the Wind-mills of thy own imagination: and the man, whom thou
thoughtest to have executed by his own hands, stands by, and laughs at thy
ridiculous attempts. Notwithstanding this, and much more railing, and scoffing
language, wherewith he lards all his works, the good man, out of his exceeding
great humility, does plainly confess, in his answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle
Apologetical, in the Preface to the Benedictines, Page 4.
That he is yet to learn the Art, and Terms of Railing. What? yet to learn the
art and terms too, of Railing? well then, we may conclude, that he will never
learn this art; for I am confident, there cannot be found in the world a man,
who is able to teach him. A Juggler, a man without sense, an empty vessel, a
Leviathan, a Pusionello, base suggestions, sly insinuations, absurd, silly, and
idle stuff, vain and sophistical talk, and such like, are (it seems) in this
Drs. Dialect, terms only of pure civility. It Is in vain to examine, what Reason
Dr. St. had to fasten upon my Companions, and my self, such scurrilous
expressions. For we must not expect from him any Reason, or Proof, for what he
says.

By these, and such like Romantic Phrases, which are the chief Ornament, that
sets off his works, we may easily guess, in what books this Dr. of Divinity has
spent his time, and that he is well verst in Don Quixot, the Seven Champions,
and other Romantic Stories. Sure he erred in his Vocation; had he quitted all
serious matters, and dedicated himself wholly to Drollery, and Romances, with
two or three years under Hudibras, he would have been a Master in that Faculty:
the Stage might have been a gainer by it, and the Church of England would have
been no loser.

But who would imagine, that in the very same book, and within some few leaves,
where he Characterizes his Adversaries in such reproachful language, he should
have the confidence to affirm, Pref. p. 5.
I have learned of him, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, not only to
forbear reproaching them [his Adversaries] in the same manner, (is it, because
he reproaches them in a far higher manner?) but to return them good for evil,
and to pray for them, while they calumniate me. What language is reproachful,
if the forementioned expressions be not? If such be Dr. St's Prayers, who will
be so mad, as to desire the Dr. to pray for him? or what Contradiction can
there be more palpable, than to revile us in such a manner, and then to tell
us, that he does not revile us, but only pray for us? Suppose, that one of as
hot a temper as Dr. St. should call him a Trifling Sophister, an empty Vessel,
a Juggler, a man without sense, a half-witted man, a Romantic Knight, a
Socinian Leviathan, a Pusionello, the 8th Champion of Christendom, and a leader
into Atheism; (for such fine Epithets as these he is pleased to bestow, either
upon all Catholics in general, or upon some in particular:) should one (I say)
draw such a Character of Dr. St. and then tell him, Sir, after all this, I have
no intention to revile you: God forbid I should. I do only pray for you. What
opinion could any rational man conceive of such a person, who should so
palpably, and so notoriously contradict himself? But alas! poor Dr. I pity him;
he is so possessed with the Spirit of Self-contradiction, that he can scarce
write some few leaves without falling into one of his Fits: and even in this
book, where he had made it his business to clear himself from so foul an
imputation, he could not forbear to afford us fresh proofs, and instances
thereof.

Neither am I ignorant, at what Dr. St. aims with this manner of dealing. He
would fain have me contest with him, either at Drolling, or Railing; and then
he would be sure to have the better of me; and between Railing and Drolling we
should both make a fine business of Religion; but I am far from any such
intent: I know him too well. He is as pitiful at Arguing, as excellent at
Drolling; and I am resolved to attack him on the weakest side, let him complain
never so much.

Nor could the Dr. have given the world a more pregnant Testimony, that his
Adversaries have pinched, and galled him, than by using such unhandsome, and
passionate expressions against them. For, all wise men do clearly understand,
that whoever, in serious debates, (such as those of Religion are, with all
persons, who have any sense of Religion in them) when he is closely pressed; in
lieu of Answering, falls a Railing, or a Drolling, he yields himself for
defeated: not to seem so to ignorant people, (who think, that so long as the
party speaks, he answers) he will needs say something, though it be nothing to
the purpose. The best way to deal with such Adversaries, is to press the
Arguments which nettled them. The Spur, Which touching only does make one kick,
and wince; if often applied, may tame and calm him.

And though one should be permitted, now and then, to sprinkle even serious
Discourses with some sort of Railery; yet what prudence could it be in Dr. St.
when he had no less than Nine several Treatises to answer, (besides others
published before) issued forth against his Discourse concerning the Idolatry of
the Roman Church, or some part thereof; and such as even Protestants were of
opinion, he would have enough to do to answer them: what prudence could it be
(I say) for him, in this Conjuncture, to mis-spend so much time in framing
Romantic Characters of his Adversaries? Sure, had he been persuaded, that he
could solidly answer them, he would presently have closed with them, and
dispatched them; and not have stood off so long in Buffoonery. And the effect
he has obtained by this manner of answering seems to be, that having quite
spent himself in these Drolling, and Railing Fits, he has been forced to be
beholding to a Person of Honor, (though unacquainted with Polemical Contests,
as his Book sufficiently proclaims it) for answering his grave Adveersary, S.
C. and to Dr. Whitby, (though as that witty Author, J. V. C. tells us, he vents
Reasons, Epist. ad Cressyn. ag. Mr. Whitby.
as young Children do Worms, heads and tails together) for encountering even the
Knight himself: For so he styles his worthy Antagonist, pref. page 40.
T. G. And here I cannot but wonder: What? Dr. St. the Champion of the
Protestant Church, Whitby in his preface.
that Incomparable Man, that Prodigy of Ingenuity, and Learning, had he not
Courage enough to Combat the Knight, even when his own party was in so great
expectation of the Engagement? Must he be forced to substitute Whitby in his
place? But to such shifts as these one will be put, who, when he has serious
business in hand, trifles out his time in fopperies. Yea, probably speaking, he
will hire some such man (and there are many such men) as Dr. Whitby, to
Encounter the Squire too, for so he terms that Ingenious Writer, J. S. and the
rest of his Learned Adversaries, who remain unanswered. Yet it is great pity,
he should not answer them all himself. For if any of their Books have not
hitherto arrived to the esteem they deserve, let the Dr. answer them in
particular, and they will not fail to gain the Repute due unto them. For my own
part I can assure him, that not only I my self, but several others too, have a
greater esteem for my little Book, since the Dr. was pleased to answer it, than
we had before: and I am so far from fearing his Replies, that I heartily desire
he would Answer whatever hereafter I shall Publish, relating to Controversy.

The substance of the Reply was finished some few months after Dr. St.
Examination of my Book came forth: the reason why it was not published sooner,
is, because I expected the Dr. should afford a particular answer to several
Treatises, issued forth against his discourse of the Roman Idolatry (the book I
attaqued) which remained yet unanswered; to the end that having seen what he
could answer to the whole charge laid to him in this debate, I might the
better order my Reply. But since the Dr. in so long a time has not yet been
pleased to satisfy so just an expectation, for some good reasons he knows; I
resolved without any farther delay, to set forth this Rejoinder; especially
being pressed thereunto by the invitation of several persons of Learning, both
Diocesan and Catholic, who are persuaded, that the Dr. in the Examination of
my Book, has laid himself thus open, as will manifestly appear by the
following Treatise.

The Contents.
CHap. I. On supposition Dr. St. Contradicts himself in the way I insist upon,
all the charges he casts upon the Roman Church, are false, and all their proofs
void. Chap. II. Several objections against the forementioned way of answering
the Dr. proved insignificant. Chap. III. Other Objections answered. Chap. IV.
The Evasions of the Dr. to clear himself from Self-contradiction, in charging
the Roman Church with Idolatry, examined. Chap. V. The Dr. palpably Contradicts
himself, by affirming the Roman Church to be Idolatrous, and yet granting her
to be a True Church. Chap. VI. Another proof of the same intent drawn from the
nature of the Idolatry, the Dr. fathers upon the Roman Church. Chap. VII. The
invalidity of the Drs. answers to our Propositions in particular. Chap. VIII.
Several quibbles against the aforesaid Doctrine removed. Chap. IX. The Drs.
answer to my Appendix proved frivolous. Chap. X. Concerning the other
Contradictions committed by the Dr. in the Charges he lays upon the Roman
Church. Chap. XI. Some difficulties raised by the Dr. against my Judgment
concerning his manner of proceeding, rejected.
ERRATA.
PRef. post medium, not to seem so, r. yet not to seem so. fine, Diocesan and
Catholic, r. Protestants and Catholics. ib. thus open, r. too open, p. 47. l.
13. would not, r. would it not p. 68. l. 5. charity of this, r. charity as this
p. 75. l. 18. his excess, r. this excess. l. 22. this charity, r. his charity.
p. 100. l. 2. nor among, r. now among. p. 101. so it is, r. so that it is. p.
103. l 13. commanded, r. commandment p 123. l. 13. post illa virba, honor due
to God, add and then it is false. p. 124. l. 8. this part was, r. this was part.
p. 131. l. 8. when, r then. p. 132. l. 27. does not own, r. does own. p. 145. l
25. our own, r. his own. p. 161. l. 27. would not be, r. would be. p. 185. l.
24. answering, r. answer. p. 186 l. 22. and Idolater, r. an Idolater. p. 188.
l. 8. any, r. as any p. 194. l. 19. universal truth, r. universal true. p. 214.
l. 26. in any times, r. many times. p. 220 l. 26. detected, r. detested. p.
221. l. 9. are most, r. are more. ib. l. 17. to him treason r. him to treason.
p. 239. l. 20. that was, r. that this was p. 249. l. 23. as he, r. as that he.
p. 265. l. 15. being an, r. being of an. p. 269. l. 2. eighth, practices, r.
eighth and their practices. ib. l. 14. to the same, r. the same.

CHAP. I. On supposition Dr. St. contradicts himself in the way I insist upon
all the Charges he casts upon the Roman Church are false, and all their proofs
void.
AFter Dr. St. had prefixed two Prefaces to his Book, the one of 82 pages, the
other of 12: he sets upon the examination of my Treatise; which with
Introduction, Answer, and Appendix, contains only 21 pages, though in a closer
letter. He designs to prove two things against me. 1. That on supposition he
did contradict himself in the way I insist upon, yet that would be no
sufficient Answer to his Book, Page 14. 2. That he is far enough from
contradicting himself in any one of the things I charge him with.

In reply to these two Points, I shall show, 1. What follows if the Dr.
Contradicts himself: and hence will appear, whether on supposition he
contraicts himsef in the way I insist upon, I answer his Book, or not. 2. That
he palpably contradicts himself in the forementioned Charges, he lays upon the
Roman Church. And that the Dr. may see I have a mind to deal fairly with him, I
am very willing to be tried by the Learned men of our Two Famous Universities
(where there are many as ingenious as Dr. St. and far more ingenuous) not only
whether I have not proved that the Dr. contradicts himself; but also whether,
this being once proved in the way I insist upon, I do not invalidate and annual
all the abovementioned Charges he lays against the Roman Church, with all the
Reasons, and Proofs he produces, or can produce to make them good.

To commence therefore the first Point of this Reply, If I have proved that Dr.
St. has contradicted himself in the aforesaid Crimes he imputes to the Roman
Church (which is the supposition wherein he, and we speak in this first part)
it manifestly follows, that I have obtained the design of my Book, couched in
the Title thereof, viz Dr. Stillingfleet, against Dr. Stillingfleet: and if I
moreover show, that he still contradicts himself, I complete also the Subject
and Title of this Rejoinder, Dr. Stillingfleet still against Dr. Stillingfleet.
For nothing else is aimed at in these Titles, but only to evince, that the Dr.
did contradict, and persists to contradict himself. This is apparent from what
I insinuated at the beginning of my Book, in these words, page 1. My aim
therefore in this short Paper, only is, to lay open the palpable contradictions
of Dr. St. in imputing to the Roman Church the forementioned Calumnies. And
what more can be expected from a Writer, than to fill up the Subject and
Design of his Discourse? Especially, if the Design be of great Consequence,
as this is, according to what now follows.

Again, Self-contradiction being proved, as Dr. St. himself grants, p. 15.
overthrows the authority of the Person, who stands convicted thereof, Now I
conceive, that a sheet and half of Paper was not ill-imployed in overthrowing
(had it no other effect) the authority of one, who pretends to be a Pillar of
the Protestant Church, and who gains more upon his Devotees by authority than
by reason. So that, even according to Dr. St's confession, self-contradiction
being once evidenced against him; we ought not to believe him in any thing he
says, or alleges unless he recalls himself. For, to believe one is to take a
thing upon his authority: and sure no body ought to take any thing upon the
authority and credit of one, who has lost all authority and credit.

Besides, whoever forces his Adversary to grant manifest Contradictions, or
shows that he grants them, according to the rigor of Logique, and close
arguing, he puts him in a sack, he brings him to a Nonplus, and in plain
vulgar English, he makes an Ass of him, or shows him to be so, unless he
recants. And can more than this be required of one to confute and confound his
Adversary? or can one press him further than to a Nonplus?

Finally, Whoever grants and persists to grant palpable Contradictions, he may
justly be posted up for a Madman. Should one (for instance) infected with the
Plague say, and repeat that he is in very good health, but withal, that he is
deadly sick of the Plague; could there be a clearer Symptom, that such a man's
brains were distempered, than to hear him harp upon so palpable a
contradiction? And there is no wise man who will have to do with Madmen, no,
not in their Lucid Intervals, as Dr. St. in his Pref. p. 11. gravely observes.
For though Madmen and Fools may sometimes say shrewd things, yet no body who
is persuaded they are such, can in prudence think himself bound to confute
them, but rather to pity them; nor to solve their Objections, but to slight
them: though it does not follow, because they are so, that all their Arguments
are false, and their Objections null. This I have said, because I perceive
there are several, who are not sensible what gross absurdities do follow from
self-contradiction.

Nevertheless the Dr. still urges, That all this is no sufficient answer to his
Book. For though he confesses, that self-contradicition, being once evidenced
against him, all his authority and credit is worth nothing, and consequently he
is not to be believed or credited in any thing he quotes or alleges, and all
his Arguments which depend upon the truth of his Quotations, are not to be
valued; nay, neither is one bound to make enquiry, whether his Quotations be
true or not. For who is bound to make inquiry into the truth of what a Madman,
or one that has forfeited all his credit does say or allege? Yet after all
this he affirms, and vapors in almost every leaf of this first part, that his
Arguments, especially such as do not depend upon the truth of his Allegations
(and how few has he of such Arguments?) remain firm, solid, and unanswered? Now
to disabuse the Doctor and his Partisans in this Point; I shall demonstrate
that in the present Supposition, viz. That he contradicts himself in the way I
insist upon, by laying to our charge the above mentioned crimes: not only all
the aforesaid Aspersions, but also all the Arguments which he produces, or can
produce either from Authority or Reason, in proof of them, are void and of no
force. And to this purpose I set down these following Principles; which, though
appertaining only to Logique, this Dr. of Divinity seems to be ignorant of.

1. When two Propositions contradict one another, both cannot be true; but
either the one or the other must needs be false. This is a manifest Principle
of Natural Logique; wherefore if these two Propositions, The Roman Church is a
true Church; the Roman Church is an Idolatrous Church, do contradict one
another (as now we suppose they do) it evidently follows, that both of them are
not true; but that either the one or the other is false. The same may be
applied to the other Contradictions, wherewith I charge the Doctor in the
progress of my discourse.

2. When of two Propositions that contradictone another, the one is true and
taken for granted; the other is necessarily false. This is also certain;
otherwise both of them would be true; which is impossible according to the
first Principle. If therefore the first of the two Propositions quoted above,
viz. The Roman Church is a true Church, be true, and taken for granted, it
manifestly follows, that the second Proposition, viz. The Roman Church is an
Idolatrous Church, is false; supposing as we do suppose, that they contradict
one another. The like also may be affirmed of the other contradictory
Propositions; which we have laid to the Doctors charge.

Now the way I insisted upon all along in my discourse is comprehended in these
4. Points set down in the beginning thereof, in these words. 1. I shall in
brief propose the Accusation he frames against our Church. 2. I shall lay down
some few Principles, either manifest in themselves or at least owned by Dr. St.
and his Partisans. 3. From these Principles I shall (...) one or two Syllogisms
deduce the contradictory of the Accusation framed against us. 4. I shall close
up each Point with facing together the manifest Contradictions committed by Dr.
St. in reference to the present Aspersion. Whence clearly appears, that though
I aim in the last place, only at the Contradictions committed by the Doctor
(and entitled thence my Book) yet I intended by the way to annul (as I have
annulled) out of true and solid Principles, owned by Dr. St. and his
Associates, all the Accusations he laid against us. For, what more can be
required to annul them, than to prove their condictories to be true? And hence
appears how frivolously the Dr. supposes (as in many places he seems to do)
that I have done nothing else in my whole Book, but only set down the
Contradictions committed by him: whereas of four Points, whereinto I divided
each discourse, one only is employed upon this Subject.

According to this my design, insinuated in the forementioned words; in each
Point I took two Propositions, the one contained the Charge laid upon us by the
Doctor; the other (which I proved to be opposite to the former, and is admitted
as such by Dr. St. in this first part) was granted by him, as in the respective
places I demonstrated. Neither do I see, that the Dr. as yet has denied any of
such Propositions, as far as they concern my intent: yea, we suppose now by
common consent, that he grants all such Propositions; for how can he contradict
himself in two Propositions (which is the Hypothesis we proceed upon at
present) unless he grants them both? Hence I inferred that the charges he laid
against us were false, and of no force.

The Substance of our Discourse in brief is this. If the Propositions alleged
by us above, do contradict one another; and such of them be true, and taken for
granted, as are opposite to the Charges laid against us, such Charges must
necessarily be false. But the forementioned Propositions do contradict one
another, as we have proved, and the Dr. now admits; and such of them as are
opposite to the Charges laid against us are true, and taken for granted; (for
this is the way I insisted upon, and it is supposed here, that the Dr. grants
them.) Therefore on Supposition that Dr. St. contradicts himself in the way I
insisted upon, the Charges he lays against us must necessarily be false. And
this is the common way Authors insist upon when they see, that their Adversary
grants something true in it self, and opposite to the Conclusion he has
undertaken to defend; they take for granted the former Proposition as
favorable unto them, and wherein they agree with their Adversary, and infer
thence the falsity of the later, wherein they dissent from him. But to show
also that I destroy all the Doctors Reasons too, wherewith he pretends to make
good the aforesaid Charges, I add this third Principle.

3. Whatever is brought, or can be brought in proof of a falsity; is either
false, or inconclusive. This is also evident. For there can be no true, real,
and solid proof of a falsity; according to that Maxim, Ex vero tantum non
sequitur falsum. Out of Truth alone no falsity can be legally inferred. For if
the Conclusion be false, either all the Premises are not true; or if they be
so, they do not infer the Conclusion: whence I argue thus:

If the formentioned Charges which the Doctor imputes to the Roman Church be
false, whatsoever he brings, or can bring in proof of them, is either false, or
inconclusive.

But on supposition the Dr. contradicts himself in the way I insist upon, all
such Charges are false, as has been proved.

Therefore in the same supposition, whatsoever he brings, or can bring in proof
of them, is either false or inconclusive

Whence appears how illogically Dr. St. urges, that though he should contradict
himself in the Aspersions he casts upon us, and in the way I insist upon, yet
the Reasons he produces to evidence such Aspersions are good and solid.
Wherefore I never affirmed, that merely because he contradicted himself, all
his Arguments on both sides of the contradiction were null. For one part of the
contradiction may be true, and the Arguments to prove it good and solid. True
it is, that when one contradicts himself, his proofs on both sides cannot be
good; since one part of the contradiction must needs be false; and there can be
no good proof of a falsity. What therefore I intended to show, was, That the
Dr. by contradicting common Principles owned by himself in the Charges he lays
upon us [see the Introduction to my Book] such Charges were false, and
consequently their proofs void.

Neither do I ever aver, that what he alleges in proof of the aforesaid
Charges, is determinately false, but disjunctively, that it is either false or
inconclusive. And now let any rational man judge, whether this be not a
sufficient answer to his Book, viz. not only to annul all the Charges he lays
upon us, but all the Reasons too, and Arguments wherewith he pretends to make
such Charges good, by demonstrating that on supposition he contradicts himself
in the way I insist upon, all the abovementioned Charges are void, and their
Reasons either false, or inconclusive.

But the Doctor presses that I do not answer his Reasons in particular; what
then? if I cut them off all at once, what matter is it that I do not cut them
off one by one? To destroy a house, it is of little concern whether we pull it
down Tile by Tile, Brick by Brick, and Stone by Stone, till we have laid it in
the dust, or whether undermining the Foundations, we blow it up in a moment.
Both ways are effectual to destroy a house: the difference is, that the first
is tedious, the second is quick and active. And as it would be very ridiculous
for one to say, when his house was blown up, and shivered into pieces, that
notwithstanding it was not sufficiently destroyed, because (forsooth) it was
not pulled down methodically stone after stone, and brick after brick; so it is
extreme absurd for Dr. St. to vapor, that though all the accusations he frames
against us are proved null, and all the Arguments he brings to make them out,
are shown to be false, yet his Book is not sufficiently answered, because all
his Arguments are not solved one by one, nor methodically answered.

Hence appears, that one may be secured (contrary to what Dr. St. seems to
imagine p. 29.) concerning the Truth and safety of the Roman Catholic
Religion, though he hears it charged with Idolatry by Arguments pretended to be
drawn from several Topics, whereof the Dr. makes use, without examining each
Argument in particular. For certainly the Dr. will not oblige all Christians,
if they desire to remain satisfied concerning the truth and purity of Christian
Religion, to examine in particular whatever Lucian, Porphyrius, and others of
their Gang, have objected against it; though they pretended also to draw their
Argments from the same, or the like Topics, and had as good an Opinion, and
with as much Reason too, of what they objected against Christianity, as Dr. St.
has of what he produces in opposition to the particular Tenets of Catholic
Religion.

Is it not enough to the end one may remain satisfied concerning the Truth and
safety of his Religion, notwithstanding the Objections made against it, that he
be convinced, that all such Objections are false, and all the Reasons alleged
in proof of them invalid and of no force? Now to know that such Objections are
false, it is enough to be persuaded that they contradict some common and true
Principle assented unto both by the person who is to remain satisfied, and such
as make the Objections. For, what ever contradicts the Truth, is false: and if
the Objections be false, it is evident that all their proofs are false or
impertinent: and this is the method we observed throughout our whole Treatise,
as is manifest.

The Dr. in his particular Preface descants at large against the manner
wherewith his Adversaries answer this Book of his. One man (says he) picks out
a Sentence here and there to answer; another, a page or two together: a third
leaps from one thing to another, as if resolved to pass by the greatest
difficulties: But he is a man of courage indeed, that dares fall upon the rear,
and begin to confute a Book at the end of it: So that if he lives long enough,
and get heart he may in time come to the beginning. Sure Dr. St. did expect we
should advise with him, which way we are to attack him. Let him evince, that we
do not destroy the Aspersions he casts upon us, and their proofs, and he will
do something. But when we have beaten down all his Assertions against us, and
his Arguments too, to cry out, that we have not struck him in the right place,
is very ridiculous.

This puts me in mind of what I have heard concerning a dapper young man, well
set, yet of a low stature; who trusting to a grant Buckler, wherewith he
sheltred himself, would encounter any one. Among several that worsted him, he
met with one taler than himself, who overreaching his Buckler, and giving him
two or three shrewd blows over the head, struck him to the ground together with
his Buckler. Then the poor man, after he had sprawled awhile, having recovered
himself, began to enveigh against his Adversary, saying, A Pox take ye, could
you not see my Buckler? There is no need for me to make the Application. As it
would therefore be of little comfort for us, if we have not destroyed his Book,
that we attacked him the right way: So in all reason it ought to be of little
comfort for the Dr. if we have destroyed his Book, that we did not set upon him
that way, which he imagined to be the only right and methodical way to impugn
him. Certainly Dr. St. is a happy man, if he can solace himself with such
pitiful excuses as these.

In particular he complains of N. O. and J. S. because, as he says, Genesis Pref.
page 4.40. They steal quite behind his Book, and show a particular spite at the
Dragons Tail. The reason why he says thus is, because they confute the later
end of his Book. But if they annul the part they set upon, what matters all
this? what General, who had his Army routed by the Enemy, did ever think it a
sufficient excuse, to say, That they fell upon the rear, and so routed him? And
though I do not affirm, that Dr. St's Book has neither head nor tail, yet I
may with truth aver, that his Book resembles a Monster in this, that it has the
head, where it should have the tail; for he ends with the Principles of his
Religion: whereas, according to the natural method of writing, he should have
begun not ended with them. Since therefore the Dr. ends where he should begin,
what wonder is it, that these two worthy Authors should begin, where he ends!

CHAP. II. Several Objections against the forementioned way of answering the
Dr. proved insignificant.
THis way of answering is new, as the Dr. will needs have it. Is not this to
trifle out the time, and plainly to acknowledge that he is destitute of a solid
reply? If the way I have taken be a true and an effectual way to confute his
Book (as we have shown it is) of what damage is it, that it be a new way?
Moreover, this manner of confuting I have insisted upon, cannot seem new to any
one, who is acquainted with the Schools. For though the Defendant may produce
several Reasons to establish the Conclusion he undertakes to maintain; yet the
Opponent commonly sets upon the Conclusion, without taking notice of the
Reasons; especially when he is persuaded that the Conclusion is false: and if
he destroys the Conclusion, all the Reasons produced in defense thereof, fall
to the ground. And certainly a Defendant would be laughed at, who after he had
been defeated by his Adversaries, and had his Conclusion annulled, should cry
out, Though the Conclusion be false, yet the Reasons are good and solid: or
should not be able to afford any other answer, than that the Argument made
against him was new, and never before heard of by him.

Besides, should one destroy all the Arguments one by one, wherewith his
Adversary pretends to make good the Thesis he defends; yet in rigor he would
not therefore (unless he adds some other principle) destroy the Thesis; but
only show, that the Defendant does not prove it well. But if one destroys the
Thesis (which is a more compendious way) it is evident, that he annuls all the
Reasons and Arguments brought in proof thereof. Yea, if this way of not
answering each Argument in particular, be New, I was not the Inventer of it.
For Dr. St. himself, in his Discourse of Idolatry, (which was published before
my Book saw Light) p. 558. affirms, That the Principles of Protestant Religion,
which he sets down at the end of that work, are a sufficient Answer to
Protestancy without Principles; whereas it is manifest, that in his whole
Appendix of Principles he does neither State the Controversy plainly, nor
examine the proofs that Learned Author produces, nor apply distinct Answers to
his Arguments, fairly represented in their own words: which is what he says
Protestant Writers observe, Pref. page 3. when they set themselves to Answer
our Books: And I appeal to the Judgment of any Impartial person, who has taken
the pains to peruse his late Answers to the formentioned book, Protestancy
without Prnciples, to Reason and Religion, and to the Guide in Controversy,
whether he has performed all the aforesaid Formalities, which he requires of
us, ibid. page 4. and whether he does not pick up here and there some Sentences
to Answer, or one Chapter or two together, or leaps from one thing to another,
as if resolved to pass by the greatest difficulties; or omits whole Discourses,
as the fourth and fifth Discourse in the Guide in Controversy: All these
little Arts and Shifts in us (sais the Dr.) are either plain Acknowledgments of
a baffled Cause, or an Argument of a weak and unskilful Management. Whereas all
these very same Arts in the Dr. must be pregnant proofs of a good Cause, and of
a skilful management thereof.

But some will say, That Dr. St. may be permitted to answer as he please, and
without tying himself to the abovementioned Formalities; because he has learned
a secret proper to himself, to draw off all the spirit of a book in two or
three lines, (Pref. Genesis page 30.) and all the rest he leaves behind, ( viz.
all that he cannot Answer, which is the far greatest part of his Adversaries
Books) is only Phlegm, and Caput mortuum. But we, poor Souls, to whom Dr. St.
has not as yet had the Charity to impart this Secret, unless we answer his book
Chapter by Chapter, Paragraph by Paragraph, and Point by Point, we do nothing.
Whoever desires to see more concerning Dr. St. 's manner of writing, let him
read the First Letter, written by the Worthy Author of Some General
Observations upon Dr. St. 's Book, and way of Writing.

Now the true reason why Dr. St. frets so much at my manner of dealing with
him, seems to be, because he thought it a disparagement, that so little a Book
should be published against so great a Dr. and that I should compel him, in no
more than a sheet and a half, to fall foul on himself, and to be his own
Executioner. The Dr. seems to be in the vulgar Error of such, as measure Books
by their Bulks, and Imagine, that in a little book, such as he styles Rats and
Flies, there can be no great thing. But he must know, that a Rat can overcome
an Elephant, and that Flies have been able to rout vast Armies.

Hence any one may see, what Motives I had, to take this way of Answering Dr.
St. whereof he will needs make so great a Mystery. My intention was to dispatch
him in short, and to set forth a little Book against him: which I could never
have performed, should I have answered all his Arguments one by one, and
observed all the other Formalities, he will needs oblige us to. Besides, the
Conveniences of a little book are very great. It is easily made, easily
Printed, easily bought, and easily read: and consequently thereby are spared
two precious things, Time and Money. About a Thousand Copies of Dr.
Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet went off in three weeks or a month, and
had I Printed as many more, I might have dispatched them all: On the contrary,
a great Volume cannot be made without great labor, nor Printed without great
Expenses: and when it is made and Printed, few buy it, and fewer have time or
patience to read it over. A Pestilent Book may be dashed at the beginning with
a short Paper, before it spreads its Venom: but this being once spread, a
whole Volume will scarce suffice to quell it. A Pail of Water may quench a
Fire, before it extends itself: whereas a far greater quantity will not be
effectual to a vert its fury, if it once makes it self master of a house.

But you will say, (as many do) that some deny the Roman Church to be a true
Church; which is to destroy, and pull down the very stress, whereon is builded
our whole Discourse. I say also, that many deny the Ancient Fathers; others,
all General Councils; and others, the very Scripture it self: nay what is
there, that some do not deny? May we not therefore Argue well out of Fathers,
Councils and Scriptures, against such as admit these Topics? Neither is it
necessary to prove always our Conclusion out of General Principles, which all,
or most, agree unto: otherwise we should never argue in matters of Religion out
of certain Books of Scripture, which Jews, and some Sectaries do deny, against
such as do allow of those Books. Particular Principles come nearer the
Conclusion we pretend to prove: and consequently, if they be true, and assented
unto, by both parties, they carry us a shorter way to the Truth we aim at.

Moreover, though some deny the Roman Church to be a true Church, yet many
grant it; and it is the Sense of the English Church, and the Persuasion of all
Learned Protestants, as many of their own Profession aver, according to what we
have quoted in Dr. Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet, page 3, 4. Dr. St.
himself assents unto it, Fanatics approve of it, and Latitudinarians, who
maintain all Religions to be true, stoutly defend it; and many times they seem
angry with us, that we should question, whether they grant our Church to be a
True Church. Of those, who profess themselves Christians in England, only some
rigid Presbyterians deny it: yea, the title of Reformers of the Roman Religion,
which Mother Sectaries take upon them, does manifestly imply, that the Roman
Religion and the Reformed Religion as they style it, is the same in substance,
and different only in Accidentals: and consequently if theirs be true, ours
must also be true: for it is impossible, that a true Church, and not a true
Church, should be the same in Substance. To Reform a Church is not to destroy
its Essence, but to redress its Disorders. The Apostles were not sent to Reform
Paganism: and why? because they Destroyed it; bringing in, in lieu thereof,
Christian Religion, of a different Substance and Nature. The fire destroys
wood, and Refines Gold; because it changes the very Substance of Wood into
Ashes; but it only takes away the dross of Gold, and leaves its Substance, and
Essence untouched.

Dealing therefote with the forementioned Persons, as in this Treatise I do, I
might with much reason take that proposition for granted; and should I
encounter an Adversary, who denies the Roman Church to be a true Church, I
would set upon him another way, and prove it to be a True Church: which is not
hard to do. For different ways are to be taken with different Adversaries, and
what is a solid proof against one, is of no force against another. I confess
therefore, that all the Arguments I have framed against Dr. St. grounded upon
this Principle, The Roman Church is a true Church are of no force, with such as
deny That Principle, unless first I prove it. In the same manner all the
Arguments, grounded upon the Authority of the Fathers, and Councils, are of no
force against Fanatics, who slight the Fathers and Councils, unless their
Authority be first established.

Hence appears, how insignificantly Dr. St. and his Cabal, threaten us that if
we press them out of this Principle, The Roman Church is a True Church, freely
granted by them; they will deny it, and fall back from what they have yielded
unto; and that we shall get nothing else thereby, but to make them less
Charitable toward us, and the difference between us wider. For in the same
manner they might threaten us, when we argue against them out of Councils and
Fathers, admitted by them, that if we press them they will deny their
Authority: Neither should any one press another out of Scripture, though
granted by him; for fear, least if he be pressed, he will deny Scripture, and
become a Turk, or a Pagan. Nay, since one cannot convince another, but out of
what he has assented unto, were this way of dealing warrantable, any one might
easily elude all Arguments whatsoever. For either we urge our Adversary, or
not: if not, how shall we convince him? if so, he may stave off the Conviction,
according to Dr. St. 's manner of dealing, by threatening us, that if we urge
him, we shall get only this of him, that he will deny what already he has
granted, Doubtless the Scholars of the Illustrious University of Cambridge
would be ashamed of their Dr. St. should they hear him say, in a public
Dispute to his Adversary, Do not press me; for if you do, I Will deny what I have
already granted.

Finally, since this Assertion, The Roman Church is a True Church, is common,
assented unto, not only by Catholics, but also by Protestants of the English
Church, and others of different Professions, as we have seen: But this other,
The Roman Church is Idolatrous, is denied both by Catholics, and several
learned and zealous Protestants: and since either the one, or the other of
these Assertions is to be recalled, supposing they contradict one another, it is
more reasonable to recall the latter, than the former, because caeteris paribus,
particular Sentiments are to yield to common Principles, when they run Counter.

But what is the reason, that Dr. St. who professes himself a mortal enemy to
the Roman Church, does not deny it to be a true Church, recalling what
heretofore he has asserted? yea, he is so far from recalling it, that he
ratifies, and grants several times, in this Examination of my book, in plain
terms, what he had affirmed in his Rational Account, that the Roman Church is a
True Church. I insinuated in my Book, in the place above quoted, several
motives, why Dr. St. and his Associates, do unanimosly aver the Roman Church to
be a True Church: Because upon this account they ground the pretended
Moderation and Charity of the English Churh, wherewith they endeavor to
inveigle unwary minds: and if they deny the Roman Church to be a true Church,
either they must confess that there was no true visible Church in the world for
many hundred of years be- Luther and Calvin's time, or they are shrewdly put to
it when we urge them to show us which that true visible Church was, distinct
from the Roman.

Yet another particular reason moved Dr. St. not to recall what he had asserted
concerning the Truth of the Roman Church. For he could not but see that should
he deny the Roman Church to be a true Church, he must either deny the
Protestant Church to be a true Church, or seek out other grounds to prove the
truth thereof different from those he laid down in his Rational Account. For
the Discourse he makes in that Book to establish the truth of the Protestant
Religion in substance is this: Whatever Church holds all such points as were
held by all Christian Societies of all Ages, and acknowledged by Rome it self;
has all that is necessary to the being of a true Church, and by Consequence is
a True Church. But such is the Protestant Church, as he affirms: Therefore
according to his Principles it is a true Church. And descending to particulars,
he says, That all Churches, which admit the Ancient Creeds (as the Roman Church
evidently does) are true Churches.

Now these Principles whereon the Dr. bottoms the truth of Protestancie, do
necessarily imply that the Roman Church is a true Church. For, either the Roman
Church acknowledges what is sufficient to constitute the being of a true Church
or not; if she does, she must necessarily be a true Church. If she does not,
how can Dr. St. assert, That the Roman Church, with other Christian Societies
acknowledges what is sufficient to constitute the being of a true Church?
Wherefore, unless Dr. St. grants the Roman Church to be a true Church, that
Principle whereon he grounds the truth of Protestancie, viz. That it admits
whatsoever is admitted by all Christian Societies, and acknowledged by Rome it
self, is of no force. So that unless Dr. St. maintains the truth of the Roman
Church, he must either confess that Protestancie is no true Religion, and that
the Account he has hitherto given concerning the grounds of Protestancy, is
void and irrational; or seek out other Principles to prove it. Now if Dr. St.
has such a pike against the Roman Church, that to the end he may prove her
Idolatrous, or no true Church; he cares not to unchurch Protestancy, or at
least to cancel whatever he has yet said to show, that it is a True Religion; I
conceive that Protestants will give him little thanks for his pains. But the
truth is, that Dr. St. if we reflect well upon his works, cares not what
becomes of Protestancy, nor Christianity neither; so that he may, according to
his fancy, destroy Popery. But we care as little for his attempts, if he cannot
destroy Popery, without undermining Christianity.

The Dr. seems, in several places of his Answer, slily to insinuate, as if he
had only been heretofore of opinion, that the Roman Church is a true Church;
but that now he has altered his Opinion: and it can be no disparagement for a
man to recall what heretofore he asserted. To this purpose he alleges, page 16.
the Recognitions of Bellarmin, who, in imitation of St. Augustine, retracted
some former Errors delivered by him. But where, I pray, has D. St. made any
book of Recognitions, recalling his former Errors? though he might make a just
Volume upon that Subject, and begin it with the Recantation of what he sets
down in his Irenicon, destructive to the Episcopal Dignity; which he is loath to
do; for he sees, that book endeared him to the Presbyterian party; whom he
seems to Court. I confess, that it is no blemish for a man, when he is better
informed, to recall the Errors which heretofore he assented unto. For, to err,
is a frailty of men; but to persevere obstinately in an Error, (as necessarily
he must do, who persists in a palpable Contradiction) is a brutish obstinacy:
and what greater disparagement than this can there be for a rational man!

Now Dr. St. not only heretofore, but even in this present book, after he had
Charged the Roman Church with gross Idolatry, affirms, that she is a true
Church, (as shall hereafter appear) without having ever yet recalled that
Proposition: and consequently he persists to contradict himself, as he now
admits.

Whence follows, that the Allegation of Bellarmin's Recognitions, or
Recantations was nothing to the purpose. For it is as if one should argue thus;
Bellarmin, though he erred, yet because he recalled his Errors, making a Book
of Recognitions, did not lose his Reputation, neither did he deserve, that we
should slight what he says: Therefore Dr. St. who has erred, and does persist
to err, who has, and does still contradict himself, without ever having
recalled his Errors, does not deserve we should slight what he affirms: or
thus: Saint Peter, though he sinned grievously, yet because he did sincerely
repent, was a great Saint: Therefore such as have sinned grievously, and never
repent, are great Saints. Let Dr. St. imitate Bellarmin, and recall his former
Errous, and he will lose nothing, no, not his Authority: which notwithstanding,
as he himself affirms, Self-contradiction being once proved, especially if it
be insisted upon, is utterly overthrown.

But we must reflect, That such as recall their former Opinions, or Tenets, are
in two sorts. Some recall Tenets heretofore assented unto, because they find
them inconsistent with Errors, which they are resolved to defend; as if one
(for instance) who being not able to vindicate the General Principles of
Christianity, without confessing the particular Tenets of the Roman Church to
be true, should out of hatred to such particular Tenets, deny the General
principles of Christianity; which before he had yielded unto. Such men as
these, are far from deserving any Commendation, for recalling their former
persuasions; but rather show an inveterate obstinacy, and odium against the
Truth: and amongst such men, Dr. St. must be enrolled, should he, to defend the
Idolatry of the Roman Church, deny her to be a true Church, contrary to the
Truth he has so often acknowledged, and to the very Grounds, whereon he builds
the truth of Protestancy. For, though I do not allow of his Grounds, yet I
Assent to the Truth of the Roman Catholic Religion; which is evidently thence
inferred.

Others, to embrace the Truth, which in process of time they have discovered,
recall former Tenets, contrary thereunto, as St. Augustine, and Bellarmin did: So
do many, who finding Protestant Religion to be false, relinquish it, and
embrace the Roman, opposite thereunto. Such men as these show great ingenuity,
and sincerity; and by revoking such Opinions, with all Wise men, rather gain,
than lose Authority, or Reputation. And among these men Dr. St. would deserve
to be listed, if he would be pleased to recant, and declare plainly to the
world, that when he Charged the Roman Church with Idolatry, Fanaticism,
Divisions in matters of Faith, danger of Salvation in her Communion, and other
Corruptions, he over shot himself, as several, even of his own Friends, confess
he did, at least in the Charge of Idolatry.

Besides, when one recalls an Opinion, as inconsistent with the Truth, to which
he had heretofore assented, he also virtually recalls all the proofs thereof,
acknowledging them to be either false, or unconcluding. And since what St.
Augustine, and Bellarmin stood to after their Retractations, contradicted what
they held before, it is manifest, that their proofs, either on the one side or
other, were void: and consequently, recalling such Opinions, they recalled
also, their proofs of them. And here I cannot but reflect, that Dr. St. seems
to list me ( page 14.) among such as he terms Revolters from the Church of
England. Thanks be to God, I was bred a Roman Catholic: my Parents and
Ancestors were of the same Religion, and suffered much for their constancy
therein. And I can assure the Dr. that for all I have seen in him, I am so far
from being startled in my Religion, that I am rather confirmed therein. For a
weak impugnation of the Truth is a confirmation thereof: and if God shall be
pleased to give me his Grace, not to quit the General Principles of
Christianity, I shall never, upon the account of what Dr. St. says, relinquish
the particular Tenets of the Catholic Church.

Many ask me, what matters it, that Dr. St. palpably contradicts himself, and
persists so to do? which is the same as if they should ask me, what matters it
if Dr. St. be a Madman? And to say the truth, it matters very little for the
Public good, that he be so: but it matters very much, that being so, he should
be commonly reputed a Wiseman. For, what greater damage can be imagined, than
that the people be guided by a Madman in affairs of so great concern, as those
of Religion are? Neither can one do a greater service to the Commonwealth,
than to discover their Guides to be mad, if really they be so. Neither can
there be a better way to discover it, than by showing they grant, and persist
to grant, palpable Contradictions.

Moreover, they might say the same, in case I had attacked any other particular
Doctor of the Protestant Church; (for Dr. St. carries as great a vogue as any
other) asking me, what matters it, if I force such a Doctor to manifest
Contradictions; and by consequence bring him to a Nonplus? So that were this
Objection justifiable, it would prove, that it is of no concern, to defeat, and
bring to a Nonplus any particular Adversary: which is certainly false, and
repugnant to the common practice of all Learned and Zealous men.

Besides, had I proved only, that the Charges which Dr. St. says upon us, did
contradict some particular Tenet, held only by the Dr. and some few of his
Partisans; though that would have been sufficient to have baffled him, yet it
would not have been of so great moment. But I have shown, that the Aspersions
he casts upon us, do contradict General Principles, assented unto, not only by
Dr. St. and all Roman Catholics, but also by all Learned Protestants, Members
of the English Church, and by many others of different Professions: and
consequently I convince all such, that the forementioned Aspersions are false,
as being repugnant to True and General Principles granted by them: and that
whatever is produced in proof of them, is false, or impertinent. And what more
can be required, in order to wipe of, from the minds of such persons, the
aforesaid Calumnies!

CHAP. III. Other Objections Answered.
BY what hitherto has been discussed, it plainly appears, that the instance of
a Lawyer at the Bar, alleged page 16. by Dr. St. is of no force against us:
Because, should a Lawyer produce at the Bar no other proof, but such as is
repugnant, not only to his own particular Tenets, but also to the common
persuasion of the Judges, and of all the Learned Lawyers of the Kingdom; yea
and to the unanimous consent of the Parliament; sure his proofs would be held
for frivolous. This is what succeeds in our present Case. Dr. St. Charges us
with Crimes, repugnant, as he himself now admits, to this Principle, The Roman
Church is a True Church, not only granted by him, and all Roman Catholics, but
also by all Learned Divines of the English Church, as suitable to her Sense,
and Doctrine, as they themselves confess, and by several other of different
Professions. All such persons therefore (and these are all with whom we now
disp^ (...) hold the forementioned Accusations for void, and frivolous.

Moreover, should a Lawyer plead to prove one to be a notorious Traitor, and
yet at the same time should plainly declare at the Bar, that he is, and has
ever been, a Loyal, and faithful Subject, could Dr. St. or any other, think,
that any account were to be made of such a Barrister; who should so openly
Contradict himself? This is what the Dr. does. He pleads to show our Church to
be Idolatrous, and yet at the same time he sincerely confesses, that she is a
true Church, standing to what he has formerly asserted: and he admits at the
present that the forementioned Accusation contradicts this his Assertion, as
really it does, no less then these two Propositions do contradict one another.
Such a man is a notorious Traitor, but yet he is a faithful Subject. What
account therefore can any prudent man make of this Accusation of Dr. St. or
consequently of the proofs he alleges in favor thereof?

Finally, though a Lawyer may be permitted, when required thereunto, by his
Clyent, after he has informed him of his Judgment, to propose all the proofs he
can in his favor, though his particular opinion be, that his Clyent has no
right to what he pretends; because the Judge, who is to decide the Plea, may be
of a contrary persuasion. Yet sure Dr. St. will not affirm, that what he
produces in his discourse concerning the Idolatry of the Roman Church, is only
to show (in order to ingratiate himself with the Presbyterians) what may be
said upon that Subject; and not because he is of opinion, that the Roman Church
is Idolatrous. For if so, he might as well have published some book against the
Divinity of our Savior, or against a Deity, as he has published the
forementioned Discourse, to prove the Roman Church Idolatrous; and then tell
us, if he be urged, that having received a Fee from Socinians, or Atheists, he
did it only to show, what might be said against the Divinity of our Savior, or
a Deity, and not because he is of opinion that there is no God, or that Christ
is no God. Yea, he might say in like manner, that what ever he has produced
hitherto, to prove the truth, and Orthodoxness of the Protestant Religion, was
only to show (to the end he might promote his Interest among Protestants) what
might be alleged in favor of their Religion; and not that he thinks it True,
and Orthodox.

The Dr. seems to value much a Case he produces, page 20. in order to show the
Insufficiency of our manner of Answering him: his words are these; I will put a
Case parallel to this. Suppose one of the Church of Judah should have called
the Church of Israel, in the time of Jeroboam, a true Church, because they
acknowledged the true God, and did believe an agreement in that common
acknowledgment to be sufficient, to preserve the Essentials of a Church among
them; and afterward the same person should go about to convince the Ten Tribes
of their Idolatry in worshipping God by the Calves of Dan and Bethel. Would
this be thought a sufficient way of Answering him, to say that he contradicted
himself by granting them a True Church, and yet charging them with Idolatry?
Whereas the only true Consequence would be, that he thought some kind of
Idolatry to be consistent with the being of a Church. He adds, that such a
person might justly say, that they made a very ill use of his Charity; and that
if they could prove to him, that the Idolatry he fathered upon them, did
Vn-church them; the Consequence of it would be, that his Charity must be so
much the less, and that he must deny them to be a true Church. This is Dr.
St.'s Case; whereby he pretends to evince the invalidity of our manner of
Answering him.

But before I examine this Case of the Dr. I will put a Case Parallel to ours,
to show, that the way we have taken to Answer him is sufficient. Suppose that a
Jew, (for why may not a Jew be as Charitable, and Zealous too, as Dr. St. and
yet Contradict himself, as he does?) should, out of a pretended zeal, Charge
Christian Religion, even when it was in its greatest purity, with the same kind
of Idolatry, as Dr. St. fastens upon us; and that notwithstanding at the same
time, carried away with the like Charity, as the Dr. is, should confess, that
Christian Religion was then, not only a True Religion, but also a Pure, Safe,
and Sound Religion: and with such a Religion even Dr. St. affirms, the Idolatry
he Charges us with, yea all kind of Idolatry, to be inconsistent, as will
appear hereafter. Now in this Case might not the Dr. in vindication of
Christian Religion, say and prove too, (for I do not aver, as he seems to
insinuate, that it is enough to say he is guilty of self-contradiction, unless
one proves it) that such a man did contradict himself, in granting Christian
Religion to be a true and sound Religion, and yet Charging it with Idolatry?
Could he rationally say, that the only true Consequence in that case would be,
not that such a person contradicted himself, but that he thought some kind of
Idolatry to be consistent, not only with the Being, but also with the Soundness
of a Church? or should he think so, would he not therefore contradict himself?
and having proved to him, that the Idolatry he fathered upon the Christian
Religion, was destructive to the Soundness of a Religion, would the Consequence
be, that the Charity of such a person must be so much the less, and that he
must deny hereafter the soundness of Christian Religion? Would it not be a
suffient way of Answering such a man, to demonstrate unto him, that the Charge
of Idolatry cast by him upon Christian Religion was false; and consequently
that what ever he produced in proof thereof, was void? and to demonstrate this
unto him, would not be enough to show, that such a charge did contradict a
Principle, viz. the Soundness of Christian Religion, true in it self, and
assented unto by both parties?

This is just our case with Dr. St. For, as that Jew does contradict himself,
by granting Christian Religion to be a sound Religion, and yet charging it with
Idolatry; So Dr. St. Contradicts himself, by affirming the Roman Church to be a
true Church, and yet Idolatrous, as we have proved, and he now admits: and as
it would doubtless be a sufficient way of answering that Jew, to prove unto
him, that the charge of Idolatry he laid upon Christian Religion, was false, as
contradicting a Principle true in it self, and assented unto by both parties:
So the way we have taken to answer Dr. St. being the very same, must needs be
sufficient: and finally the Quibbles Dr. St. makes at our manner of Answering
are, or might be made, by the forementioned Jew, at the like manner of
Answering him; and consequently they are insignificant in both Cases, or in
neither.

Now to the Case proposed by Dr. St. my Answer is, That it would be a
sufficient way to Answer that person of Judah, for those of Israel to prove to
him, as the easily might, that if the Church of Israel was, in those times, a
True Church, as they both affirmed, though erroneously, it was not Idolatrous:
and that if it was not Idolatrous, what ever he alleged to prove it such, was
void, and of no force. This, I say, would have been a sufficient way of
Answering that person of Judah; but not others, who deny, as we do, the Church
of Israel to have retained, in that time, the Essentials of a true Church: and
it is no wonder, that what is a sufficient Answer to one, be not a sufficient
Answer to another; Because different Adversaries go upon different Principles.

Let Us now see, what Answer the Dr. makes to the Instance I produced, of a
Witness, page 1.14. who being once Convinced of Self-Contradiction in the
evidence he alleges, renders himself unworthy to be heard any more in the
Court; at least till he has repaired his Reputation; and whatever he produces
void and of no force: Besides, the condign punishment he is liable unto. To
this Dr. St. Answers, ingenuously confessing, as has been hinted above, page
15. That Self contradiction, being proved, overthrows the Authority of the
person, who stands convicted thereof, and where things depend merely upon
Authority, it is a good Argument; and nowhere else. I willingly accept of what
Dr. St. so liberally grants; and hence conclude, that if he contradicts
himself, (as we both now suppose he does) all his Quotations, and all the
Arguments he grounds upon them, (and he has scarce any Argument, which is not
grounded upon some Quotation or other) signify nothing, because they depend
merely upon his Authority; which, as he confesses, is overthrown by
Self-contradiction: neither does he deserve to be heard any more in matters
that depend of Authority, till he has recruited his Credit. All this, according
to Dr. St.'s own confession, follows from Self-contradiction once proved
against him. And though one may seek out the Testimonies he aledges in their
proper fountains; at least till then, and till one has found them to be
faithfully quoted, (and who has examined all his Quotations?) he is not bound
to give any credit unto them: and should one take the pains to examine the
Testimonies he alleges in their proper places, he would easily see, that they
are either frivolous, or false; as the Learned Author of Catholics no
Idolaters, who was pleased to examine some of them, has already partly
discovered.

Besides no body in prudence can think himself bound to examine in their proper
places, the allegations of one, who is evidently convicted of
Self-contradiction: As for instance (to go on in the same similitude of a
Witness) should one, before a judge, impeach another of High Treason, and in
proof thereof name the accomplices, and alledg, that there might be found in such
a place of his house, store of Arms, and in his Closet Letters of secret
Intelligence with Rebels, and Traitors; yet withal should manifestly
contradict himself, averring before the same Judge, and at the same time, that
the person, whom he impeached of Treason, was, and had always been, a faithful
Subject to his Majesty: Can Dr. St. imagine in this case, that such a judge
would be bound, upon the mere Testimony of a Witness, who had so palpably
Contradicted himself, to send Officers to Apprehend the Conspiratours named by
him, and to search the house of the person impeached, to see whether what the
Witness alleged, was true or not? or rather, that he ought not in prudence to
look upon the Evidence of such a Witness as null, and of no force; no less than
if a Madman had put in the like accusation. And yet such a Witness might plead
for himself in the same terms, wherein Dr. St. pretends to vindicate his own
proceedings.

For he might say, That though he should contradict himself, it does not
therefore follow, (as certainly it does not) that all his Evidences are false,
and whatever he shall hereafter say in the same matter, invalid. That he never
was so vain, as to make use of his own authority, to prove a thing to be true,
because he believed it; or that his saying alone makes a thing to be true. That
he does not desire any one to follow his Opinion, because it is his; but he
offers evidences for proof of what he says assigning the places, where they
may find manifest Arguments of Treason. That if these be good, and true in
themselves, they do not therefore cease to be so, because they are inconsistent
with what he says in favor of the person he impeaches. That such persons, as
are constituted by public Authority, as all Judges are, to provide for the
security of his Majesty's Royal Person, when they hear one impeached of High
Treason, the Accomplices nominated, and the place assigned, where the Instruments
of the conjuration may be found, ought not presently to conclude, all these
Allegations are false, and of no force, merely because the person who makes use
of them, does judge so charitably of the Traitor, as to suppose, he still
retains the Essentials of a Faithful Subject; and that therefore they make very
ill use of his Charity; but however, that they are more concerned in proving
the person he impeached, not guilty of Treason, than he is in defending his
Charitable Opinion of him: That what they will get by charging him with
Contradiction, is only, that hereafter he shall not think so Charitably of the
persons he impeaches. Finally, that when he says, that such a person, whom he
impeaches, is a Traitor, but yet a faithful, and loyal Subject, the only true
Consequence, that thence may be inferred, is, not that he contradicts himself,
but that he thinks, some kind of High Treason to be consistent with Loyalty;
and that if they could prove to him, all sorts of High Treason to be
inconsistent with Loyalty, the Consequence of it would be, that his Charity
must be so much the less, but the danger would be the same.

Behold here the Vindication of the forementioned Witness, drawn up in the same
terms, and upon the same grounds, whereon Dr. St. in his Controversy, builds
his own Vindication. And yet what prudent man is there, that would not look
upon the aforesaid Vindication of a Witness, convicted of such a manifest
Self-contradiction, as frivolous and insignificant? Yea, we have showed
already, upon another account, that on supposition he contradicts himself in
the way I insist upon, all his Arguments grounded either upon Authority, or
mere Reason (if he has any such) wherewith he pretends to make good the Charges
cast upon us, are false, or impertinent. The same is to be affirmed of whatever
he shall hereafter object against our Church in matters of Faith; as long as he
holds it to be a True Church. For nothing can be objected against our Church in
that kind, which does not contradict the forementioned Principle.

Now it is very pretty to consider, how the Dr. sports with the forementioned
instance of a Witness, whereof I made use; grounding all his quibbles upon so
gross an ignorance, as is to confound Parities with identities, and the being
one thing like to another, with being the same: which Topic is very frequent
in the Dr.'s Books. For, because a Witness must make an Affidavit before the
Masters of the Chancery, he presently fancies, that a Writer of Controversies,
supposing this parity to be good, must make an Affidavit, and no other
Obligation will suffice him, before Masters of the Court of Controversies: and
because whatever is said by a Witness at the Bar, is taken upon his Oath, he
imagins, in the same supposition, that whatever a Writer of Controversy says,
must be taken also upon his Oath, and in no other manner: and because a
Witness, who stands Convicted to have forsworn himself, according to the Laws
of this Kingdom, is to be set in the Pillory, p. 27. with his Accusation on his
Forehead, he imagines himself, as being proved guilty of Self-contradiction, to
be set in the Pillory, with this Accusation on his forehead, Dr. Stillingfleet
against Dr. Stillingfleet; not being able to conceive, that any other
punishment can be inflicted upon one, who contradicts himself in matters of
moment. Are not these Fancies of Dr. St. wonderfully witty? what fine Stuff
will the Dr. make with Scripture, wherein Christ is compared to a Worm, to a
Door, to a Lamb, to Lion, and to several other things, infinitely below his
Greatness, if he be permitted to use this manner of quibbling, and to make
identities, of parities, or Parables.

Had not the Dr. made it his Study not to understand us, he might clearly have
seen, that what we intended by the aforesaid instance was, that whoever stands
convicted to have Contradicted himself most notoriously in matters of so great
concern, as those of Religion are, deserves no credit should be given him in
such matters, till he has recanted his Error; which the Dr. himself does
grant. I am not acquainted with the Style of the English Church, nor of our
Universities; yet I conceive, that there would be no absurdity, nor any thing
done contrary to the practice of other Countries, and Universities, that
Doctors of Divinity, and public Preachers, should take their Oath, to Teach
and Preach the Truth in matters of Religion: And in this Case, should they
palpably contradict themselves, they would be guilty of Perjury. And though
they do not take their Oaths, yet a natural Obligation lies upon every one, not
to commit gross Contradictions in matters of so high concern.

Some there are, who though they confess, that the way we have taken is
sufficient to confound our Adversaries; yet because they think we argue ad
hominem, they do not look upon this way as effectual, to clear the Roman Church
from the Aspersions cast upon her: For Arguments ad hominem are good to
confound an Adversary, but not to evince the Truth.

To this I Answer, that an Argument ad hominem, properly speaking, is, when one
proceeds upon a Principle, which he judges to be false; yet because it is
granted by his Adversary, he endeavors to confute him thereby. As for example,
when a Catholic argues against a Protestant, out of such Versions of the
Protestant Bible, which are false, and contrary to the Chatholick Bible, to
confute the particular Tenets of Protestancy: whence I conclude, that the way I
made use of against Dr. St. was not properly ad hominem: For I proceeded upon a
Principle, which I my self, with all other Roman Catholics, and several others
of different professions, hold to be true; viz. The Roman Church is a true
Church; and which is granted by Dr. St. Neither is it of any concern, that some
deny the Roman Church to be a true Church; For if all Arguments are ad hominem,
which are grounded upon some premise, that is denied by some, almost all
Arguments are ad hominem. For what is there, that some do not deny? Should I
have defeated all Dr. St.'s Objections out of plain Scripture, admitted both by
him and us, no body could rationally have objected, that I did argue only ad
hominem, or slight my proofs upon that account: and yet how many are there,
that deny the very Scripture; which we, and Dr. St. agree upon!

To close up therefore the first part of my Reply; By what hitherto has been
laid down, it evidently appears, that on supposition Dr. St. contradicts
himself in the way I insict upon, not only all the Charges, of Idolatry,
Fanatiscisme, danger of Salvation in our Communion, and Divisions in matters of
Faith, which he pretends to fasten upon our Church, fall to nothing; but also
all the proofs, whether drawn from Authority, or Reason, wherewith he
endeavors to make good such Charges, are invalidated, and annulled: which is
all I did pretend in my Answer to the Dr. and whether this be not a sufficient
Answer to his Book, I leave to the judgment of any judicious man whatsoever.
Yea the Dr. himself, being Conscious (as it seems) how ill a cause he had,
should he grant himself guilty of Self-contradiction in matters of so great
Concern; passing to the second part of his pretended Answer, says thus, page
17. I had best stand upon my defense, and utterly deny that I have contradicted
my self in any thing, in which J Ws. has charged me. And to pass also unto the
second part of my Reply, let us now consider, how he does vindicate himself from
the Contradictions charged upon him.

CHAP. IV. The Evasions of the Dr. to clear himself from Self-contradiction, in
Charging the Roman Church with Idolatry; Examined.
COncerning the clearing himself from Contradiction, in imputing to the Roman
Church Idolatry, and yet granting her to be a True Church, he says, page 18.
That he never vindicated the Church of Rome from Idolatry, in his Defense of
Archbishop Lawd; which is the Book, wherein he confesses the Church of Rome to
be a true Church. But what does he mean by saying, That he never vindicated the
Church of Rome from Idolatry? does he mean, that he never writ any Treatise on
this Subject? That I confess to be true. But sure, to commit Contradiction it is
not necessary to have written Treatises in vindication of each, or either part
of the Contradiction. Had he said in express terms, The Church of Rome is a
true Church, and is not a true Church, would he not have Contradicted himself,
unless he had published Books, or Treatises, in defense of the one or the other
part of such a palpable Contradiction, as this? To Contradict ones self it is
enough to affirm, and to deny the same thing, although he has never writ, or
produced Arguments to prove the one or the other part. Does he therefore mean,
that in defense of Archbishop Lawd, he has not laid down any Principle, nor
asserted any thing; which, if true, does not clear the Church of Rome from
Idolatry: and consequently contradicts the Charg he lays upon her, in his
Discourse of Idolatry? This I have shown to be false; because in the Defense of
Archbishop Lawd, he grants the Church of Rome to be a true Church: which
concession does evidently clear her from Idolatry, wherewith he charges her in
his other Book: neither has he yet vindicated himself from this Contradiction;
as we shall see by examining the shifts, whereby he pretends to clear himself,
page 18.

He adds in the same place, that it fell out very happily, that in his Defense
of Archbishop Lawd, page 596.606. he had made a Discourse to the same purpose,
proving the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry, in the Invocation of Saints, and
the Worship of Images. But what does this help to show, that what he says in
his Defense of Archbishop Lawd does not contradict what he Asserts in his
Discourse of Idolatry; which is his main design in the present Answer? Is not
this, as if one should have affirmed, what Dr. St. says in one part of his
Defense of the Archbishop, does contradict what he says in another part of the
same Book. Therefore what he says in his Defense of the Archbishop, does not
contradict what he asserts in his Discourse of Idolatry? Is not Dr. St. like to
have a good cause, if such Inferences as these be warrantable. To contradict
himself in the very self same Book is more detestable, and can be no medium to
prove, that he does not contradict himself in different Books. Neither was I
ignorant of the forementioned contradiction, committed by him in his former
Book: but because my Design in Dr. Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet was,
to annul the Charges laid upon the Roman Church in his Discourse of Idolatry, I
took notice only of the Contradiction between his former Book and latter
Discourse; never intending to deny, that in the same book he did contradict
himself. For the Dr. does so stuff up his works with Contradictions, that it is
not necessary to turn over many Books, nay nor many Chapters, nor (sometimes)
many leaves, to meet with them.

He says farther in the same page 18. that I do not pretend to gather out of
his Books any Contradiction in Terms, or a Formal Affirmation and Negation of
the same Object; but only by Consequence: and I desire to know of him, whether,
if I do show, as I have already shown, That what he asserts in his Rational
Account, does by good Consequence contradict, and annul the Charges laid upon
us in his Discourse of Idolatry; All those Inferences mentioned above, which
follow from Self-contradiction in the way I insist upon, do not by good
consequence fall heavy upon him? and if so, whether this be not enough to
confute him?

To declare the better the inanity of these Evasions he makes use of, to
Vindicate himself from Contradictions; let us put case, that one, who
heretofore had confessed Dr. St. to be an Honest man; should now, upon some pick,
although retaining yet the former good opinion of his honesty, affirm him to be
a Knave; and that some of the Dr.'s Friends, to vindicate him from so foul an
Aspersion, should charge his Adversary, as justly they might, with
Contradiction, in affirming Dr. St. to be an Honest man, and yet a Knave; can
he, or any one else, imagine, that such a man would sufficiently clear himself
from the Crime of Contradiction, by saying, That he never vindicated the
Honesty of Dr. St. although he has heretosore, and did still, hold him to be an
Honest man; That it had happily fallen out, that when heretofore he
acknowledged him to be an honest man, even at the same time he had published
him for a Knave; and finally, that to say he is an Honest man, and yet a Knave,
is no Formal Contradiction in terms,; since he does not Formally say that he
is, and is not, an Honest man; or affirm, and deny the same thing? This Case is
parallel to the Vindication Dr. St. makes here for himself; and so clear, that
any one, without difficulty, may make the Application: And yet there is no more
Contradiction in affirming that one is an Honest man, and yet a Knave, than in
saying, that the same Church is a True Church, and yet Idolatrous: and the
Contradiction in both Cases is so palpable, that it appears to any one, who
understands what he says, without needing to draw it out by Consequences.

In the next page, in order to the farther clearing himself from
Self-contradiction, page 19. he carges me with Disingenuity; because (forsooth)
as he says, I barely oppose a judgment of Charity concerning our Church, (such
he styles this Concession of his, The Roman Church is a true Church) to a
judgment of Reason concerning the nature of Actions: and such he will needs
have this his Assertion to be, The Roman Church is an Idolatrous Church. Is not
this a pretty way to save all Contradictions, let them be never so palpable?
For, in all Contradictions the one part is favorable; which upon thaat ccount
may be called a Judgment of Charity, or Kindness; and consequently, according
to this excellent Principle of Dr. St. cannot without Disingenuity, be put in
opposition to the other part, which is grounded, or pretended to be grounded,
upon other respects; for both parts of a Contradiction cannot have the same
enducements. Suppose, that Dr. St. had expressly granted The Roman Church to
be, and not to be an Idolatrous Church; (which, sure, is to grant palpable
Contradictions, if it is possible, that there should be any such) would the Dr.
in this Case think it a satisfactory Answer to say, That the one of these
Judgments is of Charity, and the other of Reason? and that accordingly, one
cannot be opposite to the other? and to urge the instance produced above,
should one be charged with Self-contradiction, for asserting Dr. St. to be an
Honest man, and yet a Knave, certainly no prudent person can think, that such a
one would sufficiently clear himself by saying, That he granted him to be an
Honest man out of mere kindness, but that he affirmed him to be a Knave upon
good and solid Reason: and that therefore no body could, without disingenuity
oppose the one Judgment against the other. These pitiful shifts of Dr. St.
make one exclaim, O how unhappy a thing it is to engage in a bad Cause! What
will not some say, rather than unsay themselves, and confess their Errors!

Again, either Dr. St. thinks this Concession of his, The Roman Church is a
true Church, to be grounded upon good, and solid Reason, as really it is, or he
does not think it such: now if he think it such, it is not a Judgment of
Charity only, but of Reason also; and consequently, he unjustly charges me with
disingenuity, for opposing a Judgment of mere Charity against a Judgment of
Reason; since both, in his opinion, are Judgments of Reason. If he does not
think this his Concession to be grounded upon Reason, how can it be a Judgment
of true, and real Charity? Can it be true Charity to tell us, That we are in a
true way to Salvation, That our Church does not teach us any damnable Error,
or any thing destructive to our Eternal Welfare; and yet to tell us all this,
without any Reason to think it so? Such a Charity of this, if it must be called
so, is rather a mere Cheat, than Charity. Nay, since the Dr. has declared
himself an implacable Enemy to the Roman Church, bespattering her with so many
foul Aspersions, it is not credible, he would grant her to be a True church, did
not good, and solid Reasons force him thereunto: and we have seen above, that
the very same grounds, whereby he pretends to establish the Truth of the
Protestant Church, evince also the Truth of the Roman Church. So that he must
either confess, That he grants his own Church to be true out of mere Charity,
without any solid ground for to grant it; or he must acknowledge our Church to
be a true Church upon good, and solid Reasons, at least in his Opinion.

And because Dr. St. and his Associates do so often vapor of their Charity, in
allowing Roman Catholics a possibility of Salvation; endeavoring (some of
them) thence to prove, That their Religion is better than ours, which does not
allow so much to Protestants, 'twill not be amiss, to examine the depth of this
their Charity: and sure, if we consider, how those, who deny our Church to be a
true Church, are puzzled, and to what shifts they are put, concerning the
continuation of the True Church for so many years before Luther, and Calvin;
their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and several other points of highest concern,
objected against them; we may prudently believe, that when they acknowledge our
Church to be a true Church, they do it not so much out of any kindness they
have for us; as for their own proper Interest, and Concern.

Again, if that Religion has the greatest Charity, and upon that account is to
be held for the best Religion, that makes the way of Salvation widest, the
Religion of the Libertines, and Latitudinarians, who affirm all Religions to be
true, and sufficient to Salvation, whether Christianism, Judaism, Paganism, or
Mahometism, would be the best of all Religions: which certainly Dr. St. will
never grant, although he burns with so great Charity. Moreover, leaving both
parties, Catholics and Protestants, to their proper Tenets, it is greater
Charity in Catholics toward Protestants, to tell them they are in the wrong,
than in Protestants toward Catholics, to tell them they are in the right, or
in a true way to Salvation. For the most that Protestants can effect in
Catholics with this their Concession, is to encourage them to go on with more
alacrity in the way, wherein they are; since they see, that even their greatest
Enemies do grant them to be in a true way to Heaven: when as Catholics, by
telling Protestants they are in the wrong, may bring many of them to the right,
and save them from Damnation: Since they cannot but be much moved, seeing that
so many Learned men, who are ten to one for Protestants, do affirm with so
great asseveration, and constancy, producing several solid grounds, in proof of
what they affirm, That protestants are in the wrong way. And beyond debate it
is far greater Charity to save one from Damnation, than only to encourage him
to obtain his Salvation: So it is greater Charity to tell one, whom we know to
be out of the way, That he is in the wrong; than to tell one, whom we know to
be in the true way, That he is in the right: Because the one, unless he be told
of his Error, will probably go on, and never come whither he intended: when as
the other, encouraged by our advice, will only come sooner to his journey's
end: whither he would have arrived, although we had told him nothing.

Besides, when our Adversaries are pinched with the inferences we deduce from
this their Concession, they do so mince, and clip their Charity, that it scarce
retains any show or mark thereof, as appears by what Archbishop Lawd, Dr.
Stillingfleet, and others, assert in this matter. For they say, That all
Learned men among us are damned, if they continue in Communion with the Roman
Church: Nay the same they affirm of all those, who understand the pretended
Absurdities, they are pleased to oppose against us: which in their opinion are
so clear, and manifest, that no body, who is not a mere Fool, or a Madman, and
consequently in a condition not capable of Malice, may easily understand them:
That scarce any one is saved amongst us; That only an invincible ignorance,
which is not easily presumed in matters so clear, (as they will needs have our
Errors to be, and wherein every one is so much concerned) can excuse us from
eternal Damnation: That we are all flat Idolaters, and as gross, as the
grossest of the Heathen; and by consequence, That this Proposition, A
Roman Catholic may be saved, has no more truth in it than this, An Idolater
may be saved: Finally, that Roman Catholics may be saved upon condition they
repent of their Errors; as also Jews, Turks, and Pagans may be saved upon the
like Condition.

Now if we compare with these their Assertions concerning Roman Catholics,
what we affirm of Protestants, in order to their Salvation or Damnation, we
shall evidently see, that there is little or no difference between us and them
in relation to this point; and that they have no cause to make such Bravadoe's
of their Charity toward us. For between these two Propositions, scarce any one
is saved, and all are damned, there is so scant a difference, that there is
very little reason to boast thereof. Neither do we deny, but that some
Protestants have an invincible ignorance of the Errors of their Religion; and
consequently upon that account are no less excusable from Damnation, than they
say we are. Besides, Catholics do not affirm, That those Protestants, who are
in a condition not capable of Malice, as mere Fools, Madmen, and Children, are
more liable to damnation, than Catholics of the same condition: Yet farther,
we never assert that this Proposition Protestants are damned, has more truth in
it, than this, Idolaters are damned: and consequently it is as true, That a
Protestant may be saved, as that an Idolater may be saved. Neither do we deny,
but Protestants may be saved if they repent. Where then is the difference
between their Charity and ours, that may give them any cause of Vapouring?

In Fine, if things be well considered, it will manifestly appear, That
Protestants damn more Catholics, than Catholics do Protestants. For it is
certain, that there are at least twenty Roman Catholics in the world for one
Protestant of the English Church; with which is our present debate. Now since
they affirm, that scarce any Catholic is saved, let us put the case, that only
one in twenty is saved, and all the rest are damned; according to this
computation, they damn nineteen, where we damn one; Supposing that we damn all
Protestants, or believe them to be damned, if they continue in that Profession;
and they scarce save any Chatholick, or believe him to be saved, if he lives
and dies in the Communion of the Roman Church. So that concerning the
Damnation, or Salvation of Contrary Party, we have more reason to glory of our
Charity, than they. And hence evidently appears the inanity of their pretended
Charity, which they often cast in our Teeth; this being a common Topic, whence
they have framed many Sermons, and Discourses against us.

Yet I cannot deny, but that the Charity of Dr. St. is enhanced to a high
degree: For he has made the bounds of the True Church so wide, that it contains
not only the most notorious Heretics, but also the greatest Idolaters. Was it
not therefore very ill done of me, to make so bad a use of so wonderful a
Charity? And all this he does out of his exceeding great kindness for
Protestant Religion; and because he cannot find a way, how to bring her within
the verge of the True Church, without letting in with her the grossest
Idolaters of the world, both in Doctrine and Practice. But whether Protestants
will think themselves bound to render the Dr. Thanks for his excess of his
Charity, I leave it to the judgment of the Learned, and Zealous men amongst
them. One step only is wanting, to make this Charity perfect indeed; and that
is, to enlarge the Pale of the True Church so far, as that it may take in flat
Atheists: which he may do with as much ease, as he does other things.

In the pages 19, 20, 21, 22. he mingles many things, which do not tend to
prove, that he does not contradict himself, (which was the proper subject in
this second part of his Answer) but only, that on svpposition he should
contradict himself in the way I insist upon, yet this would not be a
satisfactory answer, nor annull the Reasons he produced in order to make good
the charges he lays against us: All which has been already answered above in
the first part of our Reply. As concerning his Vindication from
Self-contradiction, he says, page 20, 21 That by granting us a True Church,
and yet charging us with Idolatry, it does not follow, That he contradicts
himself, but the only true consequence is, That he thinks some kind of Idolatry
consistent with the Being of a True Church. For what shadow of Contradiction is
it (they are the Dr.'s words page 21.) to say, That the Roman Church is a true
Church, and yet is guilty of Idolatry, supposing he believes some sort of
Idolatry, which is very sinful, not to be yet of so high a nature, as to
unchurch those that practice it. A strange Answer! so that if one has so good
an opinion of himself, (and who has not?) as to believe, or think, that what he
affirms is, in some sort, consistent with what he denies, let him affirm or
deny what he pleases, according to this admirable evasion of Dr. Stillingfleet,
he will be free from Self-contradiction: Whoever joins two terms, that really
contradict one another, whatever he thinks, he commits a Contradiction. Should
one affirm another to be a notorious Traitor, but yet a Loyal Subject, (which
is the instance above insinuated) could the Dr. prudently say in this case,
that such a person did not contradict himself, but that the only true
consequence, that hence might be inferred, was, That he thought some sort of
notorious Treason to be consistent with Loyalty? or could he justly exclaim,
What shadow of Contradiction is it to say, That one is a notorious Traitor, but
yet a Loyal Subject; supposing that who says this, believes some sort of
Treason, though very notorious, not to be yet of so high a nature, as to
destroy Loyalty?

Neither should the Dr. have supposed page 22. (as he does) but proved, that
the Idolatry introduced by Jeroborm among the Israelites, was not destructive
to the being of a True Church. Several protestants, among other precedents,
produce the Church of Israel, infected with the Idolatry of Jeroboam to show,
that the true visible Church may cease: and consequently, they believed the
Church of Israel to have ceased to be a true Church, by reason of the Idolatry
she committed; otherwise they could never have made use of the said instance to
that intent: and accordingly they looked upon that Idolatry, as destructive to
the Being of a True Church. For how can a Church cease to be true, upon the
account of an Idolatry, not destructive to the Being of a True Church? Yea the
Apostle, Romans 11. does, not obscurely, insinuate, that the Idolatry practiced
by the Israelites did unchurch them; yet they were not all infected therewith.
For God told Elias, when he complained, that he was left alone in Israel, that
seven thousand of them had not bowed their knees unto Baal.

The Evasions produced hitherto by the Dr. are, as we have seen, ineffectual to
clear him from Self-contradiction; and such as, had they any force in them,
would prove it impossible, that any one should contradict himself; especially,
if he believed he does not; which is evidently false. So that the Dr. to show
himself guiltless of Self-contradiction, takes the same way, as if to prove
himself an honest man, he should allege no better Reasons, than such as prove,
(if they prove any thing) that there have never been, nor are, any Knaves in
the world; but that all are, and have been, honest men. But this is a common
Artifice of Dr. St. So that he may produce any Arguments that seem to prove his
intent, he cares not whatever else they prove with the same force; and so he
may shoot home, he matters not, how much he over shoots himself: though one may
miss as much of the mark by being gone, as by being short. And although the Dr.
has been advised of the Nullity of this manner of Arguing, according to that
Maxim, an Argument that proves too much, proves nothing, yet hitherto he has
not thought it for his purpose to take notice of it.

In the same page 22. the Dr. affirms, that although they do allow the Church
of Rome to be a true Church, they are far from understanding by that a Sound,
or a good Church: but mean no more by it, than as a man is a true man, though
he has the Plague upon him. Neither did I ever say, ( Dr. St. ag. Dr. St. page
3.) that Dr. St. expressly affirmed, that our Church is a Sound Church, but
only that he granted it to be a True Church: which neither now does he deny, or
question. For, among other things, I alleged out of the Dr. in order to this
purpose, I affirmed, that he held our Church to be a true way to Heaven, but
not a safe way; which signifies here the same, as a true Church, but not a
sound Church. Now Dr. St. does plainly confess, that it is a Contradiction to
say, That the Roman Church is a Sound Church, and yet an Idolatrous Church:
which ( viz. had he granted our Church to be Sound) would be as he says, p.
23. the most proper sense to found a Contradiction upon, in this matter of
Idolatry. For he freely grants, that all sorts of Idolatry are inconsistent
with the Soundness of a Church; but not with the Truth thereof.

Wherefore, if I can evince, That all sorts of Idolatry are at least that sort
of Idolatry, which he fastens upon Roman Catholics, is destructive, not only
to the Soundness, but also to the Truth of a Church; and that an Idolatrous
Church is not as a man sick of the Plague, who may retain the Essentials of a
man: if (I say) I can evince this, it will be a contradiction, not only to say,
That the Roman Church is a Sound Church, and yet an Idolatrous; but also to
affirm, That the Roman Church is a True Church, and yet Idolatrous; at least
with such a kind of Idolatry, as Dr. St. lays upon her: for which see.

CHAP. V. The Doctor palpably Contradicts himself in affirming the Roman Church
to be Idolatrous, and yet granting her to be a True Church.
WHen my Book first appeared in public, several Zealous Protestants, who had
been pleased to peruse it, were so firmly persuaded, that there is a palpable
Contradiction between these two Propositions, The Roman Church is a True
Church, The Roman Church is an Idolatrous Church; and being moreover sensible,
what an affront it is for any one especially for Learned men, to grant, and
persist to grant palpable Contradictions, they would never believe, that Dr.
St. whom they applauded so much for his Learning, had ever granted the two
forementioned Propositions. Besides, they being not able to deny, but that he
asserted The Roman Church to be an Idolatrous Church, seeing he had written a
whole Traetise of that Subject, they concluded, that he had never granted The
Roman Church to be a True Church, although I quoted out of him several plain
places to that intent.

But now Dr. St. has done me justice, and has cleared all doubts, if any might
be in this matter; ingenuously confessing, that he has heretofore, and does
still affirm The Roman Church to be a true Church. And why should he plainly
confess, that he had affirmed any such thing so disadvantagious unto him, were
it not so manifest he had done so, that it could not be questioned? especially,
when he is forced to wind himself all the ways he can to disentangle the
contradiction objected against him: whereas had he never granted the Roman
Church to be a true Church, all appearance of Self contradiction in this point
would have vanished.

Nay, he confirms clearly he same Doctrine in several places of this his
Examination of my Book. For page 21. he says thus; We acknowledge that they
(Roman Catholics) still retain the Fundamental. Articles of the Christian
Faith; That there is no dispute between them and us about the True God, and his
Son, Jesus Christ, as to his Death, Resurrection, and Glory, and being the
proper Object to Divine Worship. We yield, that they have true Baptism among
them, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and we looking upon
these, as the Essentials of a true Church, do upon that account own that Church
to be so. Where, without doubt he judges the points here mentioned to be all
the Fundamental and Essential points of a true Church: otherwise he would not
own our Church to be a true Church precisely, because she holds the
forementioned points. For a Church that fails but in one Essential point of a
true Church, although it be the least of all, is no true Church.

[And here by the way I cannot but Advertise, that Dr. St. without (perhaps)
reflecting on it, has set down a particular Catalogue of all the Fundamental
points of the True Religion: which protestants commonly are loath to do.]

Page 23. he says, Those which we account the Essentials of a Church, we deny
not to it, that is, to the Church of Rome: and a Church, that retains all the
Essentials of a true Church, must needs be so. In the same place he compares
our Church, overrun, as he says, with such Corruptions in Worship, to a man
that has the Plague upon him; who yet still remains a true man. Page 22. when
we allow (says he) the Church of Rome to be a True Church, we are far from
understanding by that a sound, or good Church: which words expressly signify,
that he and his Partisans allow our Church to be a True Church: which is all we
now pretend. But more at large he confirms this Doctrine, page 29.. 4. where he
has in the Margin these words, In what sense the Church of Rome is owned by
him, and other Protestants as a true Church: which manifestly imports, that
they own her as such. Page 30. he speaks thus, Whatever Church owns those
things, which are Antecedently necessary to the Being of a Church, cannot so
long cease to be a true Church. and in the same page, immediately before, he
insinuates, that those things only are necessary Antecedently to the Being of a
Church, which are required to be believed in order to Salvation: and page 31.
he says, Nothing ought to be owned as necessary to Salvation by Christian
Societies, but such things which by all those Societies ( i. e. Christian
Societies, and consequently by the Roman Church, who is one of them) are
abknowledged antecedently necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church. page
32. he makes (and confessed he made before) the Ancient Creeds of the Catholic
Church the best measure of those things which are believed to be necessary to
Salvation: and consequently were sufficient to constitute the Essence, and
Being of a True Church. Now it is evident, neither does Dr. St. ever question
it, but rather very often supposes it, That the Roman Church does embrace the
Ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church, wherefore even according to Dr. St.'s
constitution of a true Church, the Church of Rome is necessarily such. Page 26.
he says We have no Controversy with them (Catholics) about the Essential
Doctrines of Religion, which is that we mean by their being a True Church.
Finally, page 33. and in other places the Dr. distinguishes between the Essence
and Soundness of a Church, and he several times grants, that our Church holds
all that is requisite to the Essence of a True Church: But he denies, that she
holds all that is necessary to the Soundness of a Church: Neither did I ever
allege Dr. St. to the contrary; as above I insinuated.

Hence is evidently concluded, that it is the unquestionable Sentiment of Dr.
St. that the Roman Church, even as it is now in the world, is a True Church,
retaining all the Essential, and Fundamental Points of Christian Faith: All
which I have said, not because Dr. St. did ever deny it; but because some of
his Friends could scarce believe that he, who had endeavored with all his
strength, to prove the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry, should
notwithstanding hold her to be a True Church. See more concerning this in his
Answer to my Book, page 40, 41, 42. Wherefore since it cannot be questioned but
that Dr. St. has heretofore, and does still allow these two Propositions, The
Roman Church is a True Church, The Roman Church is an Idolatrous Church, we
come now to examine, whether the latter Proposition contradicts the former?
which Dr. St. denies; but we do prove in the following Discourse.

If the Roman Church holds any Fundamental, or Essential Error in matters of
Faith, it is no True Church. For it is certain, that some Errors are
sufficient to unchurch a Community, and destructive to the very Being of a True
Church: otherwise a Congregation that holds there is no God, might yet be a
True Church: and if any Errors be such, sure such are all Fundamental, and
Essential Errors. For all Errors in matters of Faith, even according to Dr.
St. and other Protestant Divines are divided into Fundamental or Essential, and
into Non-fundamental, or Non-essential. These latter they affirm to be
consistent with the Essence, and Being of a True Church; but not with the
Soundness thereof: But the former are destructive, not only to the Soundness,
but also to very Essence of a True Church. So that whoever says, that such a
Church is a True Church, but yot that she holds some Fundamental-Errours, he
commits a manifest Contradiction, as if he should say, such a Church is, and is
not True. Upon this account those Protestants, who grant the Roman Church to be
a True Church, but yet depraved with several Errors, to save themselves from
Self-contradiction, commonly affirm, that the Errors of the Roman Church are
not Fundamental, nor Essential, but only inferior Errors, Non-fundamental,
and Non-essential.

Again, if the Roman Church holds any Error, necessarily destructive to any
Fundamental, or Essential Point of Faith, she must needs hold a Fundamental,
and Essential Error in matters of Faith. This is also evident; neither can Dr.
St. deny it. For an Error is denominated Fundamental, or Non-fundamental;
Essential, or Non-essential, from the nature and quality of the Truth,
wherewith it is inconsistent: all Error being inconsistent with some Truth. So
that if the Truth, or any of the Truths, wherewith such an Error is
inconsistent, be Fundamental or Essential, the Error must needs be
Fundamental, or Essential: But if none of them be Fundamental, neither can the
Error be Fundamental. Now the inconsistency of a Proposition with its
contradictory, or of an Error with the Truth opposite thereunto, does not
consist, in that an Error does absolutely destroy the Truth in it self,
wherewith it is said to be inconsistent: For it is certain this Erroneous
Judgment, There is no God, does not destroy the Truth of its Contradictory,
There is a God: nor in that he, who gives an assent to the one part, cannot
possibly at the same time give his assent to the contrary part; otherwise it
would not be possible for any one to Contradict himself; which is manifestly
false, as Dr. St. himself does too too well know. The forementioned
inconsistency therefore consists in the repugnancy, in order to the Truth of
both Propositions together, and at the same time; or in that the Truth of the
one necessarily destroys the Truth of the other: So that if the Error, which
is inconsistent with a Fundamental Truth, should cease to be an Error, the
contrary Truth would cease to be a Truth.

Moreover some Errors are not destructive to any Fundamental Point,
immediately, or formally, or in express terms, as this Error, There is no God,
is destructive to this Fundamental point, There is a God; but only mediately,
and by Consequences; because they destroy immediately something, wherewith some
Fundamental point is necessarily connexed; which being once destroyed, such a
Fundamental point must necessarily fall: as, supposing that it is a Fundamental
point of Christian Faith, that Christ is God, Consubstantial to his Father,
this Error, Christ is a mere Creature, is beyond debate Fundamental; although
it does not destroy immediately the former Truth, but only mediately, and by
Consequence, because it immediately destroys its Contradictory, viz. Christ is
not a mere Creature; which being destroyed, the former Fundamental Truth does
necessarily fall. For, whatsoever is God, either is no Creature, or at least no
mere Creature. Wherefore it is a Fundamental Error, whatsoever necessarily
destroys a Fundamental Truth, whether mediately or immediately. For the malice
and malignity of a Fundamental Error consists in its Destructiveness to a
Fundamental point: and what destroys it mediately, does truly destroy it; but
destroies with it some other thing. One may beat down a Steeple, either by
shooting immediately at the Steeple, or at the Tower that upholds the Steeple;
and in both Cases the Steeple is equally beaten down; but with this difference;
that in the second case the Tower also is beaten down with the Steeple. Yea,
Dr. St. himself page 24. confesses, the second way of Worship, mentioned there
by him, to be destructive mediately only, and by Consequence, to the Existency
of a true God; and yet it is inconsistent, doubtless, with the Being of a true
Church; since by such a Worship, the Unity of the Godhead is denied, and many
False Gods are joined with him in the same Worship; and to teach a multiplicity
of Gods, is beyond debate, to teach an Error, by reason of its opposition to
the Unity of the Godhead, destructive to the Being of a Church.

Besides, I said, that an Error, which is necessarily destructive to any
Fundamental point, whatsoever it be, must needs be Fundamental, and
inconsistent with the Essence of a True Church. For an Error, as other
Negations, is malignantis naturae, of a malignant nature; such as destroying
any Essential part, or intrinsical condition, must needs destroy the whole. So
that a Church, to be True, must have all her Essentials; but, to be absolutely
False, it is enough, that any one of them be wanting, according to those common
Axioms of Philosophers, Bonum ex integra causa; malum autem ex quolibet
defectu. Death destroies the Essence of a man; and yet it neither destroies the
Soul, nor the Body immediately; but only the Union between them both: which is
the least considerable thing in a man's Essence.

Finally, because we discourse now, what Errors are Essential in matters of
Faith, and inconsistent with the Being of a True Church, we must reflect, that
according to Divines, there are two sorts of Errors; the one Privative, the
other Positive. A Church does err privatively against the Essence of a True
Church, by not holding all the positive Essential points requisite thereunto,
(although she should not positively hold any thing contrary to such points;) A
Congregation of Men, who should not believe there is a God, although they
should not positively believe that there is no God, would beyond all question,
be no true Church. But a Church errs positively against the Essence of a true
Church, when she positively holds, and asserts something inconsistent with an
Essential point, whatever else she affirms. Doubtless a Church, or
Congregation, which teaches that there is no God, cannot be a true Church,
whatever else she teaches. Both these sorts of Errors are destructive to the
Essence of a Church: and the latter is rather worse than the former. For it is
worse to believe that there is no God, than not to believe that there is a God.
Hence I infer, that to the constitution of a true Church it is not enough to
assert, the positive Articles requisite to the Being of a Church; but it is also
necessary, not to hold any Error, inco^sisten^ with any of such Articles; as
(...) several persons, who deny, either mediately or immediately, those very
points which they confess.

These things being premised, I go on to show, that if the Roman Church does
hold any kind of Idolatry, (what kind soever it be) to be lawful, as Dr. St.
expressly affirms she does, she must needs hold an Error destructive a to
Fundamental, and Essential point of Faith; and by consequence, a Fundamental
Error, inconsistent with the Essence of a true Church. And since it is certain,
that no kind of Idolatry is lawful, if the Roman Church holds any kind of
Idolatry as lawful, she must needs hold an Error inconsistent with some Truth,
as all Error is. Now it is not possible, that the Roman Church should hold any
sort of Idolatry whatsoever, as lawful, unless she holds that some Honor,
which is due only to God, may be given to a mere Creature. For the notion of
Idolatry in general does necessarily contain this, even as Dr. St. himself
confesses, in this Book, page 24. where he says thus, I agree in general, that
the true notion of Idolatry is, giving the Honor due only to God, to a mere
Creature; but he adds presently these words, I desire no greater advantage
against the Church of Rome, in order to prove her Idolatrous, than from such a
Concession: which is as much as if I should say, I desire no greater advantage
against Dr. St. in order to prove him a Knave, than that he should grant, as
doubtless he does, that the Notion of a Knave in general, is he, who makes it
his business to cheat others: For I am certain, that it is far easier to show,
that this notion of a Knave does agree to Dr. St. than that notion of Idolatry
to the Roman Church.

But for my present purpose it is enough, that Dr St. grants that to be the
true notion of Idolatry in general. For so it is evident, that let the kinds of
Idolatry be never so many, they must needs participate the forementioned
notion; because all the Species, or different kinds, must needs participate the
general notion, under which they are contained: as for instance, because it is
the general notion of an Animal, to be vivens sensibile, a living Substance
endowed with a sensitive power, let the Species, or differences be never so
many, it is impossible, that there should be any sort of Animal, which is not
vivens sensibile. So that, whatsoever is not vivens sensible, is not Animal:
and whatsoever Worship is such, that thereby the Honor due only to God, is not
given to a mere Creature, such a worship cannot be any sort of Idolatry.

Hence I infer, that it is impossible the Roman Church should teach, or hold,
any kind of Idolatry whatsoever it be, gross, or not gross, but she must hold,
(supposing the Notion of Idolatry in general, to be such as has been
insinuated) expressly or implicitly, in the same manner as she holds Idolatry,
That some Honor due only to God may be given to a mere Creature: which Error
(for evidently it is an Error) is inconsistent with the contrary Truth, viz. No
Honor due to God may be given to a mere Creature. And what Truth is this?
Fundamental and Essential, or Non-fundamental and Non-essential? without debate
it is a Fundamental, and Essential point of Religion. For what point is such,
if this be not? Nay Dr. St. himself does absolutely grant it, page 26. in the
Answer to my first Proposition, as hereafter will appear; and p. 21. he
accounts among the Essentials of a true Church, and the Fundamental Articles of
the Christian Faith, this very proposition, viz. That God, and his Son Jesus
Christ, are the proper object of Divine Worship; or (which is the same) no
Divine Worship, or no Honor due only to God, is to be given to any one but
God. Since therefore all Idolatry is inconsistent with the forementioned
Fundamental, and Essential point, it is manifest, the Church of Rome cannot hold
any kind of Idolatry whatsoever, without holding a Fundamental Error,
destructive to the very Essence, and Being of a True Church. Wherefore Dr. St.
by granting the Roman Church to be a True Church, and yet charging her with
Idolatry, does commit a palpable Contradiction, and in one breath blows cold
and hot; asserting, that she is a True Church, and yet that she holds something
inconsistent with the very Being and Essence of a True Church.

To draw this Argument into a narrower circle, I form this Dilemma. Either by
the Idolatry Dr. St. Fathers upon our Church, Some Honor, due only to God, is
given to a mere Creature, or not. If not, then it is no Idolatry, as not
participaring the general Notion of Idolatry: If so, then it is destrrctive to
an Essential point of Religion; and consequently to the Essence of a True
Church. So that Dr. St. by distinguishing two sorts of Idolatry, one
destructive to the Being of a Church, another not-destructive to the Being of a
Church, does as much as tell us, There are two sorts of Idolatry; one, that is
Idolatry, another, that is not Idolatry: of the former he declares us free; but
of the latter, he makes us guilty. And we, poor Souls! because we cannot
discern such subtle distinctions as these, must be chalked up for Half-witted
men. But if the accomplishedness of Dr. St.'s wit has no more of wit in it,
then No Idolatry has of Idolatry, we have little reason to envy him.

Yet farther; it is impossible, that a Church, which holds any damnable Error,
should be a True Church. For all damnable Errors lead to Damnation; and upon
that account are called Damnable. But a True Church carries to Salvation; and
therefore must be True in all things necessary to the obtaining thereof. Nor
among those things which are necessary to the obtaining taining of Salvation,
one is the avoiding all Damnable Errors, as being destructive thereunto.
Whence it is manifest, that a Church, which holds any Damnable Error, cannot
so long be a True Church: and to hold any Idolatry whatsoever is, without
question, a Damnable Error; since all Idolatry is Damnable, and destructive to
Salvation. Yea Dr. St. page 34. Charges our Church with Damnable Errors;
especially upon the account of the Idolatry, which, as he fancies, she does
teach; and which page 22. he owns to be very sinful: neither do I believe, that
the Dr. will dare to affirm, that a Church, which should teach Adultery to be
Lawful, could so long be a True Church: and yet Idolatry is no less damnable,
and destructive to Salvation than Adultery. Wherefore to hold either of them as
Lawful, is equally at least destructive to the Being of a True Church. It Is
therefore impossible, that the Roman Church should hold any sort of Idolatry,
as Dr. St. will needs have us believe she does, without holding a Damnable, and
Fundamental Error, destructive to the very Essence, and Being of a True Church.

For in the Dictionary of such, as have any insight into Religious Concerns; a
Fundamental Error in matters of Religion, a Damnable Error, and an Error
inconsistent with the Essence of a True Church, are Terms Synonymous.

Moreover, whereas the very Vitals of a Religion are the Honor of God and the
Salvation of Souls, Idolatry undermines them both; by giving the Honor due
only unto God, to a mere Creature, and by leading souls to Damnation. How
therefore can it choose, but destroy the very Essence of a True Religion? And as
a High Treason, whereby one does give the Honor, and Respect due only to his
Sovereign, to a mere Subject, is beyond debate contrary to a Fundamental point
of Loyalty, and destructive thereunto; so it is a palpable Contradiction to
assert, that such a person is a true and faithful Subject, but yet a Traitor:
in the like manner, since by all Idolatry, according to the Notion thereof
assented unto even by Dr. St. is given to a mere Creature the Honor due only
unto God, and upon this account Idolatry is High Treason against God, Dr. St.
must needs be guilty of Self contradiction, in affirming the Roman Church to be
a True Church, but yet Idolatrous. Whence appears, that the instance of a
Traitor, alleged by the Dr. page 25. makes rather against him, than for him,
where we must reflect, that according to Dr. St. not only the practice of the
Roman Church, but also her Doctrine is Idolatrous: since she teaches and
approves of that very practice, which she judges to be Idolatrous.

Hitherto we have shown, that all sorts of Idolatry are inconsistent with the
very Essence of a True Church, and by consequence, that it is a manifest
Contradiction to affirm, that the Roman Church is a True Church, and yet
depraved with Idolatry. However, it is enough for my purpose to evince, that
that sort of Idolatry, which Dr. St. Fathers upon the Roman Church, Destroies
the very Essence, and Being of a True Church: which I shall prove in the
following Chapter,

CHAP. VI. Another Proof of the same intent, drawn from the Nature of the
Idolatry, the Doctor Fathers upon the Roman Church.
THe Idolatry Dr. St. endeavors to fasten upon the Roman Church, is, as he
pretends to prove at large in his Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced
in the Church of Rome; page 58. and seq. point blanck against the second
Commanded (according to their reckoning) of the Decalogue; and is immediately
opposite thereunto. Now it is certain, that this Commandment contains an
Essential, and Fundamental point of Religion, since it so nearly concerns Gods
Honor, and worship, the chief aim of Religion. Whence it manifestly follows,
that the Idolatry he Fathers upon the Roman Church, is destructive to a
Fundamental point of Religion, and by consequence inconsistent with the very
Being of a True Church.

Besides, the Dr. does willingly confess, (and it would be a madness not to do
so) that there is some sort of Idolatry destructive not only to the Soundess,
(for this is general to all sorts of Idolatry) but also to the very Essence,
and Being of a True Church. See his Answer page 24. whence we infer, that
whatever Church holds that kind of Idolatry, which is destructive to the Being
of a Church, cannot so long be a True Church whatever other Tenets she
maintains. So that it would have been a palpable Contradiction in Dr. St. even
according to his own Doctrine, had he held the Church of Rome to be a True
Church (as he does) and yet charged her with the Forementioned kind of
Idolatry. Now let us examine, what Character Dr. St. gives us of the Idolatry he
is pleased to Father upon the Roman Church.

In his Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, page
69. he says thus: It seems much more reasonable for me to worship God by
Prostrating my self to the Sun, or any of the Heavenly Bodies, nay to an Ant,
or a Fly, than to a Picture or Image; and he endeavors to prove this his
Assertion: according to which the Idolatry he Fastens upon the Roman Church, in
the Veneration of the Pictures, or Images of God, is esteemed by him far worse
than the Adoration of the Sun, Moon, an Ant, or a Fly, practiced by the
Heathens. page 132. he approves this Testimony of Costerus: If the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation be not true, the Idolatry of the Heathens in Worshipping
some Golden, or Silver Statue, or any Images of their gods; or the Laplanders
in Worshipping a red Cloth, or the Egyptians an Animal, is more excusable,
than of Christians, that Worship a bit of Bread. This Costerus asfirms, only
upon this condition, That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be not true: But
Dr. St. who absolutely judges that Doctrine not to be true, and moreover
approves the foresaid Testimony of Costerus, must needs hold the Idolatry he
imputes to Catholics in the Adoration of the Eucharist, to be more detestable,
than that of the Egyptians and Laplanders.

Page 134. he seems to approve this Sentiment of Dr. Taylour, An Image then
becomes an Idol when Divine Worship is given to it: and to Worship False Gods
or to give Divine Honor to an Image, which is no God, is all one kind of formal
Idolatry Wherefore Dr. St. since he assents to this Doctrine, Parallels the
Veneration of Images, practiced by the Roman Church, to the Worship of False
Gods, and looks upon them both as one kind of formal Idolatry: and certainly
the Worship of False Gods, as rejecting the true God, is inconsistent with the
Being of a True Church. For what Idolatry is so, if this be not? In the same
page he pretends to show, that the grossest Idolatry in the world, is excusable
on the same grounds, whereon we excuse from Idolatry the Veneration of Christ
in the Eucharist: which he compares with the Idolatry of those, who said Christ
was the Sun: and he adds, page 136. That the Absurdities of Transubstantiation
are greater, than of that Doctrine; which teaches the Sun to be God; and in the
same place he calls it as Venial a Fault; The Worshipping that for the True
God, which is not so; such is the Idolatry he Fathers upon us, and terms it the
Superstition of an undue way of Worshipping; as the Worshipping False Gods,
which he styles the Superstitian of an undue object: and page 137. he says
thus, The most stupid and senseless of all Idolaters, who Worship the very
Images for God, (which the wiser among the Heathens, according to his Judgment,
always disalowed) were in truth the most excusable upon this ground; upon
which we excuse from Idolatry the Veneration we give to the Sacrament of the
Altar: and by consequence, the Idolatry he Fathers upon us in this matter, is
in his opinion worse, and less excusable, than the most stupid, and senseless
Idolatry of the Heathens.

In the page immediately before, he compares our Veneration of Christ in the
Eucharist, with the Egyptians worshipping the Sun for God, and the Israelites
the Golden Calf, believing it was the true God. Page 142, 143. speaking of the
Veneration the Roman Church allows to Saints, he adds, I would willingly
understand, why I may not as well honor God by giving Worship to the Sun, as
to Ignatius Loyola, or St. Francis, or any other of the late Cannonized Saints?
And why does he not speak of the B. Virgin Mary, of the Apostles, of St.
Augustine, and of other Ancient Saints, since he equally impugns the Veneration
of all Saints? The reason he adds is excellent: I am sure, says he, the Sun is
a certain Monument of Gods goodness, and I cannot be mistaken therein. But I
can never be certain of the holiness of those persons, viz. the late Cannonized
Saints. -- For all that I can know, Ignatius Loyola was a great Hypocrite. But
I am sure that the Sun is none. -- I know the best of men have their
Corruptions, and to what degree it is impossible for others to understand. But
I am certain the spots of the Sun are no Moral Impurities, nor displeasing to
God. How frivolous this reason is, will clearly appear by this instance. Dr.
St. will not deny, but that some Reverence, Respect, Esteem, and Veneration may
be given in this life to men, by reason of their Holiness, Sanctity, and
Honesty of Life; and that one may here upon earth implore the Prayers of other
men, especially Holy and Honest Men; or invoke them to be his Intercessours
with God in his Necessities; which is practiced by Protestants; and no more
than this we ascribe to the Saints in Heaven.

Now according to this Reason of the Dr. (to use his own words) Why may I not
as well honor Dr. St. 's Cat, or Dog, (who in the common opinion of
Philosophers, as being Substances endowed with Life, are perfecter than the
Sun) as Dr. St. himself; or invoke them as well as him, or any of the
Protestant Bishops, or Ministers? I am sure Dr. St. 's Cat, and Dog, do
whatever God will have them do; and that they never have transgressed any of
his Commandments; and I cannot be mistaken therein. But I can never be certain,
that Dr. St. is an honest man; yea I am certain, that he has transgressed Gods
Commandments. For all that I can know Dr. St. is a great Hypocrite, and an
errant Knave. But I am sure Dr. St. 's Cat, and Dog are none. I know that Dr.
St. has his Corruptions, since the best of men have theirs; and to what degree
he has them, is impossible for me, or others, to understand; but I am certain,
that the Blemishes of those Creatures, supposing they have them, are no Moral
Impurities, nor displeasing to God.

Whence it follows, that according to this Argument of Dr. St. it is as Lawful,
and more laudable, to Reverence, upon the account of Honesty, Dr. St.'s Cat, or
Dog, and to invoke their Intercession; as to Reverence Dr. St. himself, or to
invoke his assistance by Prayers: and what ever answer Dr. St. shall give to
this Instance, will solve the Objection he makes against us. For it is certain
that the Sun is as incapable to understand, or to be made to understand, our
addresses, or to intercede for us, or to lead a moral, honest life, as a Cat,
or a Dog: But Dr. St. knows too well, that it is not for his interest to
consider the incoherency of his Principles, or the train of Absurdities, which
commonly wait upon his Arguments. Yet for our present intent it is enough, to
show, that the Idolatry he endeavors to fasten upon the Roman Church, in the
Invocation of Saints, which she allows of, is, in his persuasion, as bad or
worse, than the Adoration of the Sun.

Page 159. he makes a large Parallel between the Veneration, that Roman
Catholics afford to Saints, and the Idolatry of the Heathens, in Sacrificing
to their Inferior Deities, or Heroes. Did the Israelites, says he use solemn
Ceremonies of making any capable of Divine Worship? So does the Roman Church.
Did they set up their Images in public places of Worship, and then kneel down
before them, and Invocate those represented by them? So does the Roman Church.
Did they Consecrate Temples, and Erect Altars to them, and keep Festivals and
burn Incense before them? So does the Roman Church. Lastly, Did they offer up
Sacrifices in those Temples to the Honor of their lesser Deities, or Heroes?
So does the Roman Church. Whence it appears, that Dr. St. does hold us for as
great Idolaters, by reason of the Honor we afford to Saints, as the Heathens
were in Adoring their lesser Deities. All this Doctrine he had laid down in his
Answer to the Questions, page 3, 4. where he has these words. The same Argument
whereby the Papists make the Worship of the Bread in the Eucharist not to be
Idolatry, would make the grossest Heathenish Idolatry not to be so: And a
little after he says thus; The Church of Rome, in the Worship of God by
Images, the Adoration of the Bread in the Eucharist, and the formal Invocation
of Saints, does require the giving to the Creature, the Worship due only to the
Creator. Whence it follows, that Dr. St. does Charge the Roman Church with an
Idolatry of an undue Object; Because the Worship, due only to God, is given by
us (as he fancies) to a mere Creature: and not only with Idolatry of an undue,
and prohibited man-manner of Worship: which are two sorts of Idolatry he makes
mention of.

In the same page, to confirm the former Doctrine, he says thus; In the
Worship of God by Images, wherewith he Charges us, the Worship due to God (and
I suppose he speaks of a Worship due only to God) is terminated wholly on the
Creature. Wherefore if this be Idolatry, it must be Idolatry of an undue
Object. Much more to the same purpose might be alleged out of him. But what
already I have produced, is sufficient.

From what hitherto has been quoted out of Dr. St. it is manifest, that the
Idolatry he Fathers upon the Roman Church is, in his opinion as bad, nay worse,
than the grossest Idolatry of the Heathens. Now since the grossest Idolatry of
the Heathens is, beyond debate (and Dr. St. always supposes it is so) is (I
say) inconsistent with the Being, and Essence of a True Church, and a true
Religion: and since the Malice of Idolatry is to be scaned by the opposition it
has with Religion; this being so, is it not a madness to say, and confess, that
the grossest Idolatry of the Heathens is inconsistent, not only with the
Soundness, but also with the Essence of a true Church; but yet that the
Idolatry of the Papists, although as bad, nay worse; than the grossest of the
Heathens, is inconsistent only with the Soundness of a Church, and not with the
Essence. Is not this, as if one should say, If you cut off the head of a man,
you will kill him; but if you give him another wound as bad, or worse; if you
run him through the heart, if you cut him all in pieces, you will only make him
sick? What sense can there be in affirming, that the Heathens are not members
of the True Church, because they are Idolaters in so high a degree; and yet
that Roman Catholics, though grosser Idolaters than the Heathens, are Members
of the True Church? That the Heathenish Idolatry, at least some, is of a nature
high enough to unchurch Heathens; and yet that the Roman Idolatry, though
grosser and higher than any Heathenish, is not of a nature high enough (as he
says page 22.) to unchurch Romanists? If this be not Nonsense, what is?

Moreover, from what we have alleged out of the Dr. it is evident, that he
ascrib's unto us Idolatry of an undue Object: and sure all such Idolatry is
inconsistent with the very Being of a True Church. For Dr. St. when he would
excuse the Idolatry he Fathers upon us, from being destructive to the very
Essence of a true Church, he endeavors to say, that it is only Idolatry of an
undue manner of Worship; which shows, that he holds Idolatry of an undue
Object, to be destructive to the Essence of a Church. Since therefore he
confesses, in the places above mentioned, that the Idolatry of the Roman Church
is Idolatry of an undue Object, he makes her guilty of an Idolatry,
inconsistent with the Essence of a true Church.

Again, Dr. St. seems to suppose, that an Idolatry, which brings in a
multiplicity of Gods, is destructive to the Essence of a Church: and why?
Because it is destructive, at least by consequence, and mediately, to a
Fundamental point of Religion, viz. the Unity of the Godhead. Since therefore
the Idolatry he fathers upon us, is destructive, at least mediately, to this
Fundamental point, The Honor due only to God is not to be given to a mere
Creature, assented unto even by Pagans, it must be inconsistent with the Being
of a Church. For an Error destructive to any Fundamental point of Religion
whatever, is destructive to the Being of a Church, as has been demonstrated.
Yea an Idolatry accompanied with the acknowledgment of one only God, (such is
the Idolatry he imputes to us) may, doubtless, be inconsistent with the Being
of a Church: as for instance, the Idolatry of such, who accknowledging one only
God, should adore no other God but the Sun.

Yet farther, the Adoration of a red Cloth, which the Laplanders use, either is
destructive to the Being of a Church, or not. Sure Dr. St. is not so mad as to
say it is not. Now if it be destructive to the Essence of a Church, as
certainly it is, is not Dr. St. ashamed to say, that the Adoration of Christ in
the Eucharist is worse, and less excusable, than that of the Laplanders, and
yet that it may be consistent with the Being of a True Church? Can any one
require a more convincing Argument, to prove, that such a Church is no true
Church; then if he can show, that she adores, or requires the Adoration of a
red Cloth for God, or something as bad, or worse.

Lastly, Dr. St. affirms, that the Roman Church does not only teach an Idolatry
as bad or worse, than the grossest of the Heathens, but also that she teaches
it as an Article of Divine Faith, Fathering it upon God, and making him the
Author thereof. For the Roman Church delivers as Articles of Divine Faith, the
Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, the Invocation of Saints, and the
Veneration of Images, as both he and we confess. The Dr. moreover maintains
all the forementioned practices, and Doctrines to be flar Idolatry; as much, or
more detestable, than the grossest Heathenish Idolatry. Now certainly it is a
Fundamental, and Essential point of Religion, That God is not the Author of any
Superstition whatsoever, much less of so gross an Idolatry, as he will needs
have the Roman Idolatry to be: and consequently, it is impossible, that the
Roman Church should teach God to be the Author of such an Idolatry, (as
necessarily she must, if she teaches it as an Article of Faith) without erring
against the aforesaid Fundamental point; and by consequence, without incurring
a Fundamental Error, destructive to the very Being of a Church.

It Is manifest therefore, that Dr. St. does commit a palpable Contradiction, by
asserting the Roman Church to be a True Church, and yet charging her with an
Idolatry as bad, or worse, than the grossest of the Heathens. I know not
whether these lines will fetch blood from Dr. St. for (as he says, Pref. Genesis
he was threatened with such lines from his Adversaries) But I am sure, that if
he has any blood in him, and has not lost all sense of his honor, they will
fetch the blood into his face, and make him blush.

After the Dr. had proved unsuccessful in showing my way of proceeding
disingenuous, he endeavors to prove it sophistical, and captious, saying, page
23. That the starting of a new Objection, or the raising a new Difficulty
answers no Argument; and that this manner of proceeding of mine, is a clear
evidence of a sophistical, and cavilling humor, rather than of any intention
to satisfy an inquisitive mind. To this I answer, When the Disciples of the
Pharisees, and Officers of Herod came to tempt our Savior, ( Mat. 22.) they
proposed unto him a question, and our Savior starting a new question, and
raising a new Difficulty solved the question proposed unto him, and silenced
his Adversaries. But had Dr. St. been with the Enemies of Christ in that
occasion, he would have suggested unto them, That it was a clear evidence of a
sophistical, and cavelling humor, in order to answer one question, to start
another. Besides, what question, or difficulty do I start? I take for granted,
that the Roman Church is a true Church, as Dr. St. has heretofore, and does
still grant: and hence I prove the nullity of the Charge he lays against us:
which is the common way of confuting an Adversary; viz. Out of Principles
granted by him, to infer the contradictory of what he maintains. But Dr. St.
had charged me with Sophistry, and Captiousness; and he must make it good the
best way he can: which is to feign his Adversary to say what he does not.

CHAP. VII. The Invalidity of the Doctor's Answers to our Propositions in
Particular.
LEt us see now, for the greater satisfaction of the Reader, what he Answers to
every particular Proposition I laid down in order, to prove him guilty of Self
contradiction, in Charging us with Idolatry; and to clear our Church from so
foul an Aspersion: my first Proposition was this:

It Is an Article of Faith, and a Fundamental point of Religion, That the Honor
which is due only to God, is not to be given to a mere Creature. This
Proposition the Dr. absolutely grants, without any distinction, saying, page
26. His first Proposition I agree to. He adds afterward, That there is no
dispute between us whether that Honor, which is due only to God, may be given
to a Creature; and finally, he grants this Proposition to be in it self true.
But after he had absolutely granted it, without any distinction, he begins to
quibble at it. But I desire he would tell me, whether the exception he
afterward makes against it, does hinder, or not, the absolute truth thereof?
If it does not, what more can I, or any one else desire, when we lay down
Principles, or Propositions, than that the Proposition we advance be absolutely
true? If it does hinder the absolute truth of the aforesaid Proposition, why
did he grant it absolutely without any distinction? But what is the exception
he makes against us in this Proposition? He says, We should have discust, what
that Honor is, which is due only to God. Wherein he adds, there is a great
dispute between them and us. So that it seems, he would have had us lay down,
among the Principles, which we advanced against him, some thing that is
disputed between us: which is point blank against the very notion of a
Principle; which ought to he agreed unto by all, or at least by the Adversary,
with whom we deal. So that he accuses us, that we proceed Sophistically, and
Captiously: and why? Because (forsooth) we do not lay down for a Principle,
that which is not a Principle: which doubtless is a frivolous accusation.
Neither was there any need, we should discuss in particular, what that Honor
is which is due only to God. For, the Honor we give to Images, or Saints,
either is due only to God, or not. If the Dr. says it is; then it is a
palpable Contradiction, for the Dr. to affirm that our Church is True, and yet
that she allows Saints and Images such an Honor. If he says it is not, then
how can he accuse our Church of Idolatry, because she gives to Saints and
Images such an Honor? Wherefore, without descending to the particular Honor
due only to God, we prove, that either Dr. St. must confess, that our Church is
free from the aforesaid Idolatray, or that he contradicts himself; which was my
proper task in that place: and is not this enough?

He adds, page 27. That it cannot excuse us from Idolatry, to say, That we
acknowledge it to be Idolatry, to give that Honor, which we suppose to be due
only to God, to a mere Creature, in case that he can prove, that we give to
mere Creatures any part of that Honor which is due to God. I do confess, that
were it once proved, that we give any Honor, duly only to God to a mere
Creature, such an acknowledgment would not excuse us from Idolatry; as it did
not excuse the Heathens from the like Crime, although they acknowledged the
same Truth. But here we must reflect, That sometimes the Dr. says, that it is
Idolatry to give to a mere Creature, the Honor due only to God: and in that he
says the truth: Othertimes, as in this place, he omits only, and speaks of
Honor due to God. For some honor is due to God; but not only to God. As when
our Savior was upon earth, without doubt the Honor of kneeling down before
him, was due unto him: which Honor notwithstanding is due unto a King, and to
ones Father. But what is all this, that Dr. St. sets down in this Paragraph, to
clear himself from Self-contradiction, in asserting our Church to be a true
Church, and yet charging her with Idolatry? which was the design in this second
part of his Answer; and my immediate intention, in Dr. Stillingfleet against
Dr. Stillingfleet, was to prove him guilty of Self-contradiction, as he says,
page 28. His immediate intention was not to clear their Church from Idolatry,
but to accuse me of Contradiction: yet I have shown above, that if I evince
that he contradicts himself in the way I insist upon I do manifestly clear our
Church from Idolatry; and that this part was of my design.

My 2d Proposition was, as follows. To teach Idolatry, is to err against the
forementioned Article of Faith, and Fundamental point of Religion, i.e. (as he
says) to teach Idolatry, is to teach That the Honor which is due only to God,
is to be given (I said may be given) to a mere Creature. To this second
Proposition he Answers thus, page 27. That this is to teach Idolatry, no one
questions: but he adds, that they who do not teach this, i. e. that the Honor
which is due only to God, may be given to a mere Creature; may yet teach
Idolatry: and therefore he says, We should, if we had proceeded as we ought to
have done, have laid down an universal Negative, viz. No Church, that does not
teach this, can be guilty of Idolatry; and not a particular Affirmative, as he
fancies this Proposition of mine to be, To teach Idolatry, is to teach, that
the Honor due only to God may be given to a mere Creature. Hence we may
discover, how great a Logician Dr. St. is. I wonder how he should fancy that
Proposition of mine to be a particular Affirmative; and not an Universal. Is
this Proposition a particular Affirmative, To be a man is to be Animal
rationale? Sure no body that understands any thing of Rationality, can take
such a Proposition for a particular Affirmative: and as the true Notion of a
man in general is Animal rationale; so the true notion of Idolatry, according
to Dr. St. himself, page 24. quoted above, is, giving the Honor due only to
God, to a mere Creature. Wherefore these two Propositions are universal
Affirmatives, equivalent to these, To be any man whatsoever, is to be Animal
rationale; To teach any Idolatry whatsoever, is to teach, that the Honor due
only to God, may be given to a mere Creature.

The reason hereof is, because, as Logicians tell us, an indefinite Proposition
in a necessary matter, (such is the Notion of a Thing; which must necessarily
agree unto it) is equivalent to an Universal; as to say a man is Animal
rationale, is as much as to say, every man is such; and to say, Idolatry is the
giving to a mere creature the honor due only to God, (which is the true notion
of Idolatry in general) is the same, as if one should say All Idolatry is such.
Now if this Universal Affirmative be true, as it is, even according to Dr.
St.'s confession, a Church that teaches any sort of Idolatry whatsoever, does
teach, that the Honor which is due only to God, may be given to a mere
Creature: and hence it necessarily follows, That no Church, that does not teach
this, can be guilty of any sort of Idolatry; as because every man is animal
rationale (a rational Animal) it must needs follow, that nothing, that is not
animal rationale, can be a man; whoever has the least smattering of Logic,
cannot be ignorant of these Rules. But it was not for Dr. St.'s purpose to
remember any thing of Logic, or of Rationality. Whence I conclude, that the
Proposition laid down by me is an Universal Affirmative, equivalent to the
Proposition set down by the Dr. Since therefore no Church can teach any
Idolatry, without teaching, that the Honor which is due only to God, may be
given to a mere Creature, it is evidently inferred, that no Church can teach
any Idolatry, without erring against the forementioned Article of Faith, and
Fundamental point of Religion: which is all I pretended in my second
Proposition.

Besides, although I should grant, (as I do not) that a Church might teach some
sort of Idolatry, without teaching, or requiring, that the Honor due only to
God, be given to a mere Creature; yet, according to Dr. St.'s own confession,
the Idolatry he Fathers upon the Roman Church, is such, that it requires the
honor which is due only to God, to be given to a mere Creature. For in his
Discourse concerning the Roman Idolatry, page 3. he has these words, The Church
of Rome, in the Worship of God by Images, the Adoration of the Bread in the
Eucharist, and the formal Invocation of Saints, does require giving to the
Creature Worship due only to the Creator. So that according to this Assertion
of Dr. St. which he endeavors to establish throughout that whole Discourse, no
Church can teach the Idolatry he fathers upon the Roman Church, without
teaching the giving to a mere Creature, the Honor and Worship due only to the
Creator: and consequently without erring against that Article of Faith, and
Fundamental point of Religion, contained in my first Proposition: which is
enough for my main intent. So that, if my second Proposition be propounded
thus, To teach that sort of Idolatry, which Dr. St. Fathers upon the Roman
Church, is to err against the forementioned Article of Faith, and Fundamental
point of Religion, he will have nothing to quibble at it; since he expressly
asserts, that such a kind of Idolatry requires the contrary to that Article.
whence I conclude, that this second Proposition is also agreed unto by Dr. St.
either absolutely, or at least as far, as is necessary for my purpose.

My third Proposition runs thus: A Church that does not err against any Article
of Faith, nor against any Fundamental point of Religion, does not teach
Idolatry. To this Proposition he answers, That it is very Sophistical and
Captious. Dr. St. seems to be possessed with such a panick fear to be
Non-pluss'd by me, that had I said two and two are four, in all likelihood he
would have called it a Sophistical and Captious Proposition. And this is a
common flaw in weak, but obstinate defendants; who, when they have nothing to
say against a Proposition, they Characterise it for Sophistical. But let us see
in what consists the Sophistry, and Captiousness of this Proposition. He says,
page 28, 29. That if by Article of Faith, and Fundamental point of Religion, he
means the main Fundamental points of Doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed,
then a Church, which does own all the Fundamentals of Doctrine, may be guilty
of Idolatry, and teach those things, wherein it lies. But where is Dr. St.'s
ingenuity? My Proposition was not That a Church which owns all Fundamentals,
does not teach Idolatry; but that a Church which does not err against any
Fundamental, does not teach Idolatry: which is very different; because a Church
may err against a Doctrine which she owns, and contradict her self, as has been
hinted at above, and Dr. St. himself agrees unto, as hereafter will appear, So
that the Dr. does not deny my Proposition; but another very different. We may
therefore take my Proposition for granted: yea we have shown already, that any
Fundamental Error, or an Error against any Fundamental point, great or
little, if there be any Fundamental point of little concern, is destructive to
the Being of a Church.

He goes on, and says, But if by erring against an Article of Faith be meant,
that a Church, which does not err at all in matters of Religion, cannot teach
Idolatry, then he concludes the Proposition is true, but impertinent. Neither
does this part of the distinction touch my Proposition. For all matters of
Religion are not Articles of Faith, according to Dr. St. who does not think all
the 39. Articles to be Articles of Faith; yet he judges them all to be
Articles, or matters of Religion, and to concern the Soundness of a Church, but
not the Essence: nay, we do not hold, that all the Ceremonies of our Church,
and all our Ecclesiastical Precepts are Articles of Faith; yet they may be
called matters of Religion. Wherefore these two Propositions, A Church that
does not err against any Article of Faith, and a Chuch that does not err at all
in matters of Religion, are very different: neither does the former Proposition
contain the latter. Is not this when a learned distinction, wherein neither
part touches the Proposition, which the Author pretends to distinguish,
whereas, according to all reason, Both Members of the Distinction are to be
contained in the word, which is distinguished?

Would it not be ridiculous for one to distinguish thus the following
Proposition, Every man is a rational Animal? if by Man be meant all kind of
Animals, it is false: But if by Man be meant only that kind of Animal, which is
man, it is true. For as a man does not signify all kind of Animals, but only a
certain kind: So neither an Article of Faith does signify all matters of
Religion; but only certain points. So that Dr. St.'s distinction comes to be
this: If by Articles of Faith, and Fundamental points of Religion be understood
not only Articles of Faith, and Fundamental points, but also other points,
which are neither Articles of Faith, nor Fundamental; i. e. if by these words
he understood, what they do not signify, then very wisely the Dr. says page
28. The Proposition is true, but impertinent: as certainly it is impertinent.
But who makes it so? But if by Articles of Faith, and Fundamental points of
Religion, be only understood Articles of Faith, and Fundamental points of
Religion, as whoever has any understanding in him, must needs understand; Then
-- what then? -- he says not a word to the Proposition laid down by me, viz.
A Church that does not err against any Article of Faith, nor against any
Fundamental point of Religion, does not teach Idolatry: Whereas, according to
the common Rules of distinguishing Propositions, he should have told us,
whether our Proposition, qualified with that part of the Distinction, was true,
or false: But he coggs in another Proposition very different, saying, That a
Church, which does not own all Fundamentals of Doctrine, may be guilty of
Idolatry. Let any one judge, whether this be not downright juggling. Whence the
Reader may easily see, to what extremities this poor man is brought, to make
good against us his pretended Charge of Idolatry, and to clear himself from
Self-contradiction.

Moreover, either he does admit other Articles of Faith, and Fundamental points
of Religion, besides those which are contained in the Apostles Creed, or not:
if he does admit others, then the Distinction would run thus; If by not erring
against any Article of Faith be understood, that a Church, which does not err
against some certain Articles of Faith, cannot teach Idolatry; i. e. if in
place of my Proposition, which is an Universal Negative, be put in another
Proposition very different, viz. a Particular Negative, then the Proposition,
which he puts in, may be false; as certainly it may be: for a Church may teach
Idolatry, without erring against every Artiticle of Faith: as the Heathens, who
admitted a Deity and a Religion, did not err against every Article of Faith,
though they taught Idolatry. But this cannot hinder the truth of my
Proposition; which was an Universal Negative, viz. not erring against any; when
as his Proposition would be a particular Negative, viz. not erring against
some. As, this universal is true, a man that does not transgress any of Gods
Commandments, is a good man: but this other particular may be false, A man that
does not transgress some certain Commandments of God, viz. those, which concern
immediately the honor of God, is a good man: neither could the falsity of this
latter Proposition obstruct the truth of the former.

But if Dr. St. admits no Articles at all of Faith, nor Fundamental points,
which are not contained, explicitly nor implicitly, in the Apostles Creed,
then he must needs reduce to the Apostles Creed the Article quoted in my first
Proposition, viz. The honor, which is due only to God, is not to be given to a
mere Creature; since he grants this to be an Article of Faith, and a
Fundamental point of Religion, as has been seen; and doubtless it is a main
Fundamental point too.

And this is enough for the truth of our third Proposition: For, if a Church
does not err against any Article of Faith, even of those which the Dr. grants
to be such, she does not err against the forementioned Article, which even the
Dr. places amongst Articles of Faith: and if it does not err against this
Article, it does not teach Idolatry, at least that kind of Idolatry, which he
is pleased to father upon us. For to teach any sort of Idolatry, at least that
which the Dr. lays to our charge, is to err against the aforesaid Article,
(which not only in our opinion, but also in the opinion of the Dr. and other
Protestants, is an Article of Faith) as does manifestly appear, by what has
been handled in our Second Proposition.

My fourth Proposition was framed thus. The Church of Rome does teach
Veneration of Images, Adoration of the Host, and Invocation of Saints. To this
Dr. St. page 29. answers, That it is agreed on by both sides, without adding
any more. Now I see the Dr. takes heart, and dares to grant a Proposition set
down by me, without stigmatizing it either before or after, for Sophistical and
Captious. Hence I infer, that the Veneration of Images, Adoration of the Host,
and Invocation of the Saints, are Doctrines of the Roman Church; and by
consequence they are not mere practices of Roman Catholics. For when a
practice of the members of any Chuch is taught, and approved by the Church her
self, then such a practice comes to be the Doctrine of that Church. This I have
said, because sometimes Dr. St. does seem to look upon the forementioned
points, as mere practices of Roman Catholics: and it is certain, that a Church
may be a True Church, and yet the Members thereof practice some things contrary
to the Doctrine, and Tenets of the Church, whose members they are. For the Dr.
will not deny, that among Protestants there are some, nay many, who although
they assent to the Tenets of the Protestant Church, do contradict, in their
practice, the Doctrine they profess to believe, being Adulterers, Thieves,
Perjurers, and Drunkards, living as if there were no God, according to that of
St. Paul, Titus 1.16. quoted by Dr. St. page 25. speaking of some, who profess
that they know God, but in works they deny him. And yet sure the Dr. will not
therefore affirm, that the Protestant Church is not a true, and sound Church.
However, should she teach Adultery, Thieving, and Perjury to be lawful, or that
there is no God, certainly the Dr. in that case would not hold her for a True,
much less for a Sound Church, Our present debate therefore is concerning the
Doctrines of the Roman Church; and whether Dr. St. does not Contradict himself,
by asserting, that the Roman Church is a True Church, and yet that she does
teach Idolatry, or those things wherein it lies.

My fifth, and last Proposition goes thus: The Roman Church does not err
against any Article of Faith, or Fundamental point of Religion. Dr. St. does
confess, page 29. That this is his Concession: from whence all the force of our
Argument is taken: and we do not deny, but that this Concession of the Dr. is
of great concern in order to our present Design. All the endeavors therefore
of the Dr. are bent to show in what sense this Concession is made by him, and
of what force it is in this present Debate. I prove this to be Dr. St.'s
Sentiment, (which some did question, when my book first came forth, as I
insinuated above) from several places, quoted out of his Rat. Account: amongst
the rest I alleged the page 54, 55. where he affirms (adding that this is the
sense of the English Church) That those points, which they defend in opposition
to the Roman Church, and wherein only they impeach us of Errors, agreeing with
us in the rest, are mere pious Opinions, and inferior Truths, which no body is
obliged to believe, either necessitate medij, or necessitate praecepti: and
consequently that they are not Articles of Faith, or Fundamental points of
Religion; every one being obliged, either necessitate medij, or necessitate
Praecepti, to believe all such points: and he expressly asserts in the
forementioned pages, praising thence the moderation of the English Church, that
she does not acknowledge any thing, as an Article of Faith, which is not
acknowledged as such by Rome it self. Since therefore it is manifest, that Rome
does not acknowledge as Articles of Faith, those Points which the English
Church maintains in opposition to her, it evidently follows, according to Dr.
St.'s Concession, that neither the Church of England does acknowledge such
points as Articles of Faith.

Whence I showed the truth of this our Proposition, against Dr. St. and his
Cabal. The substance of the Argument is this.

The Church of Rome does not err, nor cannot err, against any Article of Faith,
or Fundamental point of Religion; unless the points, at least some of them,
against which she is supposed to err, be Articles of Faith, or Fundamental
points of Religion. This is evident.

But none of these points, against which Dr. St. supposes the Roman Church to
err, are in his opinion either Articles of Faith, or Fundamental points of
Religion, as manifestly appears by what we have quoted even now out of him: for
he supposes her to err only against those points, wherein the Church of England
differs from us; which in his opinion are no Articles of Faith.

Therefore, according to Dr. St.'s opinion, the Roman Church does not err
against any Article of Faith, or Fundamental point of Religion; which is the
Proposition set down by me.

Neither can the Dr. say, that although the Church of Rome does err immediately
only against those points, which the English Church defends in opposition unto
her; yet these points being connexed with Articles of Faith, she cannot err
against these, without erring mediately, and by consequence, against Articles
of Faith: he cannot, I say, affirm this. For otherwise he would never grant
this our Fifth Proposition, as he does: Because to err mediately against an
Article, is to err against that, and another point too; and so he should
absolutely have denied, That the Roman Church does not err against any Article
of Faith: which he does not. In the like manner it would be ridiculous to
affirm, That one did not kill such a man, because he did not immediately
destroy the Union between the Soul, and the Body; in the dissolution whereof
death formally consists; but only mediately and by consequence, because he
destroyed some disposition, necessary to the conservation of that Union: as if
one Arraigned for having killed a man, should answer, That he did not kill him;
That he only cut off his Head. Nay, if those particular Tenets of the
Protestant Church are so connexed, and linked with Articles of Faith, that
whoever denies, or destroies the former, must also deny, and destroy the
latter, one would be obliged necessitate medij, or praecepti, not to dissent
from such points; Because we are obliged not to deny any Article of Faith; and
consequently not to deny any thing, which being once denied, an Article of
Faith is also denied, and cashiered: which is contrary to what he asserts in
the place above quoted: where he affirms, that men are prohibited to oppose
them [particular Tenets of the English Church] exteriourly, but not to dissent
from them interiourly: So because men are prohibited to kill others, they are
obliged, not to destroy any Disposition, whereon the life of man necessarily
depends.

Nor is this Fifth Proposition laid down by me, only as Dr. St.'s and his
Associates opinion; but, as I proved in my Book, it is also the common
assertion of other Protestants; some of them averring This to be the judgment
of all Learned Protestants, accusing the contrary party of their Brethren of an
ignorant Zeal; and King James adds they are worthy to be burnt. Hence is that
common speech of Protestants, boasting of their Charity therein, that the Roman
Church does not teach any Error Fundamental, Damnable, or Destructive to
Salvation; That she does not err in the Foundations, but in the
Supurstructures; nor in Fundamentals, but only in Not-fundamentals; nor against
Articles of Faith, but against inferior Truths only. Now to err in
Fundamentals, or to admit a Fundamental Error, is to err against a Fundamental
Truth. Whence I conclude, that according to the constant persuasion, not only
of Dr. St. and his Partisans, but also of all Learned Protestants, The Roman
Church does not Err against any Article of Faith, or Fundamental point of
Religion: which was the very Proposition I laid down in the fifth, and last
place.

Let Us examine yet farther, how Dr. St. still boggles at the forementioned
Proposition. All that in substance he says is this, That he never granted the
Roman Church to be a Sound Church, or consequently, that she did not err in
some matters of Religion, requisite to the Soundness, and Integrity of a
Church: neither can he show, that I alleged him to the contrary: neither does
this fifth Proposition express any such thing, as is manifest. What therefore
here, and in other places, he confessedly grants, is, That our Church is a True
Church, unerring against all Fundamental, and Essential points of Religion, and
against all Articles of Faith: which is all that is necessary to the absolute
Truth of the forementioned Proposition. Wherefore, as it would be very absurd
to answer one, who intending only to prove such a person not to be dead, should
take this Proposition, Such a person is yet a true man, retaining all the
Essentials of a man, to answer (I say) that what he avouches of him is true;
but that such a person is not a sound man: So it is very impertinent, when I
proposed only to him, that the Roman Church does not err against any Article of
Faith, or Fundamental point of Religion, requisite to the Essence of a True
Church, (as all Fundamental points are) to tell me, that the Roman Church does
err against some points of Religion, requisite only to the Soundness of a
Church: such as he fancies the particular Tenets of the Protestant Church to
be: which is to tell me in plain English, That what I say is true, but what I
say not is false: which answer is very impertinent, and good for nothing, but
to trifle away the time.

And hence will appear, of what force this Concession of Dr. St. is to our
present Design; which is to show him guilty of Self-contradiction, by granting
our Church, not to err against any Fundamental point of Religion; and yet
affirming that she teaches Idolatry, and such gross Idolatry. For, to teach
Idolatry, especially such a gross Idolatry, as he is pleased to Father upon us,
is, according to his own express assertion, to teach, or require, that the
Honor, or Worship due only to the Creator, be given to to a Creature; and to
teach this is to err against the contrary Truth, viz. The Honor which is due
only to the Creator, is not to be given to a Creature, as is evident: and
consequently it is to err against a Fundamental point of Religion. For such
does Dr. St. acknowledge to be the aforesaid Truth. Whence I conclude, that to
say our Church does not err against any Fundamental point; and yet that she
does teach such gross Idolatry, as he is pleased to fasten upon her, is to say,
That she does not err against any, and yet that she does err against some:
which is a palpable Contradiction.

Were the Idolatry he Fathers upon us, destructive only to something requisite
merely to the Soundness of a Church, and to some Non-fundamental point, his
distinction would have been to some purpose. But since the Idolatry he lays to
our Charge, is destructive, according to our own Concession, to something
requisite to the very Being of a Church, viz. to a Fundamental, and Essential
point; the forementioned Distinction of the Truth, and Soundness of a Church is
altogether frivolous.

Finally, Dr. St. page 32. speaking in particular concerning our fifth
Proposition says, That if this Assertion, The Church of Rome does not err
against any point necessary to Salvation, be only meant of those Essential
points of Faith, which he supposes antecedently necessary to the Being of a
Church, he denies it not; and he makes the ancient Creeds of the Catholic
Church, (before he had made mention only of the Apostles Creed) to be the best
measure of those things, which were believed to be necessary to Salvation. But
he adds That he does not see, of what use the forementioned Concession of his
can be to us in the present debate, unless we can show (which he supposes we
are never able to do) that whatever Church does embrace the ancient Creeds,
and own all the Articles of Faith, which are contained in them, cannot be
guilty of Idolalatry. But this answer of the Dr. is liable to the same
exceptions we produced against him, in the Explanation of our Third
Proposition. For it is a very different thing to say, A Church, that embraces,
and owns all Essential points of Faith, (which is the Dr. 's Proposition) and a
Church that does not err against any Essential point of Faith; (which is our
Proposition, tacitly at least granted by him:) For a Church may contradict her
self, and err against those very points, which she embraces, and owns: how can
the Roman Church be a True Church, as the Dr. often confesses she is, unless
she be free from all Fundamental Errors? and how can she be free from all
Fundamental Errors, if she errs against any Fundamental point? and finally,
how does she not err against a Fundamental point, if she teaches Idolatry, yea
the grossest Idolatry of the world?

Whence I conclude, that not only this main Proposition is granted by him in
the sense I pretend, viz. That the Roman Church does not err against any
Article of Faith, or Fundamental point of Religion, even of those, which he
acknowledges to be such: but also, that this his Concession is effectual to
evince our present design, viz. to clear the Roman Church from the Idolatry
cast upon her, and to prove the Dr. guilty of Self-contradiction, by granting,
that the Roman Church does not err against any Fundamental point of Faith, and
yet charging her with Idolatry, and with such gross Idolatry.

To say the truth, I would never desire an Adversary to grant me more, in
order to confute him, than Dr. St. has, and does grant in the present debate.
For these Five Propositions set down by me, are either absolutely granted by
the Dr. or at least not denied by him in the sense I pretended; as is apparent,
by what has been discussed: and we take this Non-denial of the Dr. for a grant,
or consent; according to that Maxim, Qui tacet, consentire videtur. And
certainly had he thought them false, he would have denied them: whenas he does
not so much as deny one of them, in the sense intended; but some other
Propositions very different.

Wherefore these Propositions being granted in the conformity aforesaid, the
method I took was to deduce from them the contradictory of the Calumny cast
upon our Church by Dr. St. For, to lay down Propositions, or Principles, and to
deduce nothing from them, is, as if one should lay Foundations without building
the Superstructures: as to make Deductions without first laying Princiciples,
(as some do) is to build without Foundation. And because some cannot, others
will not make by themselves the deductions; especially when they are contrary
to what formerly they have imbibed, and are resolved to maintain, I thought it
best to make them to their hand. However, because the main, nay the sole,
exception, that some persons had against my Book, was, because I used a
Scholastic Method, framing my deductions in a ridged Syllogistical form, it
seems to me expedient, for the satisfaction of such persons, to produce here
the reasons, that moved me thereunto: which are these.

First, Because this method I took, is a close, clear, short, and convincing
way; and since I desired, in a matter of so great concern, and not having too
much time, to be quick, close, clear, and short with my Adversary, in order to
convince him of Self-contradiction, I made choice of this Method.

Secondly, all Discourses whatsoever, loose, or not loose, do necessarily imply
some Syllogism; wherein the truth one endeavors to prove, is inferred, or
pretended to be inferred, from some Principles. And although all kinds of
Discourses are obnoxious to Fallacies, and Sophistry; yet this difference there
is between Loose, or Rhetorical Discourses, and Logical, or not Loose, that in
Rhetorical Discourses, as being commonly interlaced with several digressions,
and gay Metaphors, which amuze the Reader, the fallacy is easily disguised. But
in ridged Syllogistical Discourses, divested from gaudy Expressions, quaint
Metaphors, and unnecessary digressions, the Fallacy, if there be any, is with
far less difficulty detected. And this is the reason, that when we will
manifest the Sophistry of a loose discourse, we do commonly reduce it to a
Syllogistical form, the better to discover it. Now because I desired to deal
fairly, and sincerely with Dr. St. I made use of this method; to the end, that
were there any fallacy in my Syllogisms, it might more easily appear unto him.
And although in almost every page he impeaches me of Sophistry and
Captiousness, yet he does not legally show any one of my Syllogisms to be
liable to any of the Fallacies, the Logicians make mention of: and one would
think, that a Dr. or of Divinity should not be ignorant of them: and all that
he does in this kind is, as appears by the instances above produced, First he
feigns me to speak what I do not, and then he affirms, that I speak
Sophistically, and Captiously.

Thirdly, it is the common style of our Polemical Divines here in England,
whether Catholics or Protestants, to use this Syllogistical way, both in their
Books and conferences, concerning matters of Religion, when they will write or
speak close to the Subject they handle. Let my Adversary be a president; who in
his Answer to the two Questions proposed by one of the Church of Rome, he
reduces almost all his Discourses to formal Syllogisms, although he labored
that Answer, only for the satisfaction of a Lady; and Ladies do not use to be
much verst in Artificial Logic, or formal Syllogisms. And in the late Disputes
between the Annabaptists and Quakers, the greatest of their Auditory being made
up of Women and Tradesmen, who have not frequented Universities, yet their
Arguments were framed in a Syllogistical way.

Since therefore I had never heard this common method of treating Controversies
reprehended in our Divines, Protestants or Catholics; and being moreover
inclined thereunto, as having been bred, the greatest part of my life in Famous
Universities, where a Scholastic, and Dialectical method is most in vogue, I
thought no just exception would be made against me, should I indulge my self in
a thing nothing extravagant, and suitable to my inclination: especially when I
intended my Book particularly for learned men, who are not unacquainted with
Syllogisms. And for the satisfaction of Protestants in this matter, 'twill
without doubt be enough to see, that my Adversary, Dr. St. although he seems to
have been resolved to pardon me in nothing which he could find to be any way
obnoxious to his Reproofs, has not carped at me upon this account. However, if
any one be not satisfied with these Reasons, he may pass over the Formal
Syllogisms, laid down at the closing of each point, in Dr. Stillingfleet
against Dr. Stillingfleet: only I desire him to make the Deduction by himself,
in the manner he shall think best.

The Two Syllogisms therefore, wherewith, out of the Propositions above
mentioned, and assented unto by the Doctor, I demonstrated the Roman Church to
be free from Idolatry in the Veneration of Images, Adoration of the Host, and
Invocation of Saints, were these:

A Church that does not err against any Article of Faith, or Fundamental point
of Religion, does not teach Idolatry. See Prop. 3.

But the Roman Church is a Church, that does not err against any Article of
Faith, or Fundamental point of Religion. See Prop. 5.

Therefore she does not teach Idolatry.

But she does teach Veneration of Images, Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist,
and Invocation of Saints. See Prop. 4.

Therefore none of these Practices, as taught, and allowed of, by the Roman
Church, are Idolatry.

We may add this farther Discourse: A Church, that does not err against this
Fundamental point, viz. The Honor due only to the Creator, is not to be given
to the Creature, does not teach Idolatry; all Idolatry being destructive to the
forementioned point. See Prop. 3.

But such is the Roman Church, as is evident by the fifth Proposition.

Therefore she does not teach Idolatry.

And hence manifestly appears, how palpably Dr. St. Contradicts himself, in
charging the Roman Church with Idolatry, and yet granting her to be a True
Church, unerring against all Fundamentals. For it is as much, as if he had
said, she does not err against any Fundamental point, yet she does err against
some.

CHAP. VIII. Several Quibbles against the aforesaid Doctrine removed.
FRom what we have hitherto set down, may easily be answered several Quibbles,
which Dr. St. and others, do, or may, object against the Doctrine above
established. The Doctor often insinuates that there are two sorts of Idolary.
The one consistent with the Being, but not with the Soundness of a Church: The
other inconsistent with the very Being of a Church: and he makes the Roman
Church guilty of the former kind of Idolatry, and not of the latter. Whence he
concludes, that he does not commit any Contradiction by charging the Roman
Church with this sort of Idolatry, and yet granting her to be a true Church.
But this objection vanishes to nothing; because we have shown, that the general
notion of Idolatry, allowed by the Dr. is inconsistent with a Fundamental, and
Essential point of Religion; and consequently with the very Being of a True
Church. And since there can be no kind of Idolatry, which does not participate
the general notion of Idolatry, as is evident, it manifestly follows, that all
sorts possible of Idolatry are inconsistent with the Being of a Church.

Moreover, we have already demonstrated, that Dr. St. affirms, in the places
quoted above, the Idolatry allowed of by the Roman Church to be as bad, nay
worse, than the grossest Idolatry of the Heathens. Now if the grossest Idolatry
of the Heathens be destructive to the Being of a Church, as certainly it is,
(neither does, nor can Dr. St. deny it) how is it credible, that an Idolatry
yet worse than that, should be consistent with the Being, and Essence of a True
Church? The Dr. might as well, with the subtlety of his wit, distinguish two
Antichrists; the one, that is contrary to Christ; the other, though worse than
the former, that is not contrary to Christ, but his intimate Friend. For I am
confident, that one may as easily find out an Antichrist, not contrary to
Christ, as an Idolatry not dstructive to the Being of a True Church. In the
like manner he might say, (and therein he would highly oblige the Libertins of
our Nation) that there are two sorts of Debauchery, the one, inconsistent with
a good life; the other, though far worse than the former, yet consistent with
it: and then tells us, that one cannot be a good, and pious man, and yet a
Debauchee in the former sense; But that if one be a Debauchee in the latter
sense, (which is yet far more horrible, than the former) he may very well be a
good and pious man, without the least show of Contradiction: and then laugh at
us, as half-witted men, because we cannot understand these Niceties.

Certainly, there has never been yet in the world a man, who has more obliged
Idolaters, than Dr. St. has done. I, and many more with me, have always
believed, that there is no Idolatry, which is not Idolatry; and that all
Idolatry is inconsistent with the Being of a True Church. But the incomparable
Dr. St. has found out one Idolatry, that is no-Idolatry; another Idolatry,
which kills a Church; another, though worse than the former, that makes her
only sick; and another finally, that is an Essential perfection, and a
necessary ingredient of a True Church; as we shall see, when we come to examine
his Answer to our Appendix. Now since the Dr. has invented such pretty kinds of
Idolatry, who can blame him for making our Church, both True and Idolatrous?

Again the Dr. answers, (clear himself from Self-contradiction) that he never
affirmed, the Roman Church did, or does teach in express terms, any sort of
Idolatry, or that the honor due only to God, may be given to a mere Creature.
But that she only teaches those things, wherein Idolatry lies: which is not to
teach Idolatry expressly: as for instance, she does not teach the Veneration
she exhibits to Images to be Idolatry, and yet lawful; for that would be to
teach Idolatry in express terms: but rather she affirms the contrary, viz. That
the forementioned Veneration is not Idolatrous: for she thinks, that the honor
she exhibits to Images, is not Divine Worship: however, because the Dr. will
have her to be mistaken in these persuasions, he impeaches her of Idolatry.

Now the Substance of this Answer comes to be, that although to say, that the
Roman Church is a True Church, and yet that she does teach Idolatry in express
terms, be a palpable Contradiction; yet there is no appearance of contradiction
in saying, as he does, that the Roman Church is a True Church, but yet that she
does teach those things wherein Idolatry lies; which are his words, page, 29. or
that she does teach Idolatry, not in express terms, but only by Consequence, as
he says page 21.

But I leave to others to examine, how this does agree, with what Dr. St.
affirms, in several places of his Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced
in the Roman Church: endeavoring to show, that she does expressly act against
the Second Commandment of God, (according to their account) wherein is
prohibited Idolatry) when she teaches the Veneration, and Worship of Images.

Besides, this objection is cashiered, by what has been already discussed. For
since the Idolatry Dr. St. fathers upon the Roman Church is destructive to a
Fundamental point of Religion, and consequently to the very Being of a True
Church, as has been already demonstrated, it is impossible, that a Church,
remaining a True Church, should teach such an Idolatry, either in express
terms, or by good Consequence: and as the Dr. will not grant, that to teach
Idolatry only by Consequence, teaching those things wherein it lies, is enough
to free the Roman Church from being really Idolatrous; otherwise by this Answer
he himself would discharge her from the Crime of Idolatry he casts upon her; so
neither can it excuse the Roman Church from being no True Church; the
oppositeness of Idolatry with the Essence of a Church, consisting in the
Reality of the thing, and not in the particular persuasion of such as teach it.
Wherefore to say, that the Roman Church is a True Church, and yet that she does
teach Idolatry in the manner aforementioned, is to commit a palpable
Contradiction.

Moreover, it is certain, neither can the Dr. question it, that the Churches of
the grossest sort of Heathens, did teach Idolatry, destructive to the being of
a true Church, and in a manner destructive thereunto; and yet they did not
teach Idolatry in express terms, but only by Consequence, teaching those things
wherein it did lie. For either they did affirm (though by mistake) that the
object, to which they gave Divine Worship, was not a mere Creature; or that the
honor they gave, was not properly Divine. For what Heathen did ever teach in
express terms, That the honor due only to God, may be given to a mere
Creature? So that were this objection of any force, it would excuse the
grossest Heathens from practicing, or teaching any Idolatry, destructive to the
Essence of a True Church. Nay, if Idolatry, because it is taught, not in
express terms, but by consequence, is not destructive to the Being of a Church,
he might also affirm, that upon the same account it is neither destructive to
the soundness of it; and consequently the Roman Church would not be, according
to the Dr. 's opinion, not only True, but Sound also. For if this Doctrine be
true, the destructiveness of Idolatry is not to be taken from the thing, which
is practiced or taught, but from the manner of practsing it, or teaching it.
All Heresies, if they be truly such, are destructive to the very Being of a
True Church, because they separate the Societies that profess them, from the
Church of Christ, as the very notion of Heresy does import: yet according to
this answer of the Doctor, they would be consistent with the Essence of a True
Church; because there is no Heretical Church, which is not mistaken in some
thing that it teaches; or which does teach to be an Error or Heresy, that
which she maintains as a Truth: yet because she teaches those things, wherein
her particular Heresy lies, and because she teaches to be true what really is
an Error, and an Error contrary to an Article of Faith; therefore she is an
Heretical, and no True Church.

Whence it follows, that should one affirm, that such a Church is True, and yet
that she teaches those things, wherein Heresy, and Error against Faith does
lie, he would, beyond debate, contradict himself: and if it be a contradiction
to affirm, that such a Church is true, and yet Heretical, will it be no
Contradiction to defend, that the Roman Church is True, but yet Idolatrous? For
certainly Idolatry is no less destructive to the Being of a Church, than
Heresy.

Wherefore, as to kill a man, it is enough for one to do that, which necessarily
infers the Separation of the Soul from the Body, whether he does it by mistake,
or without mistake; knowingly, or not knowingly: So, to destroy the Being of a
True Church, it is enough, if she teaches any Fundamental, or Essential Error,
destructive to the Essence thereof; as she must necessarily do, if she teaches
Idolatry, whether she teaches it in express terms, or only by consequence,
whether by mistake or not: For although mistake may excuse him, who has it,
from erring maliciously, yet not from erring, nor the Church that should teach
such an Error, from being Erroneous.

Since therefore Dr. St. does not excuse the Roman Church from Erring against
this Fundamental point, The Honor due only to God, is not to be given to a
mere Creature, he cannot excuse her from a Fundamental Error, inconsistent
with the Being of a True Church; and consequently he cannot excuse himself from
a manifest Contradiction, in granting the Roman Church to be a True Church, and
yet charging her with Doctrines containing Idolatry.

After all these attempts, on the part of the Idolatry he fathers upon us, had
proved unsuccessful; he turns himself to the other part of the Contradiction,
saying, that when he grants the Roman Church to be a True Church, he means
thereby nothing else, but that she does embrace all Essential points of Faith,
couched in the Ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church; and he thinks it very
far from any contradiction, to affirm, that a Church may embrace all such
points, and yet teach Idolatry: and therefore he says, that although the
Church of Rome does own the Fundamentals of Christian Faith contained in the
Ancient Creeds, yet she debauches those very Principles, which she professes to
own, page 34. This objection is also annulled, by what we have laid down above.
First, Dr. St. does not only grant, that the Roman Church does embrace all the
Essentials points of Christian Faith, and consequently amongst the rest this
point, viz. The Honor due only to God, is not to be given to a mere Creature;
which he confesses to be one of them: But also he allows, that she does not err
against any Fundamental point of Faith: this being my Fifth Proposition; which
he assents unto, and calls in his Concession. Now to say, That the Roman Church
does not err against any Fundamental point, (as he says she does not) and yet
that she teaches Idolatry, (which is to err against a Fundamental point, even
according to his Principles) is a palpable contradiction.

Secondly, When Dr. St. grants our Church to be a True Church, as he does,
without doubt he takes a True Church as contradistinct from a False Church, or
from a Church which is not True: otherwise he would interpret in a quite
contrary sense this his Concession, The Roman Church is a True Church, i.e. The
Roman Church is no true Church; which interpretation cannot but seem to any
prudent man very ridiculous. Now a Church may fail to be a True Church, either
because she does not positively embrace some Essential point, or because she
denies some Essential point, and errs against it: and to the Essence of a True
Church it is requisite, not only to embrace positively all Fundamental points,
but also not to err against any one of them, as I have demonstrated above.
Neither do I think, that Dr. St. will deny it; otherwise he would, doubtless,
have denied our Fifth Proposition. Whoever therefore affirms, that our Church
is a True Church, and yet that it errs against a Fundamental point, (as
necessarily it must, if it maintains Idolatry) does as much as affirm, it is
True, and not True.

Thirdly, let us suppose, (since it is possible for a Church to contradict her
self) that a Church, embracing all the ancient Creeds, with the Articles
contained in them, should notwithstanding contradict her self, denying some of
the main points couched in those Creeds, and owned by her, sure Dr. St. will
not say, that such a Church is a True Church; and that by contradicting those
main Articles of Faith she does only debauch them, but not ruin, or destroy
them. Certainly every Contradictory ruins it Contradictory, and every Contrary
destroys its Contrary. Will the Dr. affirm, that the grossest of the Heathens
Idolatry did only debauch, and not destroy, this Prindiple owned by them, viz.
The honor due only to God is not to be given to a mere Creature? and after the
Dr. has taken so much pains to show, that the Veneration of Images, owned by
the Roman Church, is point blank against their 2d Commandment, will he say now,
it only debauches it, but does not destroy it? Wherefore Dr. St. cannot defend,
that the Roman Church does teach Idolatry, without granting, that she
contradicts, and destroys a Fundamental point of Religion; neither can he
grant, that she contradicts a Fundamental point of Religion, and yet allow that
she is a True Church. So that to maintain on the one side that she teaches
Idolatry, and on the other, that she is a True Church. is to commit a manifest
Contradiction.

I insinuated in my Book the similitude of a way from one place to another,
hinted at also by the Dr. page 50. which may contribute much to clear this
matter. Suppose, as the custom is in some Almanacks, which set down the true
ways from one place to another, one should describe a True way, how we may go
from London to York; and setting down all the Towns, which others commonly
mention, should intermingle them with other places, that lie either the quite
contrary way, or at least quite out of the way; as for instance, from Stamford,
(which lies in the ordinary way) to the Fennes; thence to Salisbury; thence to
Plymouth; thence to the West- Indies, and if you please to East Indies also:
for you are always in a true way from London to York; only with this general
advice, that whenever you go out of the true way, you must turn back again;
without specifying which places are out of the way; which not: but setting them
down all as parts of the True way. So that whoever does not go through all the
places, put down in the forementioned description, does not follow the way
therein contained. Would not such a description of a True way from London to
York be extreme ridiculous? could there be a better piece of Drollery than
this, for Poor Robins Almanac? or can any man of common sense, knowing that so
many places, set down in the aforesaid description, lie quite out of the way
from London to York, call the way there described a True way from London to
York? For certainly, whoever understands what he says, must needs understand
by a True way from London to York, a way, that not only contains all the
principal places from the one City to the other, but moreover does not contain
any place quite out of the way.

This is just our case with Dr. St. He freely confesses, that the Roman Church
is a True Church, and a True way to Salvation; but withal he affirms, that she
does not only contain those main points, which he thinks sufficient to
constitute a True Church; but also other particular points, which he looks upon
as gross Idolatry, and open Violations of the Divine Law; and consequently
destructive to the Salvation of men: which particular points the Roman Church
delivers, not as Errors, but as Truths, and Articles of Faith, which all are
bound to assent unto. So that whoever denies any of those particular points,
can no more be a Roman Catholic, than if he denied some of the main points of
Christianity, common both to Catholics and Protestants. Now since Dr. St. is
of this persuasion, that the Roman Church teaches and requires gross Idolatry,
and open violations of Gods Laws, how can he say without manifestly
contradicting himself, that notwithstanding all this, she is a True Church, and
a True way to Heaven? Can a True way to Heaven be made up of a high way to
Hell? as certainly Idolatry is: or is not Idolatry as far out of the way to
Heaven, as the West Indies is out of the way from London to York? The answer of
the Dr. in effect is this. If you be a Roman Chatholick, you are in a True way
to Heaven; and yet if you be a Roman Catholic, you are quite out of the way to
Heaven: and whether this be not pure nonsense, I leave it to the judgment of
any impartial person whatsoever. Whence I conclude, that all men of Reason must
needs understand by a True Church, a Church that does not only positively
embrace all those points, and Articles, which are requisite to the Being of a
Church; but moreover does not teach, nor require any thing whatsoever
destructive to Salvation; as doubtless gross Idolatry, and open Violations of
the Divine Laws, are.

As insignificant and senseless as this, is another evasion, (or rather the
same in other terms) the Dr. makes use of, viz. that we may be saved as
Christians, but not as Roman Catholics; and that we may be saved, if we
repent; but not otherwise. And what Roman Catholic did ever affirm, that
Protestants, or any Heretics whatsoever, are damned as Christians; or because
they hold the general Principles of Christianity, wherein they agree with good
Christians? but only as holding the particular Errors of their respective
Religions: neither will they be damned, if they Repent. And yet Dr. St.
pretends, that Protestants have a more Charitable opinion of Catholics, in
order to their Salvation, than Catholics have of Protestants. See my book,
page 7, 8. Yea, there is no Religion, which does not hold some general Truths,
viz. That we ought to repent of our sins, and retract our Errors; That we are
bound to believe, and do whatsoever God will have us believe, or do, and such
like: neither is any one damned for holding these Truths; nor if he sincerely
repents of all his sins, and retracts all his errors: and yet sure Dr. St.
will not grant, that all Religions in the world are True, and the very same
with Protestancy, as he says ours is.

The forementioned Answer of Dr. St. puts me in mind of what one answered a
Prince, who was also a Bishop, when being checked by him for having committed
some great misdemeanour unbeseeming a Bishop, he said, that he had done it as a
Prince, not as a Bishop; the other replied, But if the Devil carries away your
Highness as a Prince, what will become of you as a Bishop? In the like manner,
if Dr. St. affirms, that Roman Catholics, as such, are damned, can he imagine,
that they will be saved as Christians? In fine, according to this answer of Dr.
St. it is no more possible for Roman Catholics to be saved, than for a man to
become a Horse; which is altogether impossible. For the repugnancy that is, for
a man to become a horse, is not grounded upon the Generical Predicates, wherein
he agrees with a Horse; but upon his special difference: and Dr. St. confesses
the particular Tenets of Roman Catholics to be repugnant to Salvation; but not
the general: and if this be the possibility of Salvation he grants us, and
whereof he so much vapors, what Catholic ever denied it to Protestants? and
to say, that we may be saved, if we repent of our particular Tenets, and recall
them, (which we can never do without quitting the Roman Catholic Religion) is
as much, as if he should say, that the Roman Catholic Religion is a true way
to Salvation, but that it will never carry you thither, unless you quit it;
which is, as I insinuated in the place above quoted, a pretty piece of
Nonsense.

Whence we conclude, that, as Dr. St. to show that the Roman Church may be
Idolatrous, though True, forges an Idolatry, which is no Idolatry; so to prove
that she may be a true Church, though Idolatrous, he feigns a true Church that
is no true Church. And who can wonder now, that Whitby should style Dr. St. a
Prodigy of Ingenuity and Learning; since he has been able to invent such
prodigious distinctions of a true Church, no true Church; and of an Idolatry,
no Idolatry.

And hence by the way, I infer a thing of great comfort for Roman Catholics,
which is, that when they hear their Church impeached of Idolatry, in so many
Ballads cried through the streets, and in so many Pamphlets, that lie upon
every Stationers Stall, there is no more meant by the Idolatry they accuse us
of, than an Idolatry that is no Idolatry; or an Idolatry that is an essential
perfection of the true Religion: and there is no great harm to be feared from
such Idolatries as these.

One thing there is, that I cannot but wonder at; which is, that since Dr. St.
is so eminent in composing things, though never so opposite one to the other,
the Anabaptists and Quakers did not choose him for Arbiter in their late
Contests concerning Religion. For though the Anabaptists had proved the Quakers
no Christians, as they pretended; notwithstanding the Dr. out of his immense
charity, would have demonstrated, that they were both still of the very same
Religion, not only among themselves, but even with him also. For if he be able
to bring to a composition things, that grin so much one at the other, as a True
Church and an Idolatrous Church, even with the grossest sort of Idolatry, what
will he not compose? and if he be so charitable as to make his own Church the
very same in substance with an Idolatrous Church, why not also with a No
Christian Church? besides, the Quakers and Anabaptists follow the very same
Rule, whereby Dr. St. regulates Protestancy. See his Principles, 5, 13, 15. For
after a sober and sincere enquiry made into the Truth, (and whether they have
made such an enquiry or not, they must be their own Judges, without being bound
to submit to any Exterior Guide) they follow the Light within, or a faculty in
them of discerning Truth and Falsehood, in matters proposed to their Belief:
whereby they judge of the Truth of Divine Revelation, and of the Genuine sense
thereof. So that, if this faculty (which is, and ought to be, according to the
Dr. their sole Guide) tells them, That Christ is not God, That Christian
Religion is not true, or that there is no Scripture; All goes well, and they
are of the very same Religion with Dr. St. adjusting themselves to his very
rule. A late Book, entitled A Treatise of Humane Reason, disgusted much the
Protestants as I have heard: and yet it is nothing else, but an abstract of
those very Principles and Grounds, whereon this Champion of Protestancy, Dr.
St. builds the Vindication of the Protestant Religion.

Finally, because the Dr. seems extreme fond of his distinction of a True
Church, and a Sound Church, insinuated above, it will not be amiss to examine
what he can mean by a Sound Church, and secure way to Salvation; which in this
debate signify the same. Does he mean by it a Church, that is free from all
difficulties, and Temptations? if so, then there is no True Church in the
world, that is sound and secure. For, even according to our Saviors Testimony,
the true way to Heaven is narrow, and difficult, beset with several dangers,
and temptations; which render the Salvation of men extreme hazardous; and
encompassed on all with cross and bypath, and dark turnnings; wherein many
are miss-led; yea Christian Religion, taken in its greatest purity, contains
high Mysteries, not easy to be assented unto; and hard Precepts which go
against the grain of our nature; and many miscarry, deterred by these
difficulties. Does he therefore mean by it a Church qualified with such Laws,
that whoever keeps close to them till death, (and let the way to Salvation be
never so secure, yet if one does not keep to it 'till death, what will it avail
him?) will certainly be saved. If this be his meaning, there is no True Church
which is not sound and secure, in this sense. For a True Church must contain
all things necessary to Salvation, both in order to our Belief, and Practice,
as is certain: neither does Dr. St. deny it: and sure, whoever dies, having
discharged all things necessary to his Salvation, as well in reference to his
Belief, as Practice, will certainly be saved; as is manifest from those words
of our Savior, Si vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata: which is a much as if
he had said, whoever observes my Commandments, shall certainly be saved: and
doubtless no Body can do all, that is necessary to Salvation, without observing
Gods Commandments.

Does he mean by it a Church, that does not teach any thing whatsoever, as an
Article of Faith, which is either an Error, or Corruption? This seems to be
his meaning. But neither is it possible, that any Church whatsoever should be a
True Church, and yet not sound, and secure in this sense. For it is a manifest
Contradiction to affirm, That such a Church is a True Church, but yet that she
fathers upon God, or teaches God to be the Author of some Error or Corruption;
as necessarily she must, if she teaches any Error or Corruption, as an Article
of Faith. A True Church must not err against any Fundamental point of Faith, as
is certain; nor consequently, against this point, God is not the Author of any
Error or Corruption whatsoever: which, doubtless, is Fundamental. A true
Church therefore must not teach any Error or Corruption, as an Article of
Faith; or (which is the same) must not teach God to be the Author of any
Error, or Corruption. For to teach this, is to err against the forementioned
point.

Does he mean by it a Church, that does not require, or enjoin, any Practice,
or any other thing, destructive to Salvation; as doubtless all Idolatry is,
whether she teaches it as an Article of Faith, or not? But how can a Church be
true, and yet not sound nor secure, in this sense also? A true Church must lead
men to Salvation; and certainly it cannot lead men to Salvation, if it enjoins,
and requires them to do things destructive thereunto. Wherefore I cannot see
what Dr. St. is able to mean by a Sound and Secure Church; which does not
prove, either that there is not in the world any Church True and Sound; or that
there is no Church True which is not Sound, and secure: and we are so far from
confounding a True Church with a Sound and Secure Church in the first sense
abovementioned; i. e. with a Church free from all dangers and difficulties, as
Dr. St. will needs suppose we do, that we constantly affirm, that there is no
True Church in the world, Sound and Secure in that sense; according to what I
set down in my Book, page 5. But the Dr. did not think fit to take notice
thereof.

From what has been agitated in the precedent Discourses, it manifestly
appears, that Dr. St. is guilty of Self Contradiction, by asserting that the
Roman Church is a True Church, and yet charging her with Idolatry, yea the
grossest Idolatry of the world: and as I promised at the beginning, I am
willing to admit, as Judges in this plea, the Learned men in our two famous
Universities.

CHAP. IX. The Doctor's Answer to my Appendix, proved Frivolous.
I Come now to consider, what Answer Dr. St. is pleased to afford to the
Appendix of my Book; which he Attacks in the next place: wherein, to confirm
the former Doctrine, concerning the Nullity of the Charge of Idolatry, cast
upon the Roman Church, I proved, that either his Principles, whereon he bottoms
the forementioned Charge, were not good, or that he himself was an Idolater:
and the greatest part of his Answer, being contained in less than three leaves
in Octavo, is stuffed up with Scoffs, gaudy expressions, jingling Metaphors,
superfluous Digressions, Railery, and such like Chaff, the common Ingredients
of his Books. After I had declared each premise by it self, I summed up the
substance of my Argument in this manner.

Whoever Worships God represented in a way far inferior to his Greatness, is
an Idolater, according to Dr. St.'s main Principle; whereby he pretends to make
good the Charge of Idolatry laid upon us in the Veneration of Images.

But whoever Worships God represented unto him without the Beatifical Vision,
either by Images, by words, or by Imagination, he worships God represented in a
way far inferior to his Greatness, as is manifest.

Therefore whoever Worships God, represented unto him without the Beatifical
Vision, either by Words or Images, or by his own Imagination, as is ding to Dr.
St.'s Principles, is an Idolater: but Dr. St. does worship God represented unto
him without the Beatifical Vision, either by words, by Images, or his own
Imaginations, as is evident, if he Worships God at all. Whence I conclude, that
he is an Idolater, according to his own Concessions.

Now Dr. St. cannot deny the Consequences, if he once grants the Premises:
neither can he deny the Premises without eating his own words, or denying some
manifest Principle. For, certainly he is not so wicked, as to confess that he
never Worships God; nor so Phanatically pround, as to say, That he does enjoy
the Beatifical Vision. Whence it follows, that he must grant, that he Worships
God represented unto him in some manner beneath the Beatifical Vision. For it
is certain, that all other Representations of God, different from the
Beatifical Vision, must necessarily fall beneath it. Hence I infer, that all
Representations of God, excepting the Beatifical Vision, (which is an Intuitive
Knowledge of God) are inferior to his Greatness. For all such Representations,
as the Apostle teaches us, are Enigmatical, and per speculum, not representing
God, on the part of the object, sicuti est, as he is, but (as Scholastical
Divines term them) inadequate and abstractive, per species alienas, by Idea's
alien, and far estranged from the Nature of God; and consequently, infinitely
beneath his Greatness. For whatsoever is not God, must necessarily be
infinitely beneath him. Since therefore all Representations of God not as he
is, but by alien Species, and Idea's (such are all Representations of God by
words, by Images, or by abstractive, and imperfect Imaginations) are far
inferior to his Greatness, and Majesty; it is manifestly inferred, that
whoever Worships God, represented unto him in either of the forementioned
manners, must needs worship him represented in a way far inferior to his
Greatness. Neither does Dr. St. in his Answer to this point, any where refute
this Doctrine; but rather confirms it, confessing plainly, page 39. That his
Conceptions cannot reach the Greatness of God; and he would be a Fanatic
should he assert the contrary. Now since Dr. St. worships God represented unto
him by his own Conceptions, these remaining far beneath his Greatness, we
conclud that Dr. St. worships God represented unto him in a way inferior to
his Grandeur, and Majesty. Wherefore, to save himself from being an Idolater,
he must necessarily deny this Principle to be true, viz. Whoever worships God,
represented unto him in a way inferior to his Greatness, is an Idolater. Yet
this is the main Principle, whereon he grounds the Charge of Idolatry, cast
upon the Roman Church, in the Veneration of Images: and hence is manifestly
proved, that the aforesaid Charge, as bottomed upon a false and Sandy
Principle, is altogether groundless, and frivolous: which was what I intended
by this Appendix, made in confirmation of what I had laid down before, to prove
our Church guitless of Idolatry.

Let Us now examine, what Artifices the Dr. uses, to clear himself from this
imputation of Idolatry, drawn up against him out of his own Principles, and to
prevent the Train (as he says page 35.) laid to blow him up, fetched from his
own Stores. First, he seems to have been inclined to suspect, that this Charge
of Idolatry cast upon him, was intended only for a piece of Drollery. This is a
pretty way to stave off all Arguments ab absurdo; which are very concluding,
and frequent among Learned men; when to prove the inanity of some Principle
produced by the Adversary, they lay open the absurdities which thence ensue. A
compendious Answering to all such Arguments, according to this incomparable
Doctors way of answering, is to tell those who frame them, That they are in
jest, and that without doubt they intend only to Droll. But if this manner of
Answering be warrantable, 'twill be sufficient to tell Dr. St. That his whole
Discourse of Idolatry, and Fanaticism, charged upon the Roman Church, and
almost all his other works, were intended only for pieces of Drollery. Aperson
of Quality, and no Roman Catholic, could find no fitter place in his Library
for Dr. St.'s Discourse of the Roman Idolatry, than to put it among the
Play-books.

After this, to annul the aforesaid Charge of Idolatry, he betakes himself to
admiration. What, says he, page 35. is it come to this at last? and am I
become an Idolater too, who was never apt to think my self inclined so much as
to Superstition? I marry Sir, This is a speedy way indeed to dispatch
Arguments, with no more than an Admiration. What! Dr. Stillingfleet and
Idolater? Dr. Stillingfleet, that Zealous man for Religion? who knows not how
to defend his own Church to be True, without laying down Principles, that prove
all Churches, never so Heretical, or Schismatical, to be true, and Orthodox.
Dr. Stillingfleet, that pious and godly Protestant! who has so great a kindness
for the Protestant Church, that he makes her the very same with an Idolatrous
Church, and with such a kind of Idolatry, that is worse than the adoring a red
Cloth for God! Dr. Stillingfleet, so Religious a man, that by all we can guess
by his Principles alleged above, we cannot determine, whether he be of any, or
of no Religion! What, such a man as this, an Idolater! no, God forbid. And why?
Because (forsooth) he was never apt to think himself inclined that way.
Excellent! just as if one should say, The Heathens did not think themselves
Idolatrous, nor inclined that way: Therefore they were no Idolaters. I wonder;
why Dr. St. who boasts so much of his Charity, does not go to Newgate to
instruct the Malefactors there, how they may defend themselves, when they are
Arraigned for Thieves, or Murderers; telling them with one sole Exclamation,
they may invalidate all the Evidences brought in against them. What, They,
Thieves? They, Murderers? They, take away men's Goods, and Lives too? who were
never apt to think themselves inclined but to works of Piety? and as coming
instructed by so good an Advocate, they would, doubtless, be instantly
discharged.

But if this be the Champion of the English Church, as he is cried up to be,
she is in as miserable a condition, any of her Enemies con wish her. Such
Defenders as these, have brought the English Protestancy so low, that it is no
wonder they should in a every Session of Parliament give her a Cordial to keep
her alive. Such Ministers contribute far more to the ruin of Protestancy, than
any Roman Priests. Yea, if this manner of answering be solid, it follows also,
that the Charges of Idolatry, and Fanaticisme, wherewith he impeaches our
Church, are without difficulty repealed, saying only, What, The Church of Rome
Idolatrous! That Church, which has banished Paganism from the greatest part of
the World! Should she introduce an Idolatry more detestable, than the grossest
Idolatry of the Pagans! That Church, which even Protestants themselves confess,
to have been the only visible Church of Christ, for above 1000 years, and
acknowledge her to be the Mother Church, the Patriarchal Church of the West,
the first See, prima Seeds, a true Member at least of the Catholic Church,
unerring in all Articles of Faith, the very same with their own Church; from
whom they pretend to derive the Ordination of their Bishops, and by whom have
been handed down to them the Books of Scripture; upon which alone they ground
their Religion: that such a Church, and acknowledged as such, should be
impeached by Protestants, and among the rest by Dr. St. who in most things
agrees to the former Character given of her: Should, I say, be impeached of an
Iddolatry more detestable, than the Adoration of an Animal, a Statue, or a red
Cloth, for God; is indeed a thing worthy of Admiration, and whereof several
moderate Protestants are ashamed. But why should any one wonder, that Dr.
Stillingfleet (Dr. Stillingfleet I say) should be an Idolater; and only because
he was never apt to think himself inclined that way? Although I never
absolutely accused him of Idolatry; but only on supposition, that the
Principles whereon he pretends to establish the Charge of Idolatry cast upon
us, were warrantable: which is very different, as presently shall be made to
appear.

He goes on, and says ( page 53.) That all the comfort he found left, was
toward the conclusion of my Book; wherein, as he affirms, I confess, That the
same Argument proves the Prophets, Evangelists, and the Holy Ghost himself, to
be Idolaters: and then he adds, that he hoped there was no great harm to be
feared in so good Company. But Dr. St. very disingenuosly leaves out this
Clause contained in my Book, viz. or it proves nothing: which renders the sense
very different fcom what those words, as quoted by the Dr. may seem to import.
For sure he will not deny, but that it is a very different thing to say
absolutely, Dr. St. is an Hypocrite, without adding any thing more, or to say,
Dr. St. is an Hypocrite, if he holds one Religion in his heart, and professes
another exteriourly. Now my intent was, by discovering the vast absurdities,
which wait upon Dr. St.'s Argument, whereby he pretends to prove Roman
Catholics guilty of Idolatry, to show the inanity, and nullity thereof,
according to that irrefragable Maxim of Rational Discourses, Out of Truth
alone neither Falsity, nor Absurdity does follow: and because perhaps some
might not think it any absurdity to grant, that Dr. St. is an Idolater; and
consequently, admitting it, might stick to his Argument, I added, that the same
Argument of the Dr. had it any force in it, would prove the Evangelists, and
the Holy Ghost to be Idolaters: an absurdity so great, that no Christian can
assent unto: and when we argue ab absurdo, the greater, and more evident the
absurdity, we infer, is, the better is the Argument. So that my Discourse runs
thus:

Either Dr. St.'s Argument proves the Evangelists, and Holy Ghost, to be
Idolaters, or it proves nothing; as I have shown throughout that Appendix.

But it does not, nor cannot prove, the Evangelists, and the Holy Ghost to be
Idolaters. For certainly there can be no good proof of a Falsity, or Absurdity:

Therefore his Argument proves nothing.

When shall we find any thing in the Dr. that looks like a rational Answer to
this Charge of Idolatry, which lies so heavy upon him, out of his own Tenets?
He says ( page 37.) That God did forbid, in the Commandment, the worship of
him by Images; but not the worship of him by our Conceptions, although
unsuitable to his incomprehensible nature; without taking any notice of what I
objected to the contrary: for page 19. I affirmed, that the Dr. himself, page
59. in his Discourse concerning the Roman Idolatry, did understand the
prohibition contained in the Commandment, of all kind of Similitudes, or
Representations whatsoever, whether of a real, or imaginary Being. For the
words of the Law being general, all sorts of Representations, or Likenesses of
God are necessarily comprehended therein. Now, not only Corporeal Images, but
also Words and Conceptions, are certain Repretations, and Resemblances of their
objects: which Dr. St. never denied. Yea Knowledge, or Mental Conception, is
commonly defined a Formal Representation of an Object; and it is an ordinary
opinion among Philosophers, that in obscure, and abstract Conceptions, the mind
frames an Idea of the Object. And certainly should one adore his own thoughts,
and Idea's, he would commit Idolatry, and transgress this Commandment.
Wherefore this Commandment does forbid the making any Image, or Representation
of God, whether Spiritual, or Corporeal; not absolutely; but as the Law says,
to adore it. Since therefore, as Dr. St. confesses in his former book, and the
Reasons now alleged do evince, the Law speaks of all kinds of Representations,
and Resemblances, in order to that effect, why does he, in his Answer to my
Book, confine the Law only to Corporeal Representations?

Again, if according to the Dictates of Nature, (as Dr. St. affirms. page 36.
who therefore thinks this commandment to be of an unalterable Nature, common to
all, and not peculiar to the Jews) it is Idolatry to represent God by Corporeal
Images, or to adore him so represented; because Corporeal things represent God
in a way far beneath his Greatness, (which is the reason he produces for the
Law) it follows evidently, that whoever adores God represented unto him in a
way beneath his Greatness, whether by words, Images, or gross Imaginations;
(for neither of these ways do represent him in a manner suitable to his
Majesty, and there are unworthy Conceptions of God, as well as unworthy Images)
is an Idolater: which is, what I intended to prove against him. For in natural
Precepts (such as this is) the Law extends as far as the Reason of the Law; and
according to the constant Axiom of Logicians, Causalis vera infert universalem
veram. If the Proposition, which contains the cause, or reason of a thing be
true, there follows necessarily an universal Truth. Wherefore if this
Proposition, who adores God represented by Corporeal things is an Idolater,
because he adores him represented in a way inferior to his Greatness, be true,
as Dr. St. will needs have it to be, this Universal must also be true, Whoever
adores God, represented in a way inferior to his greatness, is an Idolater.
But the Dr. thought it best not to take any notice at all of these things: and
I find, that among many other his rare accomplishments, one is, that he is
excellent in forgetting such things, as he knows he cannot answer.

In the same page he will seem to lay in the dust my whole Discourse, with
these only words: But the mischief is, all this subtlety (of my Argument) is
used against the Lawmakers, and not against me. O Irrefragable Answer! if such
Answers as these wll serve the turn, I Will warrant you the Dr. will never be
puzzled. Let any one interpret the Law of God never so ridiculously, if he be
urged with the Absurdities, that flow from such an Interpretation, his answer
may be according to this learned Dr. when he has nothing else to say, That all
the Absurdities they pretend to draw from his Interpretation, are against the
Lawmakers, and not against him. Here occurs unto me, what I have lately read in
a brief account of the most material passages between the Quakers and the
Baptists, at the Barbican Meeting, London, October 9. 1674. page 9, 10. The
Anabaptist pressed the Quaker in this manner: the Apostle says, Let Women be
silent in the Church. Why suffer ye Women to declare? The Quaker answered, The
Woman to be silenced, is the Flesh. Has the Flesh, replies the Anabaptist, a
Husband? Yea, says the Quaker: and who is it, replied again the Anabaptist.
the Quaker promptly answered, The Devil. But the Anabaptist goes on, and urges,
The Text says, Let a Woman ask her Husband at home; must the Flesh be
instructed by the Devil in matters of Religion? Here the poor Quaker seemed,
according to this account, to be puzzled. But had Dr. St. been by him, he would
have suggested to him this easy answer. Alas for thee! Thou can not
understand. All thy subtlety is against Paul, and not against me.

The debate between us and Dr. St. is concerning the right meaning of Gods
Commandment. The Dr. says, that thereby are prohibited all Representations of
God, in a way inferior to his Greatness, and the Adoring of him so
Represented. And after I had shown out of undeniable Principles the absurdity
of this interpretation, can the Dr. think it a sufficient answer to say, All
this subtlety is against the Law maker, and not against him? Whenas all the
Absurdities I deduce, are against Dr. St.'s interpretation of the Law, not
against the Law it self, nor the Lawmakers.

In the page 38. he seems to place the difference between Thoughts of God, and
Corporeal Images of him, in order to our present design, That the former
proceeds from the necessary weakness of our understanding, not being able to
reach the Greatness of God; who therefore has procured by several ways, to
prevent the error of our Imaginations. But the latter are voluntary. This
difference, or disparity, is very insignificant. For, as it proceeds from the
necessary weakness of a man's understanding, that we cannot represent God in our
Conceptions and Imaginations, but in a way far beneath his Greatness: so it
proceeds also from the necessary weakness of all humane Art, and Learning, that
we cannot represent him either by Words, or Corporeal Images, but in a manner
very unsuitable to his Majesty. And as I have insinuated several times, it is
certain, that there are as unhandsome, and unworthy Representations of God, and
as far beneath his Greatness, in Imaginations, and in words, as in Corporeal
Images. For what are Images, or Pictures, as I hinted page 20. but men's
conceptions, and Idea's either cut out in Stone, or set down in Colors? And as
God does procure to prevent the Errors of our Imaginations relating to him, by
securing us, that he is far greater, than we can imagine; so he does procure in
like manner, to prevent the Errors in our Words, and Images concerning God, by
securing us, that he is far greater, than he can be expressed, either by Words,
or Images.

Moreover, if the Dr. understands, (for neither he himself seems to know what
he would be at) by the difference assigned here by him, that we may choose
whether we will make Corporeal Images of God, or not; but we cannot choose but
think of God; and by consequence, Thoughts of God are necessary: but Corporeal
Images of God are voluntary; Then I reply, that this disparity dos not solve
the difficulty, concerning the expression, or representation of God in words;
which is as voluntary unto us, as the representations of him in Images. And yet
Dr. St. will not say, either that we cannot speak of God without committing
Idolatry; or that we are able to express in words his ineffable Majesty, as it
deserves to be expressed.

Again many times to think of God is, in some manner, free unto us; because it
is free unto us, whether we will hear Sermons, read Books, and recite Prayers,
wherein several expressions of God are contained; and consequently they excite
in us Thoughts of God, as represented by them. And although the first Thought
of God be not free unto us, yet the continuation thereof is so: nay sometimes
Corporeal Pictures of God occur unto us, when by chance we light upon them,
without more freedom on our part, then the Thoughts of God: so that were there
no other disparity, than what the Dr. here hints at, 'twould in that case be no
less Idolatry to adore God represented by our Imaginations, than by Corporeal
Images.

Another disparity he insinuates, is, That our Conceptions, although they reach
not the Greatness of God, yet they are Spiritual Representations of his Nature;
but Images are Corporeal Resemblances; and it is a great disparagement to God,
to bring him down to the meanness of a Corporeal Image. This answer is also
very frivolous. First, because words are Corporeal Representations; yet it is
no Idolatry to adore God as represented unto us in the words of Scripture.
Neither will Dr. St. dare to affirm the contrary, although by such words, God
be represented unto us in the same, or like manner, as he is represented in a
Picture, viz. with Hands, Arms, Mouth, Sitting, and with such like Corporeal
Expressions. Secondly, because, since our Conceptions do not reach the
Greatness of God, we cannot think of God without abasing him, and bringing him
down to the Meanness of our thoughts. Seeing therefore, that according to Dr.
St.'s Sentiment, it is Idolatry to represent God by Corporeal Images, because
they cannot reach his Greatness, but necessarily bring him down to mean
Expressions; upon the same account it would be Idolatry to represent him by our
Conceptions; and the difference, if any, would only be, that the former is
somewhat grosser, than the latter. Thirdly, to adore as God any Creature,
whether Spiritual, as an Angel, or the Devil, or Corporeal, as an Animal or
Statue, is flat Idolatry; neither the difference of Spiritual, or Corporeal,
can save the one from being Idolatry, and not the other: and it would be very
absurd to say, that to adore the Devil as God is not Idolatry, because the
Divil is a Spirit; but to adore the Sun, as God, is Idolatry, because the Sun
is a Body. Wherefore in the like manner there can be no reason to affirm, that
the Adoration of God by our Conceptions is not Idolatry; but that the Adoration
of God by Images is, because these are Corporeal, but those are Spiritual.

Finally he answers, page 38. That he had never such an Imagination of God, as
to apprehend him like an old man sitting in Heaven; that he has no other
Conception of God; but of a Being infinitely perfect. But with the Dr.'s leave,
unless he enjoyes the Beatifical Vision of God, and sees God face to face,
(facie ad faciem) which we have no reason to believe he does, the Knowledge,
and Conception, he frames of God, must necessarily be Enigmatical, as the
Scripture terms it, and Abstractive; and consequently by the Species, and
Similitude of Things far estranged from God: whether of an old man sitting in
Heaven, or of some other object it matters little: Because whatever is not God,
is infinitely beneath him. Besides, when Dr. St. recites his Creed, with
attention to what the words signify, he must needs conceive God by the
Species, or Similitude of one, who has a right hand, when he pronounces those
words, Sedet ad dexteram Dei Patris Omnipotentis, and it is an intolerable
arrogance in Dr. St. to scorn, as it seems he does, to conceive God, as he is
represented unto us in several places of Scripture, under Corporeal
Similitudes; and as the Prophets themselves, who writ those Books, conceived
him: their words being expressions of their Thoughts and Conceptions.

Moreover, I desire to know from Dr. St. whether he ever lifts up his heart,
and Adores Christ, as he conceives him in Heaven, or not. If not, it is no
wonder he should not dare to Adore Christ in the Eucharist for fear of
committing Idolatry; whenas upon the same account he dares not Adore him in
Heaven. If so, can the Dr. imagine, that he conceives Christ in Heaven, as
really he is there, with that Glory, Majesty, and Beauty, which neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man has been able to comprehend? Is not
the Conception he has of Christ in Heaven, like to some Pictures we have of our
Savior in Glory; which are only fancies of the Painter? And if he cannot
conceive the Humanity of our Savior, as he is in Heaven, much less his
Divinity. Wherefore he must Adore Christ in Heaven, if ever he Adores him,
considered in a manner far beneath his Greatness.

Neither do we deny God to be a Being infinitely Perfect: which is the notion
of God. Yet this does not hinder, but that such an Infinite Being may be
conceived by men under the Species, or Similitude, of some Corporeal Substance:
as we all confess, that an Angel is a mere Spiritual substance; yet we
conceive, and paint an Angel under the Species of a young man with wings on his
shoulders; when as in reality such a man is neither an Angel, nor has any
Physical likeness, unless it be very remote, with him. Yet such a Picture, or
Idea, is commonly taken to signify an Angel.

And here it is necessary to advertise, what Dr. St. will not seem to reflect
on, That it is a very different thing, to take such a Statute, Picture, Enigma,
or Emblem, to signify such an object, and to take such a Statue, Picture,
Enigma, or Emblem, to be the very object it self, or very like thereunto. In
the City of London are put up three Statues of Women, with such Attirement, to
signify Faith, Hope, and Charity; with whom they have no likeness at all: so
that those Statues are taken by the Citizens to signify those Virtues, and to
put them in mind of them. But sure Dr. St. will not say, that the Citizens of
London are so silly, as to take Faith, Hope, and Charity, to be really three
Women in such a Dress; or that they have any real likeness, unless very remote,
with them. The same is to be seen in all Emblems, and Hieroglyphics; which are
taken to signify things very different. So a Ring is an Emblem of Eternity:
But who does think that Eternity is a Ring?

In the like manner to take God to be really an old man sitting in Heaven, with
Hands, Arms, Mouth and Feet, or to have a great likeness with him, would,
beyond question be very dishonorable unto God, and unworthy of him; but to
take the Idea, or Picture of an Old man sitting in Heaven (Antiquus Dierum) as
God is described by the Prophet) or some other Corporeal Hieroglyphick,
contained in the Apocalypse, or other places of Scripture, to signify, and
represent unto us God, a Being infinitely Perfect, is by no means dishonorable,
or injurious unto him: otherwise the Prophets and Evangelists would be to blame
for representing him under such Idea's or Expressions. Neither are the Pictures
of God more obnoxious to the mistakes of vulgar people, then the like
expressions by words, contained in the Creed and Scripture, as I insinuated in
my Book. But the Dr. thought good to pass it over. Wherefore if Dr. St. has a
more subtilized manner of conceiving the Divine Essence, than the Prophets, and
Apostles had, he may keep it to himself: we, poor men, shall content our selves
to conceive God as the Apostles and Prophets represent him in the Creed and
Scripture.

From what hitherto has been discust, in relation to this point, it evidently
appears, that either Dr. St. must grant himself; and if that be not absurdity
great enough, the Apostles, Evangelists, and the Holy Ghost, to be Idolaters;
or confess, that the main Principle, whereon he pretends to make good the
Charge of Idolatry, laid upon us in the Veneration of Images; to be frivolous,
and insignificant: which is what we aim at. But such is the obstinacy of some
men, that to maintain one folly, they will run into a thousand; and they will
be sure to do their work, whatever comes of it. Dr. St. seems to be so
Complaisant, that to the end we may be Idolaters, he is willing to bear us
company, and to be an Idolater himself, and to bring with him too the Prophets
and Evangelists: and what harm is there to be feared in so good Company?

Yea, the way he takes to prove us guilty of Idolatry in the Veneration of
Images either is a mere dream, or it shows, there is no Church in the world,
though never so Orthodox, Pure, and Sound, which does not require Idolatry. For
all Churches require, that we should adore God, and as represented to us in
this life. Since therefore, according to the ordinary Providence, we cannot
represent God in this life, as he is, but in a manner far inferior to his
Greatness, it follows manifestly, that all Churches, and all Religions, though
never so Pure, and Sound, require, we should Adore God, represented unto us, in
a way far inferior to his Majesty: which according to Dr. St. is flat
Idolatry. So that the Dr. to be sure to persuade his Devotes to be no Roman
Catholics, he persuades them to be of no Religion; or, which is the same,
deters them from that, which is Essential to all Religions; as is the Adoration
of God, represented in a manner inferior to his Greatness: and as to prove
Roman Catholics, Idolaters in the Veneration of God by Images, he proves
himself, the Prophets, and Evangelists; and all persons whatsoever, that
profess any Religion, to be likewise Idolaters; so to show us guilty of the
same Crime in the Adoration of the Eucharist, (which is the grossest Idolatry
he Fathers upon us) he must declare as Accomplices, the Lutherans, who admit the
Real Presence, and Adore Christ in the Eucharist, as we do: and what good
Reformers of the Roman Church were the Lutherans, (and yet as such they are
looked upon by English Protestants) if they left her depraved with a more
detestable sort of Idolatry, in the Dr.'s persuasion, than is the Adoring of a
Red Cloth for God. But such is Dr. St.'s Zeal. So that Roman Catholics be
Idolaters, whoever else be so, he cares not. Friends or Foes, it is all one to
him. It is to affront the Dr. to imagine, that a man of his Employments has
leisure, to consider the vast absurdities, that flow from what he maintains.

And, to use the same words I set down in the Appendix, page 21. I infer, and
conclude hence, how little account is to be made of the Charge of Idolatry laid
upon the Roman Church by Dr. St. seeing that the very same Principles, whereby
he pretends to prove, that Roman Catholics are Idolaters, do prove, or they
prove nothing, (as is most certain: for an Argument, that proves too much,
proves nothing) that the Prophets, the Evangelists, and the Holy Ghost, are
Idolaters. And if in this main point of Idolatry, which he pretends to make
manifest, and undeniable against us, he does err so Sacrilegiously, and so
Enormously, may we not prudently think that the other Charges, of lesser
moment, which he lays upon the Roman Church, and wherein he does not pretend
to so great an Evidence, are mere Whimsies, and malicious Calumnies?

CHAP. X. Concerning the other Contradictions committed by the Dr. in the
Charges he lays upon the Roman Church.
MY design at the beginning was, to pursue in particular the other
Contradictions, wherewith I charge the Dr, But what hitherto has been set down
is sufficient, First, because I have manifestly convicted him of
Self-contradiction, in asserting the Roman Church to be a True Church, and yet
Idolatrous, with the grossest Idolatry: and since the main aspersion the casts
upon us is this of Idolatry, (which therefore he terms the Mouth of the Dragon)
if he can clear himself from Self-Contradiction in this point, we are willing
to declare him free from that imputation in the other points, mentioned in my
Book.

Secondly, Because we have seen, That the Dr. does confessedly grant the Roman
Church to be a True way to Heaven, a True Church, unerring in all Articles of
Faith: and hence follows (as already we have evidenced) that she teaches
nothing as an Article of Faith, which is either a Falsity, or Corruption: and
that she neither requires, nor approves of any thing destructive to Salvation.
And yet after all this, Dr. St. maintains, that the Roman Church teaches, and
requires Damnable Errors, and gross Violations of Gods laws: which doubtless
are destructive to Salvation: and herein, according to his Aspersion, consists
the danger of Salvation, in living and dying in the Communion of the Roman
Church: That she teaches and allows of particular Enthusiasms, contrary to the
Law of God, and countenances Rebellion, contrary to the Duty, due to Lawful
Superiors; which Duty is an Article of Divine Faith. And herein he constitutes
the pretended Fanaticisme of the Roman Church: and finally that she teaches and
countenances Divisions in matters of Faith: which she cannot do without
countenancing Heresies, and Errors against Articles of Faith. Whence I
conclude, that Dr. St. palpably contradicts himself, by granting the Roman
Church to be a True Church, and yet charging her with danger of Salvation in
her Communion, Fanaticisme, and Divisions in matters of Faith.

Thirdly, because one notorious Contradiction being evidenced against any
person, is enough to overthrow all his authority, and credit, and to vacate,
consequently all the Arguments which depend upon his Authority, and
Faithfulness, as the Dr. himself confesses. Since therefore Dr. St. stands
convicted of a palpable Self contradiction in a matter of so great a moment, as
is the Charge of Idolatry laid to the Roman Church; and since the other
Charges above mentioned depend upon his credit, and faithfulness in the
Quotations he produces out of our Authors, and whereon he grounds such Charges,
we infer, that the aforesaid Charges are Null, till he has wiped off the
Self-contradiction, whereof he is Convicted; or at least till those, who peruse
his Books, have found out, that his Quotations are faithful, and effectual to
his purpose.

I have read not long since, in the Catholic Apology (Third Edition) the Right
Honorable Author whereof has handled all matters of Fact objected against us,
so accurately, and perspicuously, that whoever is not resolved to be obstinate,
cannot but remain satisfied: I have read (I say) in that elaborate Book, page
269. What Gondamour observed in one of his Letters to Olivarez. He says, that
being out of curiosity once with King James at Chapel, he perceived the
Auditory extremely attentive to their Minister; yet nevertheless they would not
(he found) trust him a whit. For no sooner had be cited a place of Scripture,
but they all ran to their Bibles, to see whether it were so, or not. Now if
Protestants will not trust their Ministers, and are taught even by the
Ministers themselves, not to trust them, when they quote, or rather read places
out of their Bible which they have before them; citing the Book, the Chapter,
and the Verse; and when every one, or at least the greatest part of the
Auditory, have their Bible with them; so that if the Minister should forge any
thing, or be mistaken in the least kind, his forgery, or mistake would
presently be discovered, to his Eternal disgrace, for forging, or mistaking,
Gods own word, and not the word of men. If, I say, even in these Circumstances,
where there is so little reason to suspect any forgerie, or mistake, they are
taught not to trust their own Ministers, why should they trust them in the
Allegations against the Roman Catholics, till themselves have found out, that
what they allege against us, is, as they allege? when many times the Minister
does not so much as name the Author for the thing he quotes; or names the
Author, but not the Book, or the page; when he has not the Author before him,
nor (perchance) has ever seen him: but what he quotes, he has received at a
second or third hand; or if he has seen him, it has been only perfunctoriously;
or a long time since, and so he may have forgotten the words; when none of the
Auditory have the Book with them; nor (in any times) know where to find it;
nor, if they find it (perhaps) most of them do not understand the Language,
wherein it is written; so that the forgery, or mistake, if there be any, is not
easily detected; and at most is a forgery, or mistake, in the word of man, not
of God? should the Protestants observe only this rule, (which they are taught
by their own Ministers) even in Circumstances, where there is suspicion of some
forgery or mistake, viz. not to trust them, but to suspend their Judgment, till
they have consulted the books themselves, and find, that what their Ministers
allege, is true; most of the Calumnies urged against us, would vanish to
nothing: and if this is to be observed with other Ministers, even according to
their own Doctrine, much more with Dr. St. who by standing convicted of
Self-contradiction has forfeited all his Authority, and Credit.

The Dr. seems very fond of his Treatise concerning the Fanaticisme of the
Roman Church; wherefore 'twill not be amiss to add something in particular, in
reference to this point. He says, page 51. That to prove, that Fanaticisme
does necessarily contain a Resistance against Authority, I unhappily quote
these his words, p. 141. in his Discourse concerning the Fanaticisme of the
Roman Church; By Fanaticisme we understand either an Enthusiastic way of
Religion, or resisting Authority, under pretense of Religion. Now I thought,
that Dr. St. in the forementioned words had given us two different Notions, or
Descriptions, of Fanaticisme; but I was mistaken. For the Dr. as it seems,
intended only in that place to assign two sorts of Fanaticisme. The reason of
my mistake was, because I supposed, that the Dr. proceeded like a Scholar, and
that accordingly, beginning to treat of Fanaticisme, he would give us some
Description thereof. But he very illogically tells us, how many sorts of
Fanaticisme there are, without ever telling us what it is. I hope, he will
pardon this mistake; and I promise never more to be mistaken in him upon that
account; nor ever to suppose, that he proceeds like a Scholar.

Neither does this mistake of mine obstruct the truth of the abovementioned
Proposition, laid down by me; which I proved from the common persuasion of
Mankind. For no body judges that to be Fanaticism, which is not grounded upon a
private Spirit, and Judgment, contrary to Authority. Neither does, nor can the
Dr. deny it. Hence I inferred, that the very constitution of the Roman Church,
which we both suppose to be a True Church) is destructive to Fanaticisme;
because she does not leave every one to be guided by his private Spirit, and
Judgment, in matters of Religion, and in the Interpretation of Scripture; but
obliges all to submit to her judgment, as is manifest: neither can the Dr.
question it; since he oftentimes complains of the Tyranny (as he is pleased to
term it) of the Roman Church in this point. See Doctor Stillingfleet against
Doctor Stillingfleet, page 10. all which he passes over in silence.

Page 52. the Dr. wonders, why I do not speak a word of the Fanatic Principles
of Rebellion owned, as he will needs have it, by the Jesuitical party, viz. The
King's deriving his power from the people, and the people's Authority to call
the King to account, and if they see good, to take away his Power, and to chang
the Government: and not only so, but to take away his Life too: which pestilent
Principles he had quoted out of Mariana, a Jesuit: and to show, that not only
the Jesuits, but also the Roman Church does approve these Principles, (which
was his main task) he adds, that the party, which owns these Principles
[Jesuits] is to this day the most countenanced, and encouraged at Rome. So that
he not only Fathers the forementioned Principles upon the whole Body of the
Jesuits, because they were delivered by one of their Community; but also upon
Rome, because it favors the Jesuits: which Argument of the Dr's. is as
conclusive, as if you should Argue thus; Hugh Peter's, a Member of the
University of Cambridge, preached in the late Wars Rebellious Principles;
Therefore not only the University of Cambridge, but his Majesty also, who has
shown a a particular kindness for that University, do countenance such
Principles. Who would not contemn such a Consequence? And yet the University of
Cambridge has not made a more public detestation of those Rebellious
Principles of Hugh Peter's, than the Body of the Jesuits has made of the
forementioned Doctrines of Mariana.

Besides, the Pope, even in the common opinion of Protestants, is a Sovereign
Temporal Prince of Rome, and its adjacent Territories, and as zealous (or more,
if we believe Protestants) of his civil Authority, as any other Temporal Prince
whatsoever, how then is it credible, that he should countenance so much the
Jesuits, as the Dr. says he does; if they did allow such Rebellious
Principles, destructive to the Sovereignty of Temporal Princes? Moreover, that
party Dr. St. speaks of, is countenanced by several Kings; who would be loath to
be deprived of their Kingdoms. But alas for them! poor Princes, they do not
understand the Intrigues of the Jesuits, though they converse often with them:
neither have they men about them, able to discover such pernicious Doctrines.
King Henry the 4th, of France, his Majesty's Grandfather, and the present
French King, (both favorers of the Jesuits) are unacquainted with matters of
State, and Civil Government: but Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, the great Politician
of the world, comprehends clearly the true interest of Princes; and though he
has scarce ever had any converse with Jesuits, yet with the sublety of his
private Spirit, (whereby he is able to discover in a moment, what Scriptures
are Canonical, and which is their legitimate sense) he has learned their
Intrigues, and pestilent Principles. Finally, those, who understand the temper
of Rome better than Dr. St. affirm, that the Dominicans, and Clergy, are as
much (or more) countenanced there, than Jesuits: and yet the Dominicans and
Clergy, if we believe Dr. St. are no great friends to Jesuits.

In the same page he says, That if J. W. answer again, let him speak out like
a man, concerning those Rebellious Principles abovementioned. Well then, J. W.
speaks out like a man, and tells the Dr. plainly, That he would be very sorry,
were he not persuaded, that he detected the aforesaid Principles more, than the
Dr. himself does; for all that he can gather from his works. For, whatever Dr.
St.'s practices have been, which J. W. has not yet made it his business to
enquire after; yet even those very Principles, whereby he pretends to clear the
Protestant Church from the Crime of Scisme, do vindicate, had they any force in
them, all Rebellions, and Treacherous Conspiracies, though never so execrable;
and are most destructive to all Civil Government, than any Doctrines of
Mariana, as will manifestly appear, to whoever shall take pains to compare
them: And, to apply the Dr.'s own words to himself, in his Answer to Dr.
Cressy's Apologetical Epistle, p. 475. He that owns the Principles that lead to
him Treason, wants only an opportunity to act them. So that if Dr. St. has a
just, and real zeal for his Majesty's Interest and Security, according to what
he affirms ( page 52.) his Principles do not lead him unto it, but the prospect
of some advantage thereby.

I proved the Roman Church to be free from Fanaticisme, because all
Fanaticisme, as I showed, or at least that sort of Fanaticisme, which
maintains rebellious Principles, is against all Lawful and competent
Authority; as Dr. St. himself must needs confess. Now what is countenanced by a
competent, and lawful authority, is not against all such authority, as is
manifest; and consequently, cannot be Fanaticisme, at least that sort of
Fanaticisme, that maintains rebellious Principles. Since therefore the Roman
Church is a True Church, unerring in all Articles of Faith, and since the
Authority of a True Church, is a lawful Authority, and sufficient to clear
particular ways of proceeding from Fanaticisme, as with several instances I
have shown ( page 9.) in the proof of my fourth Proposition, though the Dr.
cunningly passes them over, it evidently follows, That whatever the Roman
Church countenances, as long as she remains a True Church, cannot be
Fanaticisme, nor Rebellion; and by consequence she is free from those crimes.
For why should any one impute to her that, which she does not countenance?

To this the Dr. Answers ( page 54.) First, That he charged as Fanatics
several persons in our Church, who were never countenanced by her, neither did
they submit to her Authority. But what answer is this to me; who pretended only
to clear our Church from Fanaticisme? and how can she be justly impeached of
Fanaticisme, which she does not allow of? Yea, the Principal design of the Dr.
in that Chapter, was to Charge the Roman Church with Fanaticisme, as appears
from its Title. But he adds, that he produced those instances to prove against
his Adversary T. G. That the Sects, and Fanaticisms among Protestants here in
England, could not be the effect of the reformation, since there were as wild,
and extravagant Fanaticisms before. Good! just, as if he should have argued in
this manner. King Henry the 8th, or Edward the 6th, could not bring in
Protestancy here in England, because Luther had broached it before in Germany.
There have been Fanatics heretofore among the Roman Catholics, as there are
now among Protestants: But with this difference; That the very Constitution of
the Roman Church is repugnant to Fanaticisme; since it expressly prohibits men
to be guided by their own private Reason in the Interpretation of Scripture,
and obliges all to submit to her judgment. On the contrary, the Church of
England, as it is constituted, according to Dr. St. 's Exposition, favors all
sorts of Fanaticisme; since it permits every one to be led by his own private
Spirit in the Interpretation of Scripture, without obliging him to submit to
the Judgment of any Church in such matters.

He answers secondly, that if whatever is countenanced by the Authority of a
True Church, ceases to be Fanaticisme, there flow hence monstrous Absurdities.
The first is, that a prevailing Fanaticisme ceases to be Fanaticisme, ( page
55.) Is not this a strange whimsie of the Drs. and a pregnant Argument, how
little he values church Authority, to say, that because some particular way of
Devotion comes to be approved, and countenanced by the Authority of a True
Church, the approbation of the Church serves only to make it a greater, and a
more prevailing Fanaticisme, than it was before? whereas I proved in my Book (
page 9.) with several instances, That the approbation of a True Church is
sufficient to clear particular ways of Devotion from the imputation of
Fanaticisme. So that the difference between Fanatic, and Non-fanatick ways of
Devotion, does not consist in the extravagancy rather of the one, and not of
the other; (for both may be extravagant enough) but in that the former are
against Authority, the latter according to Authority. I will explain this
Doctrine, with the Example the Dr. alleges in the place now quoted, of Treason
and Rebellion. What difference is there between a Loyal, and Rebellious Army?
Both Plunder, Harras, Fight, and Kill. The difference only is, that a Loyal
Army proceeds according to Authority, and by order of their true Sovereign: But
a Rebellious Army acts contrary to Authority, and to the orders of their
Prince. As therefore it would be extreme ridiculous to affirm, That the
approbation of a True and Lawful Prince serves only to make the proceedings of
his Subjects approved by him, more Rebellious, or a more prevailing Rebellion:
so it is absurd to defend, as Dr. St. does, That the approbation of a True
Church renders particular ways of Devotion, approved by her, more liable to
Fanaticisme, or a more prevailing Fanaticisme.

But the Dr. urges, That this would be an excellent way to vindicate the
Fanaticisme of the late times; which, because countenanced by an Authority
supposed competent enough by some, who then writ of Obedience and Government,
it ceases to be Fanaticisme. Speak out Doctor, was Cromwell a True and Lawful
Governor of this Kingdom, or not? if you say, he was not, how can you have
the confidence to parallel our case with theirs? since you your self defend the
Roman Church to be a True and Lawful Church; and the very same with your own,
if you say, that he was a True and Lawful Governor, and his Authority
competent, where is your Loyalty? As for the Writer of the Book entitled
Obedience and Government, let him answer for himself. I detest that Doctrine:
neither am I responsable for what that Author affirms: as neither Dr. St. will
think himself obliged to own, whatever Protestants did in the late Rebellion.

The second Absurdity he pretends to infer from our Doctrine is, That Prophets,
and Apostles, nay our Lord himself, are according to this Rule, unavoidably
Fanatics. For what competent Authority, says he ( page 56.) had they to
countenance them? Are you in earnest Doctor, had Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles no competent Authority to countenance their proceedings? This indeed
is to cast them into the common heard of Fanatics, since no competent
Authority, neither Humane, nor Divine, did countenance, or approve their
Preaching. Can the Dr. deny, but that Christ, the Apostles, and Prophets were
countenanced by Divine Authority, manifested by unquestionable Miracles? or
will he say, That Divine Authority, manifested by these Miracles, is not an
Authority competent enough to vindicate such actions as it approves of from the
Crime of Fanaticisme?

But the Dr. presses, that the Jewish Church, though not yet cast off, while
our Savior lived, did not countenance him, nor his Apostles. What then? did I
ever affirm, that the Authority of a True Church was determinately necessary to
clear particular practices from Fanaticisme, as the Dr. most grossly supposes I
did. I defended indeed, that the Authority of a True Church is sufficient to
clear such actions from Fanaticisme; but I never asserted that it was
necessary; yea I insinuated the contrary ( page 9.) There are two ways to
commission men to Preach, and to Authorize their manners of Devotion: Both of
them sufficient; but neither of them determinately necessary; the one
extraordinary, when God by evident Miracles declares, that such men are
commissioned by him: and in this manner Christ, the Prophets and the Apostles
were commissioned by him: the other Ordinary; when the Pastors of the True
Church authorize men to Preach, or approve of such particular ways of
Devotion: and in this sense I cleared the particular ways of Devotion
countenanced by the Roman Church; which the Dr. confesses to be a True Church;
from the Aspersion of Fanaticisme. Neither can one reasonably argue, that what
is not countenanced in the Second and Ordinary way, is not countenanced by a
competent Authority; since it may be approved of in an Extraordinary way.

And though the Jews did not follow the Doctrine of Christ, yet they
acknowledged his Commission, and Gods Broad seal, viz. evident Miracles wrought
by him; when in a full Assembly they affirmed ( Joan 11.) Hic homo multa Signa
facit; This man (Christ) works many Miracles: and certainly, such a public
attestation as this was enough to countenance and acknowledge his Commission;
though out of obstinacy they would not submit to his Doctrine: as Pilate
declared our Savior to be innocent, and guiltless, yet out of fear, lest he
should disgust Caesar, condemned him to death.

I cannot omit here the two famous, yet Contradictory Revelations, which are
said to have been made to St. Bridgit, and St. Catherin, concerning the
immaculate Conception of our Blessed Lady: To St. Bridgit, that she was
conceived without Original Sin; To St. Catherin, that she was conceived with
Original Sin. Dr. St. scarce publishes a Book, wherein he does not insert these
Revelations; pretending thereby to blow up the Infallibility of the Roman
Church; since she Canonized for Saints both St. Bridgit, and St. Catherin; and
approves their Revelations; and consequently something that is false; as
necessarily one of the forementioned Revelations must be: particularly he
endeavors to prove hence against me, That submission to the Judgment of the
Church is not a Rule to judge Fanaticisme by. For both these Revelations were
approved of by the Roman Church; and yet one of them was false; and therefore
Fanatical: and one of those Saints either was deceived, or went about to
deceive; and by consequence was a Fanatic. See the Dr. page 61, 62.

To this I answer, that the Dr. has never yet shown, That those two Revelations
of the abovementioned Saints, were approved of in particular by the Roman
Church, or in general. True it is, that the Roman Church declares them both to
be Saints, and to be famous for their Revelations: but she does not therefore
approve of every porticular Revelation, related to have been made unto them.
The whole Christian Church looks upon Christ, and his Apostles as famous for
their Miracles and Doctrines: shall we therefore hence infer, that the whole
Christian Church approves of every particular Miracle, related of them by any
Author whatsoever; and of every particular Doctrine which some one, or other
teaches, to have been delivered by them? Are there not many false Miracles, and
Doctrines, fathered upon Christ and his Apostles? wherefore to the end, that
the Roman Church be proved Fallible, by reason of the two forementioned
Revelations, contrary the one to the other, it was necessary for Dr. St. to
have shown, that they were both approved of by our Church: which the Dr. has
not yet done. Those two Saints might be famous for their Revelations, and
deservedly looked upon as such, though the abovesaid two Revelations, or at
least one of them, had been forged.

Moreover, though one of these two Revelations, as being contrary one to the
other, was false; and the person to whom such a Revelation is said to have
been made, either deceived, or was deceived, supposing she affirmed, that she
had had such a Revelation; yet it does not therefore follow, that either such a
Revelation was Fanaticisme, or such a person a Fanatic. For sure Dr. St. will
not enlarge so much the roll of Fanatics, as to affirm, That all such as are
deceived, are Fanatics. For so he must cast himself into that heard: since,
certainly he is not so vain, as to think, that in no Interpretation of
Scripture, in no Tenet whatsoever, of so many, as he has laid down in his
Books, he has been deceived. Wherefore, as an unjust War is not Rebellion, if
it be countenanced by the Authority, of a True and Lawful Sovereign Prince: For
Sovereigns may wage unjust Wars: So neither a false Revelation is Fanaticisme,
if it be countenanced by the Authority of the True Church; supposing, that the
True Church may countenance such Revelations. For it is Essential Fanaticisme,
as we have seen, to be contrary to Authority.

I have enlarged my self upon this point of Fanaticisme, because the Dr. seems
to hugg it, as the Benjamin of his Mimical Wit, and presumes so much of his
endeavors in this kind, that he boldly attests, as we hinted above, that his
Adversaries have not said so much as one wise word, to clear their Church from
the Aspersion of Fanaticisme. The Dr. vapors, page 59. that this Charge of
Fanaticisme was a new Charge (yet the Author of (...), Stillingfleeton, tells
us, whence he borrowed it) snd neither Bellarmin, Becanus, or any of their old
beaten Soldiers, could give them any assistance, they found not the Title of
the Fanaticisme of the Roman Church, in any of their Common place Books;
therefore plain Mother-wit must help them. It Is a wonder, that order has not
been given to erect a Statue to Dr. St. for so rare an Invention as this is, of
the Fanaticisme of the Roman Church; and if his Mother-wit could help him,
without the assistance of Commonplace Books, to frame this new Charge against
us, well may the Mother-wit of his Adversaries help them, without needing the
assistance of any Staunch-Author; for such he terms our Ancient Writers, to
answer it? There is a short way to answer Dr. St. 's Books, without needing to
read Ancient Authors. Read only his Books, and you will find the Answer to
whatever he objects against us: so full they are of self-contradictions: They
are like to certain venomous Beasts, that breed in themselves the Antidote
against their own poison.

I have lately read a perfect Character of Dr. St's. proceedings, in charging
Roman Church with Fanaticisme, drawn by himself in a Sermon preached before his
Majesty 24. of February last, 1674. Where showing, how licentious people among
the Gentiles heretofore (as in these times among Christians) brought Virtue
into Contempt, and having assigned for the first Medium they laid hold of to
effect their wicked design, viz. The seperating Religion and morality from each
other, he adds (page 11.) These words. The next thing was to make it [vertue]
to appear ridiculous; which was a certain way to make Fools out of love with
it: who do not consider what is fit to be laughed at, but what is so. When
Socrates, at Athens, undertook with many sharp, and cutting Ironies, to reprove
the vices of his age, and with a great deal of Wit and Reason, to persuade men
to the sober practice of virtue, the licentious people knew not what to do with
him: For they were not able to withstand the force of his Argments. At last
Aristophanes, (having a Comical Wit, whereby he was able to make any thing seem
ridicalous) although he knew very well the Wisdom and Learning of Socrates,
yet to please, and humor the people, he brings him upon the Stage, and
represents his grave instructions after such a manner as turned all into a
matter of laughter to the people of Athens -- This is the method, which men
take when they set their wits against Virtue, and Goodness: They know it is
impossible to argue men out of it: but it is very easy, by ridiculous
postures, and mimical gestures, and profane Similitudes to put so grave, and
modest a thing, as Virtue is, out of countenance, among those, who are sure to
laugh on the other side. I do not think, that such things can signify much to
wise men: but when was the world made up of such? and therefore it signifies
very much to the mischief of those, who have not the courage to love despised
Virtue, nor to defend a cause that is laughed down.

Thus far the Dr. All which may be easily applied to Dr. St. himself.

For the main task of the Dr. in his Treatise of the Fanaticisme of the Roman
Church, was to render ridiculous the Religious practices of the Roman
Catholics, and of so many Saints, famous throughout the world, for their Zeal
and Piety; which (to use his own words) was a certain way to make fools out of
love with our Church; who do not consider what is fit to be laughed at, but
what is so. He could not be ignorant of the great reputation, even the modern
Saints of our Church deservedly enjoy, upon account of their Virtue; far beyond
what Socrates had: yet like another Aristophanes, having a Comical, and
Drolling Wit, whereby he is able to make any thing, though never so Sacred, to
seem ridiculous, only to please, and humor Licentious people, he represents
their grave Instructions, and their Charitable and devout practices, in such a
manner, as he turns all into a matter of Laughter. He knows it is impossible,
to argue judicious men out of the opinion they have of St. Bennet, St.
Dominick, St. Francis, St. Ignatius, and St. Teresa: but it is very easy, by
Mimical Expressions, and profane Similitudes, to render them ridiculous, and
contemptible among those, who are sure to laugh on the other side. But such
proceedings can signify nothing to Wise men; but only to such as have not
courage, to love despised Virtue, nor to defend a Cause that is laughed down.

Come, Come, Dr. Stillingfleet, it is too notorious to all intelligent persons,
what you pretend with this scurrilous, and drolling way of attacking the Roman
Church. Your aim is to bring all Religion and Virtue into Contempt, and
Derision, however you endeavor to disguized so mischievous a design with all
Artifices possible. I wish from my heart, I were able to impute your
Misdemeanors, and Miscarriages in your Controversial Books, to Ignorance, or
Inadvertency: But on the one side your Mistakes are so gross, your
Contradictions so palpable, and your Aspersions so notoriously scurrilous, that
he must needs be a Fool, who cannot see them; and on the other side, the works
you have published, do proclaim you no Fool; that I am forced to impute your
unhandsome proceedings to the Malice of your Will, not the Ignorance of your
Understanding.

The Dr. ( page 70.) endeavoring to stave off the Self-contradiction charged
upon him, in imputing to the Roman Church Divisions in matters of Faith, says
thus. But the fourth and fifth Proposition (viz. of my Book in this point) are
the most healing Principles, that have yet been thought on. Fie for shame! Why
should we and they of the Church of Rome, quarrel thus long! We are very well
agreed in all matters of Faith; as I shall demonstratively prove it from the
Argument of J. W. drawn from his two last Propositions. All, who assent unto
the ancient Creeds, are undivided in matters of Faith, by Prop. 4. But both
Papists and Protestants do assent unto the Ancient Creeds. -- Ergo, they are
undivided in matters of Faith. And has not J. W. now done his business, and
very substantially proved the thing he intended? But I hope we may enjoy the
benefit of it, as well as those of the Church of Rome, and that they will not
henceforward charge us with dividing from their Church in any matters of Faith,
since we are all agreed in owning the ancient Creeds; and seeing we are not
divided from the Church, but by differing in matters of Faith, according to his
Proposition, it follows, that we are still Members of the True Church; and
therefore neither guilty of Heresy, nor Scisme.

By what Dr. St. sets down here, any prudent man may clearly see, how grossly,
and wilfully he mistakes himself. My fourth Proposition, set down by me, page
12. whereof the Dr. makes mention in the place now quoted, and to which I refer
my self in the Syllogism I frame, page 13. runs thus. All those, who assent to
the ancient Creeds, are according to Dr. St. 's opinion (mark those words)
undivided in matters and Articles of Faith; and that was the Dr. 's persuasion,
I proved out of his Rational Account, page 56, 58. and thence I conclude, page
13. that according to Dr. St. (mark those words) All those, who agree to the
ancient Creeds, are of the same Communion, and undivided in matters of Faith.
Now this wise Dr. most grossly supposes, that it is the same for me to say, All
those, who agree to the ancient Creeds, are, according to Dr. St. undivided in
matters of Faith, (where I only relate Dr. St. 's opinion, and argue thence
against him ad hominem) or to say absolutely, All those, who agree to the
ancient Creeds, are undivided in matters of Faith: which words pronounced so
without any modification, import, as if I were of that persuasion: whereas I am
very far from it: neither here, nor in any other place, do I defend any such
Doctrine. Wherefore the Major Proposition, in the Syllogism set down by the Dr.
is in his opinion True, (and consequently may be subservient to prove against
him) but in my opinion it is false, and of no force to demonstrate any thing
against me: and I confess, that it is a very compendious way to compose the
differences between me and the Dr. if one may suppose (as he here does) That
what he says, I say, and that it is the very same for me to affirm, such a
thing is so, according to Dr. St's opinion, or it is true, that Dr. St. thinks
so, and such a thing is so, or it is true what Dr. St. thinks: which
Propositions, doubtless, are very different. For, to the truth of the former
Proposition it is enough, that Dr. St. be of that opinion, whether his opinion
be true or false: but to the truth of the latter, it is requisite, that his
opinion be true, and that what he says be so, as he says it is.

Certainly, Christians may truly affirm without forfeiting their Faith, that
according to the opinion of the Jews, Christ is not the Messiah: will the Dr.
therefore infer hence, that Christians may truly affirm, that Christ is not the
Messiah? or that Christians and Jews are agreed in that main point? Fie for
shame! (to use your own expression) you a Doctor of Divinity, and cannot
distinguish between Propositions so notoriously different? Where is the
ingenuity you so much boast of? Sure you imagined, that the Reader would be so
silly, as to take upon your bare word, what you write, or quote, without ever
examining, or comparing it. By what I have said in reference to the Major
Proposition of his Syllogism, whereby he pretends to prove demonstratively
against us, That both Catholics and Protestants are agreed in matters of
Faith, any one many judge, what Demonstrations we are to expect from Dr. St.

As concerning the Minor Proposition of the Drs. Syllogism, he supposes it to
be the same with my Fifth; wherein he is also wilfully mistaken. For my Fifth
Proposition is this, All Roman Catholics assent unto the ancient Creeds;
whereas his Minor was this, Both Papists and Protestants do assent unto the
Ancient Creeds; where he adds, That Protestants assent unto the Ancient Creeds;
which I never affirmed: and the Dr. cannot be ignorant, that Roman Catholics
hold Protestants do not believe in that Article even of the Apostles Creed,
Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam; which in its true, and legitimate sense signifies
the Roman Catholic Church: and those only are to be thought to believe
Scripture, and the Ancient Creeds, who believe them in the true, and legitimate
sense: which in our Doctrine is only that sense, which is agreeable, or not
repugnant, to the exposition of the Roman Catholic Church. So that
Protestants, according to the persuasion of Catholics, do not believe the
Ancient Creeds; because they do not believe them rightly understood: But
according to Dr. St. 's opinion Roman Catholics do believe the Scripture, and
the Ancient Creeds, rightly understood. For his Rule is, that whoever
understands Scripture, or the Ancient Creeds, as by his natural faculty of
discerning Truth and Falsehood, he thinks they are to be understood, such an one
rightly understands them. Now Roman Catholics understand them, as the Natural
Faculty in them of discerning Truth and Falsehood, teaches them: and Dr. St.
ought to believe that we do so, as he will have us to believe the like of him:
and if we do submit to the judgment of the Roman Catholic Church, concerning
the true interpretation of Scripture, and of the Ancient Creeds, the Natural
Reason that is in us, teaches us so to do. And sure Dr. St. will not so far
abase the Authority of the True Church, and of her Doctors, as to assert, that
whoever is induced by their Authority, to believe such to be the true sense of
such particular places of Scripture, as they expound them in, must needs
misinterpret them.

Hence I infer, that neither the Minor Proposition in the Drs. Syllogism is
granted by us: and is not the Dr. like to demonstrate many things, if such be
his Demonstrations, that both the Major, and Minor are denied by his
Adversaries? is not this to do his business very substantially? Yet the
formentioned Syllogism is a demonstration against the Dr. that Roman
Catholics and Protestants are undivided in matters of Faith according to his
opinion; and consequently must be granted by him to be both of the same Church:
and I concluded thence above, that he must either deny the Protestant Church to
be True, or grant the Roman Church to be so.

Moreover, the Syllogism I form, page 13. out of my Fourth and Fifth
Proposition. is a demonstration against Dr. St. That all Roman Catholics, as
long as they remain so, are undivided in matters of Faith: which is all I there
pretended. For I never intended to prove, that they were so undivided with
such, as are out of their Communion.

CHAP. XI. Some Difficulties raised by the Dr. against my Judgment concerning
his manner of proceeding, Rejected.
BEfore I make an end, I cannot but take notice of some Difficulties Dr. St.
sets down in his particular Preface, relating to the Judgment I frame of his
manner of Proceeding, in these words couched by me page 11. I verily believe,
that Dr. St. did his Interest bias him that way, could with Lucian,
Porphyrius, and those many Libertines of our Country, (the spawn of such Books
as these) he could I say, flurt with as much picquantness, and railery at
Christian Religion, as he does as the Roman, charging Christians with
Superstitions, Corruptions, and Dissensions. What does he not say against these
words? He calls them a base Suggestion, wherein there is no color of Truth.
(page 8.) A sly Insinuation: a Calumny too gross, to need any farther Answer,
(page 9.) and that it had been better to have called him at Atheist in plain
terms. p. 8. I perceive the man is angry. It Is necessary to treat him mildly,
that he may come to himself. But withal I reflect, that many do endeavor to
supply with Anger, the want of Reason, and to Hector one with Bravadoes into
their opinion, when they cannot draw him with Arguments.

Let us examine in particular what he objects against the forementioned words.
He says That I very honestly distinguish the Christian Religion, and the Roman
from each other. And sure, I should not deal honestly, did I not distinguish
the Roman Religion from the Christian, as a Species from the Genus, and as a
part from the whole. For we do not deny, but that there are many vulgarly
called Christians, because they are truly Christened, and profess to believe in
Christ, and acknowledge the Apostles Creed, although interpreted in their way.
Such were Donatists, Pelagians, Arians, and others, held by us, and Protestants
too, for Heretics; who are never owned to be Roman Catholics. I confess, I
have not learned, as yet, so great kindness for our Church, as to make it the
same Individual Church, (those who do so with their own Church, let them answer
for themselves) with an Heretical, nay with an Idolatrous Church. Wherefore
it is manifest, that the Christian Religion, taken in the aforesaid sense, does
comprehend more than the Roman. So that what I intended in the forementioned
place, was, that the way Dr. St. takes to impugn the particular Tenets of the
Roman Church, does, if it be of any force, annul the common Principles of
Christianity, wherein all those, who own themselves to be Christians, do agree:
And that this was my meaning, any one, who was not resolved to quibble, might
easily have seen.

In the next place he asks me, page 8. What is this verily believe of mine
grounded upon? Doubtless the rage my words put him into, did not let him see
what followed. For I laid down the Reasons of what before I asserted, in these
words. For if it be a rational way of proceeding, to rally together whatever
has been objected by the Enemies of a Community, without making mention of the
Answers given by them, or the sentence pronounced in their favor; and to
Father upon the whole Body, the misdemeanors of some members, although
disowned by the Major part, (which are the Artifices used by Dr. St. in his
works against Catholics) what Community is there so holy, which may not easily
be traduced? All this the Dr. very handsomely omits, without so much as
answering a word thereunto. For he is too wise to take notice of any thing,
that may prejudice his design; and only is pleased to divert the Reader with
impertinent Questions: as whether This verily believe of mine be grounded upon
the Authority of our Church, or rather upon some Vision, or Revelation made by
some of our Saints? Whereas in the forementioned words the Motives of that my
belief are clearly set down. The Dr. cannot deny, but that among Christians,
even of the Primitive Church, there were committed Incest, Simony, Adultery,
and several other horrid Crimes, worse than those, which the very Heathens did
commit; as may be gathered out of the Gospel, the Acts, and the Epistles of the
Apostles; and that there were Heresies among them, as that of the Nicolaites.
Wherefore, if the misdemeanors of some Members may be fathered upon the whole
Community, although disowned by the Major part, this absurdity would follow,
that the Christan Religion, even when it was in its Primitive purity, might be
called an Incestuous Simonical, Adulterous, Heretical, and a worse Religion
than Paganism.

Again, it is certain, that many Enormous things were objected by the Jews
against our Savior; as he was a Blasphemer, a Seducer, a Drunkard, and that he
Preached Sedition; and that he was possessed by the Devil, and that the
Religion he founded, was a ridiculous, scandalous, and Superstitious Religion.
Now should one of a picquant, and malicious wit, represent these, and several
other blemishes, objected against Christ, and his Religion, without taking
notice of the Answers given them, nor of the pregnant Arguments, produced in
favor, and vindication of Christ and his Religion; what a low opinion, what an
aversion from Christian Religion, would such a man breed in those, who either
by reason of their Education, or upon some other account were ignorant of the
true condition of Christian Religion, and had already some prejudice against it?

That these are the Artifices used by Dr. Still. against Roman Catholics might
be evidenced by several instances taken out of his works. One of the proofs
that he alleges, to evince the Roman Church to be guilty of Fanaticisme (for
that was his intent) are the extravagancies of the Alumbradoe's and
Fratricelli; who were not only disowned, but condemned by the Prelates of the
Roman Church.

Moreover, he pretends to father upon the Roman Church, the Gunpowder Treason,
though detested by Roman Catholics; and without so much as taking notice of
the Sentence, that King James, who was most concerned in that plot, gave in
Vindication of Catholics, in his own Declaration about it, saying, That the
generality of his Catholic Subjects did abhor such a detestable Conspiracy, no
less than he himself. If such Artifices therefore as these be warrantable, what
Community is there so holy, (I say again) which may not easily be traduced?
Should God permit Dr. St. as certainly he may, to declare himself a Jew, or an
Atheist; he has already laid up good store of Arguments, wherewith, according
to his manner of proceeding, to traduce Christianity; Fathering upon the
Christian Religion all the horrible sins, that ever have been committed by any
Christian whatsoever, Protestant or Catholic. And if he should want matter to
fill up his Volumes, as following this way of attacking his Adversary, he
scarce ever can; he may suppose Christians either to teach Crimes which they do
not teach; or what they do teach, to be Crimes: which is the way he commonly
takes, to oppugn Roman Catholics.

Since therefore the same Topics, and Reasons drawn from them, wherewith Dr.
St. endeavors to traduce the particular Tenets of the Roman Religion, may
without difficulty, be levelled against the general Principles of Christian
Religion; That he has been pleased to make use of those Arguments, rather
against the former, than the latter, could not proceed out of more Reason for
the one, than for the other; and consequently it proceeded from some Interest,
(which has so great an Adscendent over the hearts of men) or other passion,
that biased him that way. Whence I affirmed, that had the same passion of
Interest biased him against Christian Religion, which made him so malicious
against the Roman, it is very credible, that he would have shown himself as
pievish against the one as the other. All this I have said to signify, what it
was, that this verily believe of mine was founded upon.

In confirmation of what was couched in the forementioned words, I added
immediately, But this Dr. is so unfortunate, as well in vindicating the
Protestant, as in attacking the Roman Church, that he neither produces any
thing in vindication of Protestancy, but the same, or the like, may be alleged
in defense of Socinianisme, and other Heresies, condemned as such by
Protestants. [See the Guide in Controversies, Discourse 4.] nor opposes any
thing against the Roman Religion; but the same, or the like, may be objected by
Jews, or Pagans, against the Christian: which, according to Scripture, is a
scandal to the former, and a derision to the latter. So that whoever will be
pleased to reflect seriously upon his Discourses, he may clearly see, that his
Proofs for Protestancy will as soon make one a Socinian, as a Protestant; and
his objections against Catholics will as soon make one no Christian, as no
Catholic. And what does the Dr. answer to all this? All that he could; which
is just nothing: not taking so much as notice of the forementioned words:
although they contain two main points; which are proved at large by several
Catholic Authors, and do utterly enervate whatsoever Dr. St. brings for
himself, or against us: and do moreover force the Dr. himself, to salve
whatever he produces against Catholics, if he will be a Christian; and to
confess the inanity of whatever he alleges for Protestants, as such, if he
will not be a Socinian.

The first point is, that he alleges nothing in defense of Protestancy as
Protestancy, which may not be alleged, and with the same force too, in
vindication of Socinianisme, or any other herefie. This point has been
discussed at large by those two famous, and solid Divines, the Author of
Protestancy without Principles, and The Guide in Controversies, (Disc. 4. now
quoted) wherein is contained a Plea between a Protestant and a Socinian. And
although Dr. St. has had at last the courage to offer at an answer to the
forementioned Books, yet he has not dared to touch this point: which is no
small confirmation of the opinion some have conceived, that Dr. St. is a
Socinian: and yet the Church of England looks upon Socinians as Heretics.

The second point is, That Dr. St. produces nothing against the particular
Tenets of the Roman Church, but the same, or the like, may be objected by Jews,
Turks, Pagans, or Libertins, against the Common Principles of Christianity:
Neither is he ignorant, but that some Pagans look upon our Scriptures as
Fables. no less than Dr. St. looks upon the Legends of our Saints as such. The
Jews also denied the New Testament; and the Turks make our Scripture to truckle
under to their Alcoran. This point is solidly discussed in that erudite Book,
Reason and Religion: and although the Dr. pretends to answer it, yet he
prudently waves this point, or very slightly touches it; spending the far
greater part of his Answer in scoffing at the Miracles of the Roman Church;
even those, which have been authentically approved in particular by her in the
Canonization of Saints; thinking this a fit subject for his drolling Wit. Yet
what he there says concerning this Argument, is a new confirmation of this our
second point. For he objects nothing material against the Miracles of the Roman
Church; but the same, or the like, is, or may be objected by Libertins against
the Miracles of Christ, the Prophets and the Apostles; as the same Author, in
his late reply does make apparent.

Yet the Dr. to show us that he is a Christian, says ( page 8.) That he has
made it his business to assert the Truth of Christian Religion, in a large
Discourse, several years since, published by him. But to this he himself
answers, bringing the Example of Vanninus, who writ for Providence, when he
denied a Deity. page 9. he concludes thus. In plain terms, I know but one way
to satisfy such as you are; (but I will keep from it as long as I can:) and
that is to go to Rome, and to be burned for my Faith: For that is the kindness
there showed to those, who contend for the purity of Christian Religion,
against the Corruptions of the Roman. But the Dr. must pardon me, if I tell him
plainly, that I cannot believe, he would ever be burned for defending the
particular Tenets of the Protestant Church, since he himself affirms, in his
Rational Account, page 54, 55. That such Tenets are neither Articles of Faith,
nor necessary to be believed, either necessitate medij, or praeeepti: no
Legacies of Christ, or his Apostles; but only inferior Truths, and mere pious
opinions; which no body is bound to believe. Nay we cannot be secure, that the
Dr. does assent to them; but perhaps in his heart he holds the contrary
Doctrines. For, according to his Cavils about the intention of the Priest, one
can have no security of the intention, or thoughts of other men. And why should
I think, that Dr. St. does love so little his own life, as to be burned for the
defense of such Tenets, which, according to his own Principles, he is not bound
to assent unto; and perhaps, in his heart, for ought I know, he does not
believe them to be true. Certain it is, that should he be burned for them, he
would not be burned for his Faith, nor be a Martyr upon that account: since
even in his own opinion, they are not Articles of Faith.

Moreover, should Dr. St. be burned at Rome for contradicting, or opposing the
Religion there established, he would be burned as a Malefactor, even according
to his own Churches Principles. For it is the Doctrine of the English Church,
that all Sovereign Temporal Princes, at least such as are Christians, are
Supreme Heads of the Church in their respective Dominions, and consequently,
that all are bound, as long as they are in such Dominions, not to contradict,
nor oppose the Religion there established by the Supreme Prince. Since
therefore Protestants confess the Pope to be Supreme Temporal Prince of Rome,
and its adjacent Territories, and accordingly to be Supreme Head of the Church
in those places, seeing they own him to be a true Christian Prince, (though
they will needs have him to be Antichrist) in manifestly follows, that even
according to Protestant Principles, if Dr. St. should be punished at Rome for
opposing the Religion there established, and for drawing from it the Popes
Subjects, he would suffer as a Malefactor.

Besides, how civil Rome has shown her self to several English Protestants,
persons of Quality, who have gone thither to view the Curiosities of the City,
they themselves, many of them being yet alive, can witness: and from such
instances the world may judge, whether Rome has not been kinder to English
Protestants, than London to Italian Papists. Yea, if Dr. St. has so much zeal,
as to be burned for his Religion, it is not necessary for him to go so far as
Rome. They may do him that kindness here in England; where several have been
burned for Socinians, since Protestancy came in. In fine, we may secure Dr. St.
that should he persist at Rome, to grant such palpable Contradictions, as we
have shown he does, he would never be burned there for his Religion: yet I
would not secure him, that in such a case he should not be shaved, and sent to
the Pazzarelli, as happened some years ago to Three English Quakers: who
having gone to Rome to Convert the Pope, as they said, and Preaching in the
public Streets in a foreign Language, (it seems they had not yet the Gift of
Tongues) were looked upon as Madmen, and accordingly committed to Bedlam. Yet
soon after, information being given in by some of our Nation, what manner of
people they were, they were presently set at liberty; and they offered to
supply them with Moneys; which they refused. Whether, Dr. St. would imitate
them in this, I know not.

The Dr. in his second Discourse, in the Dedicatory to the Earl of Shaftsbury,
says, That if he once loses his Senses, or his Understanding, that is, if he
once falls mad, he knows not whether it may be his Fortune to be carried to
Rome. But fear not, Dr. you will certainly be left in London, to go about the
Streets ranting at Popery, and Popish Idolatry; (For commonly Madmen harp upon
those things, which made them run mad) or Singing the Catholic Ballad, or some
such other, to Tom a Bedlams Tune: and it will not be hard for the Dr. to say
them without Book. For, as one affirmed, as truly as ingeniously, all such
Ballads, which have been lately published, are nothing else but Dr. St. put in
Rhyme. And the Dr. would do then quite as much good, by singing such Ballads
against Popery, as he has done hitherto by Preaching the like things against
it. Dr. St.'s Works were heretofore looked upon as Play-Books, as I have
already Insinuated. But now it seems, they have degenerated into Ballads. He is
resolved (I see) out of his exceeding great Charity, and Compliance, to oblige
all sorts of Merry Wits.

Neither do I blame the Dr. for what he has Writ in defense of Christian
Religion: yet I must tell him, that none court one more, than such as are
secretly contriving his Ruin. What I blame in him is, That with the Objections
he makes against the Roman Catholic Religion, he destroys Christian Religion,
which before he had vindicated; and pulls down with one hand, what he had set
up with the other: and I have evidenced already, that it is not enough for a
Christian, to assent unto all the positive Tenets of Christianity, but it is
also necessary not to teach any thing destructive to any of them.

But the Dr. retorts the Argument; and will needs have us to destroy
Christianity with our manner of proceeding, ( page 9.) and that we cannot
maintain the cause we have espoused, without plunging those, who rely upon our
word, into the depth of Atheism. He conceives (forsooth) a great fear (alas,
good man!) that some, being pressed by our Arguments; will rather become no
Christians, or turn flat Atheists, than Roman Catholics. Such is the hatred,
and prejudice they have against the Roman Church.

The inanity of this Objection has been laid open above: it is grounded upon
this pitiful Principle, That we ought not to press men, out of good and solid
Maxims, which they themselves assent unto, to prove what we pretend, least
(perhaps) rather than they will grant what we endeavor to prove, they will
deny those common Principles, wherein they agreed with us: and by consequence
make the gap, and difference between us wider. If Christian Religion be so
beautiful, solid, and incorrupt, as certainly it is; and the Roman Religion so
Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Ridiculous as he fancies it to be, sure they are
as different one from the other, as black from white. And what fear can there
be, that men ever take white for black, or black for white; unless he supposes
those, with whom he deals, to have quite lost their senses, and understandings:
yea to compare them together, if they be so different, is the best way, to make
the Beauty of the one, and the Ill favouredness of the other, appear the
greater, according to that Maxim, Opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt.
So that Dr. St. and his Associates, do evidence to the world, either that they
have a very low opinion of Christian Religion, even when it was in its greatest
purity; since they think it so hard, that being faced with the Roman Religion,
(which seems to them to be so full of Corruptions, Superstitions, and
abominations) the one may be distinguished from the other: or that the Roman
Religion is not so ridiculous, and ill-favored, as they represent it to be;
since it is so like the Christian Religion, even in its greatest Purity, that
being compared together, it is extreme difficult to know which is which; and
that by such a parallel men are incited, either to embrace them both, or reject
them both.

The Dr. goes yet farther; and endeavoring to supply with counterfeited zeal
the difficiency of true, and solid reasons, puts down these words, page 11. I
would fain know of these men, whether they do in earnest make no difference
between the Writings of such as Mother Juliana, and the Books of Scripture;
between the Revelations of St. Bridgit, St. Catherin, etc. and those of the
Prophets; between the actions of St. Francis, and Ignatius Loyola, and those of
the Apostles? if they do not, I know who they are, that expose our Religion to
purpose. If they do make a difference, how can the representing their Visions,
and practices, reflect dishonor upon the other, so infinitely above them, so
much more certainly conveyed down to us, with the consent of the whole
Christian world?

In answer to this Objection, I would fain know of the Dr. whether he does in
earnest, make no difference between a Door, a Vine, a Worm, a Lamb, a
Shepherd, etc. and Christ, our Savior? If he does not, then Christ is no
better than a Door, a Vine, a Worm, a Lamb, a Shepherd; which to affirm, is
Blasphemy: if he makes a difference, how does the Scripture compare Christ to
things so infinitely beneath him? Now if he says, that these things, though
infinitely beneath Christ, yet in some of their Properties may resemble him,
and his virtues; and upon that account he is compared unto them, without any
blemish, or reflection upon his honor; why might not we, without reflecting any
dishonor upon Christ, say, that Saint Francis, Saint Ignatius, and other
Canonized Saints of the Roman Church, do in their Virtues, Miracles, and
Practices, resemble those of Christ, and his Apostles, though infinitely above
them?

Besides, it is manifest, that Christ, and his works, as being an infinite
value, derived from the dignity of the person, were far more above the
Apostles, and their works, than those were above the particular Saints of the
Roman Church, and their practices: notwithstanding we have the same
Inducements, and Topics, to believe the matters of Fact, of the Apostles and
Prophets, as those of Christ, though so far beyond them: and whoever should
deny the former, without doubt he would open a way to deny the latter. Although
therefore the practices, and Revelations of the particular Saints of the Roman
Church be, in several Circumstances inferior to those of the Apostles, and
Prophets; yet there may be the same Motives, and Inducements, (we speak
antecedently to Scripture, taken as the word of God, as when we prove against
Pagans the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles) to believe the one as the
other: So that should one deny the Virtues, Revelations, and Practices,
constantly related, and believed, concerning the Roman Saints, and approved by
our Church, (for of such Virtues, Revelations, and Practices we speak in this
present debate) he would, doubtless, give a great occasion to Pagans, to deny,
or question, the Virtues, Revelations, and Practices of the Apostles, and
Prophets. The reason is, because the same Motives, Inducements, and Topics,
may serve for the belief of things very different one from another; which is
what I pretended: and if they are of no force in the one, neither are they in
the other. Yet one would think, that the harder the thing is, and the more
sublime, the stronger Inducements are requisite to believe it. So that, if the
unanimous consent of so many learned, and pious men is not sufficient to induce
a Protestant to believe the practices, and transactions of St. Bennet, St.
Dominick, St. Francis, and St. Ignatius, handed down by so general a Tradition,
and of a far fresher date, how shall the like consent be sufficient to induce
Pagans, to believe the works of Christ, and his Apostles, far more wonderful,
and of a staler date? For commonly, matters of Fact of a fresh date are more
easily proved, and believed, than of a staler. The difference therefore
inculcated by Dr. St. between Christ and his Apostles on the one side, and the
proper Saints of the Roman Church on the other, and the Superminency of the
former above the latter, is so far from diminishing the force of our Argument,
that it rather increases it.

Again, Dr. St. and his Partisans, commonly defend, that the certainty we have,
that such Books are Scripture, and that they were penned by such Writers, whose
names are prefixed unto them, is of the same nature with the certainty, that we
have, that such Books were written by Titus Livius, or Plutarch, which are
unanimously assented unto, as Titus Livius, or Plutarch's Works: and the
certainty we have, that there have been such men as Christ, his Apostles, and
that they did such and such things, which are commonly ascribed unto them, with
the certainty we have, that there have been in the world such men, as William
the Conqueror, Julius Caesar, and Henry the Eighth, and that they have done
such things, as unanimously are attributed unto them. So that whoever should
deny all such mere Humane Histories, would be in a fair way to deny, that ever
there have been such men as Christ, and his Apostles; or that they have done
such things, which Christians unanimously ascribe unto them.

This Doctrine supposed, (whether true or false I do not now dispute) I would
once more fain know of the Dr. whether he does in earnest make no difference
between the Books of Scripture, and the Books of Livy, and Plutarch; between
Christ and his Apostles, and their Practices, and William the Conqueror,
Julius Caesar, Henry the Eighth, Practices? if not, then we know who they are,
that expose Christian Religion to purpose: if he does make a difference, how
does he make this Parallel, between things, so far estranged the one from the
other? and if he says, the Parallel he makes is not between the persons, or
things themselves, but between the certainty of the one and the other; (and
there may be, without doubt, the same kind of certainty concerning things very
different) let him apply to the same answer to his Argument made against us,
and he will see, how it comes to nothing. For what we pretend, is, that there
is the same, or the like certainty, the same, or the like motives, and
inducements (we speak here antecedently to Scripture held to be the word of
God; for such it is not held to be by Pagans) to believe, that there have been
such men, as St. Bennet, St. Dominick, St. Francis, St. Ignatius, and that they
have done such things, as are unanimously attributed unto them by Roman
Catholics, without any hesitation, as that there have been such men as Christ
and his Apostles; and that they have done such things as are universally
ascribed unto them by Christians. So that whoever should deny, that there was
ever such a man as St. Bennet, or that he ever founded any Order of Religious
men, he might easily in the like manner be brought to question, or deny, that
there ever was any such man as Christ, or that he ever founded Christian
Religion: there being the same, or the like evidence for the one, as for the
other, antecedently to Scripture owned as the Word of God; viz. a constant
Tradition of men; although Christ, and Christian Religion be far above St.
Bennet, and his Order.

I do not deny, but that there is a more Universal Tradition for the Miracles,
and Transactions of Christ and his Apostles, than for the particular Actions
and Miracles, of the forementioned Roman Saints. But what then? may there not
be several degrees in the same kind of certainty? Protestants aver, as we have
seen, that there is the same kind of certainty, and evidence, against a Pagan
for the Miracles of Christ, as for the Actions of Alexander the Great, and
Julius Caesar, though these are attended upon by a more Universal Tradition;
since Jews and Pagans, who deny Christ's Miracles, assent unto the Actions of
Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar: and yet both we, and Protestants
affirm, that they may as well deny, or question the one as the other.

Moreover, there is Tradition enough to induce a Moral certainty for all, and
every Book of the Scripture: and yet doubtless there is a more general
Tradition for some Books of Scripture, than for others; for the Old Testament,
than for the New; and for some parts of the New, than for others. In the like
manner, though the Tradition for Christ's, and his Apostles Miracles, be more
general, than for the Miracles of the abovementioned Roman Saints, approved of
by our Church; yet the Tradition for these is so general, that it renders them
Morally certain: so that whoever proceeds rationally, upon the account of
Humane Tradition, will either allow both, or neither. Let Us suppose, that there
are in the world a hundred Millions of Christians; and that threescore Millions
of them are Roman Catholics: For even Protestants confess, that Roman
Catholics alone make up the Major part of Christendom. Now whoever has the
confidence to deny the Miracles of St. Bennet, though assented unto by so many
Millions of Roman Catholics, and for the space of above a Thousand years, he
would not stick, should the like passion carry him that way, to question the
Miracles of Christ, and his Apostles, though agreed on by the whole Body of
Christians, and for the space of above a Thousand, and six Hundred years. Can
we imagine, that any prudent man does now believe the Miracles of Christ,
because there is such a precise number in the world (and no lesser) of
Christians, who assent unto them, or rather because there is a vast number of
Christians, that unanimously assert them? and certainly the number of
Catholics alone is a vast number. Or would it not be a madness for one to say,
That were there no more Christians in the world, to attest the Miracles of
Christ, than there are Roman Catholics, he would not think himself obliged to
believe them upon account to Tradition, and consent in their favor: when as
it is certain, there was a time, when there were no more Christians in the
world, than now there are Roman Catholics: and yet even then, doubtless, there
was Tradition, and Consent, sufficient to render the Miracles of Christ, and
his Apostles unquestionable.

And thus far concerning the Parallel between the Miracles, and Practices of
Christ and his Apostles, and those of Roman Canonized Saints: supposing the
Actions of the latter to be inferior (as really they are in several
Circumstances) to those of the former. Yet our Savior expressly says, John
14.12. I say unto you, He that believes in me, the works that I do, he shall
do; and greater works than these shall he do: which words, even according to
Calvin, and other Sectaries, extend not only to the Apostles, but also to the
whole Body of the Church in succeeding Ages. So that, not only the Miracles,
and practices of the Apostles, but also those of modern Saints of the Roman
Church, considered in themselves, are as great, or greater, than those of
Christ. Did Christ do Miracles, raising the Dead, casting out Devils, curing
suddenly the Lame, the Deaf, the Dumb, and others infected with incurable
Diseases? So did the Apostles, and several Apostolical men of the Roman Church.
Did Christ Foretell things to come? So did the Apostles, and Roman Saints. Did
Christ Convert many with his Preaching? So did the Apostles, and several Saints
of the Roman Church. Was Christ a Pattern of Charity, Humility, Patience, and
all other Virtues? The Apostles, and many famous Roman Saints have imitated his
Virtues: Notwithstanding what Christ did, he did it by his own power, being
Omnipotent; but what the Apostles, and other Apostolical men did in this kind,
they did it by the virtue, and power Christ liberally conferred upon them. And
therefore Christ was the Principal Agent of all such works.

Now let any one judge, whether the Parallel between the Inducements we have to
be Christians, and those, which we have to be Catholics; and the certainty of
both, antecedently to Scripture owned as the word of God, be so unreasonable,
as that only with an Admiration or two, Dr. St. could prudently think to blow
it off. Wherefore I repeat what I have already said, That the Drs. Objections
against Roman Catholics will as soon make one no Christian, as no Catholic.

And as for several Extravagant, abstruse, and mystical expressions, he
alleges out of the Revelations, and Visions of Canonized Saints of the Roman
Church, branding them for Fanaticisme, the Dr. might, as I insinuated in my
Book, produce out of the Revelations of St. John, and the Canticles, (which
upon this account are dashed out of the Canon of Scriptures by some
Protestants) quite as strange, and extraordinary expressions, and Practices.
But Dr. St. is of those men, who whatever they understand not, they Blaspheme:
and he is as unacquainted with mystical Divinity, as with other Faculties;
which he has a greater obligation to know. Now if the Canticles, and Apocalypse
are sufficiently cleared from Fanaticisme, notwithstanding so many strange, and
abstruse expressions they continue, because they are approved of by the
greatest part of Christians: also the Revelations of St. Bridgit, St.
Catherine, and St. Teresa, are cleared from the like Aspersion, because they
are countenanced by the Major part of Christendom, viz. the Roman Catholic
Church: which, according to Dr. St.'s concession is a True Church. And sure the
approbation of a True Church, and so much extended, as the Roman Church is, is
sufficient to excuse particular ways of Devotions, and particular Revelations
from the imputation of Fanaticisme; which necessarily implies a Resistance
against all Lawful, and competent Authority.

Neither did I ever affirm in my Book, as Dr. St. grossly mistakes me, That
Divine Authority, manifested by Miracles, is not sufficient, to clear
particular manners, of preaching or Praying, from Fanaticisme; as it happened
to the Prophets, and Apostles, as I showed above. Yea my Third Proposition,
page 9. was, That the Aathority competent (and by a competent Authority I
understand a Lawful Authority) to clear particular ways, and practices, from
Fanaticisme, is not necessarily Divine; as I prove there, with several
instances. And certainly, Those words clearly signify, that I thought, the
forementioned Authority might be Divine, But such are the Arts Dr. St. uses, in
answering his Adversaries. He mistakes some places; he takes no notice of
others; and he blunders over others: and it is a great wonder, how frequently
he makes use of these Artifices, in the Examination of my Book, though so short.

I shall close up the whole Discourse, with an address to Dr. St.'s Friends,
(perhaps I shall have better luck with them, than I have had with the Dr.
himself, in the favors I requested at his hands) entreating them,

First, That as they tender the Honor of our Nation, (wherein Dr. St. bears so
great a sway) and the Credit of that famous University, whereof he is a Member,
they would find out one way or other, to purge his brains from this pestilent
Humor of Self-contradiction; which infects all his Works, in such a manner,
that they seem to be nothing else, but so many Bundles of notorious
Contradictions. This procedure of Dr. St. is a shrewd conjecture, that the
Report which goes about, is true, viz. That Dr. St. had only the penning of
those Books, which he has set forth; and that the Matter was suppeditated unto
him from several Authors; who were wiser than to publish such things
themselves; and the good Dr. without ever considering the coherency of one
thing with another, huddles all together, dresses it with Drollery, Flurts, and
Gaudy Expressions, and then presents it to public View. For it seems
impossible, that one Author, if he has an eye to what he writes, should commit
such palpable Contradictions: whereas it is no wonder, that different Authors
should Contradict one another.

Secondly, That since the Dr. as it seems misspent the time that he should have
employed in learning Logic, in the perusal of Play-books, and Romances; they
would procure some University-man to teach him the Rules of Rational
Discourses. For it is a great affront for a Dr. of Divinity, to be so
deficient, as we have proved him to be, even in the very Rudiments of
Rationality: and if the Dr. says, that it is too late for him to learn such
things, then they may persuade him to leave off Writing. Yea, who forced him to
begin, when he knew himself unacquainted with so necessary a Faculty, for such
as write Polemical Discourses? Has not the Church of England other men, who
understand the Rules of Logic, able to write in Vindication of Protestancy?

Thirdly, That they would obtain of the Dr. if he be yet resolved to write more
Books of Controversies, to lay aside Railery, unless he pretends to be, not the
Champion, but the Buffoon, of the Protestant Church. Let him try whether he be
not able to write something, which though divested of all those little Arts, he
has hitherto made use of to set of his Works, may deserve, not to lie upon the
Stalls to be bespattered with the dirt of Coach-wheels, and to be sold off at
last for wast-paper.

FINIS.

