THE Reasoning Apostate: Or MODERN LATITUDE-MAN CONSIDERED, As he opposes the
Authority OF THE KING and CHURCH.
OCCASIONED By several late TREATISES.

By John Warly B. D. late Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridg.

LONDON: Printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street, 1677.

IMPRIMATUR

7 March, 1677.

Geo. Hooper Rmo. Dno. D. Gilb. Cant. Arch. a Sacris Domesticis.

THE PREFACE.
WHen I saw the Church and Religion defended only by Reason, I looked on its
condition as Deplorable as a forlorn Hope, FOr rational Assertors of Religion,
who scorn the Auxiliaries of the Church, though they appear as stout Soldiers,
yet they are ill Disciplined, and as Goliath, set up with a natural Fortitude
and prodigious Bulk, more fit for a Spectacle than a Fight, more fit for
Inquisitive Speculation than Practical Religion; And that which renders Reason
thus incapable of putting an end to Disputes, is this, because there are some
Doctrines in obscure places of Scripture, which are like Garrisons on such a
Rock which bids Defiance to Reason to Storm it, or Art to surprise it. Arcana
(which God alone by the Mediation of the Church) will most fully reveal and
deliver to Man.

It is well known that some obscure Texts of Scripture, as Christ the Author,
appear as Incognito till the Church makes the discovery.

I am not bound to believe that our Savior gave such Commands to his Apostles,
as a Philosopher did to his Scholars, who wrapped up his knowledge in obscure
Methods, as a dark Shop to commend the Wares. Yet it is certain that some places
of Scripture are so hard to be understood, that they deserve to be called
Oracles for their Obscurity as much as Truth. Now who shall make discovery of
it but those to whom these Oracles of God are committed, and they are the
Church.

I need not trouble the Reader with the Contents of these Papers, but shall
only say, that I have endeavored to give Religion as well as Reason its due, to
rob Man of the one is unnatural Injustice, to steal from the other the worst
Sacriledg. This made me endeavor to assert the Authority of the Church,
especially in this Age in which it seems to be exposed to contempt, and some
factious persons looking on it as in a helpless and weak condition, not able to
defend it self, much less to protect or assist others, turn the Divine Command
into a Scoff and Jeer, whilst in Derision they say, Go tell the Church.

Names of some Treatises more Obscurely mentioned in the following
Considerations.
N.F. The natural Fanatic. Milton, of Civil Power in Ecclesiastical Causes,
page 24. The Judgment of Non-conformists of the interest of Reason in matters
of Religion, p. 26. The Advocate of Conscience-Liberty, p. 42. The Author of
Smyrk, p. 43. A Jesuit against one of the Sorbonists, p. 74. The Advocate for
Conscience-Liberty, p. 92.
Consideration 1. Of the Defense of the Church of England by some Orthodoxmen,
in a Method or Style which seems to some too familiar, biting, and severe.
THough the admirable Defense of the Church of England by some of the Laity
(which Name may be fastened on Nobles, as well as Peasants, though a late
Author has undertaken by Chorah's Model to assert each person a Priest; (as it
was objected to Luther by a great French Historian) deserved as much
Commendation as that ancient practice of drawing the Sword when Christians
stood on their guard whilst they made confession of their Faith; and that
without imputation of Ambition or Vain glory, have supported the tottering Ark
by their rational discourses, and seem as men from Macedonia at St. Paul's
Summons to assist the Church; yet some of these endeavoring to take off from
the estimation of the authority of the Church, they seem to me to be (as
Cassianus says of the secular order of Men in the Roman Church,
Sacerdoturientes, a new kind of Gray Friars in the reformed Religion. Neither
do other men seem less fatal to the Church who are as Mendicants, at least in
their language, endeavoring to win their designs by a cringing Supplication, I
beseech you my Fathers, which they could not obtain by Arguments. These men
professing a plainess of Speech and Integrity, seem as much suspicious as the
Gibeonites to make Leagues with clouted Shoos whilst Poverty pleads their
cause. Neither are those altogether excusable who dispute against their
Adversaries in a rational way without pressing the Authority of some ancient
Fathers; seeing it is possible to show, that the most valuable Arguments which
are made use of as a Battery against Atheists are not the mere products of
their own inventions, but of others whose names are concealed by them; I know
not for what reason except this is it, that they thought Authority would
prejudice the humoursome Age, and that Books would be better esteemed as
Anonymous, or a New Cabala to the reformed Religion, or because it seems policy
in Church as well as Srate ( Arcana Ecclesiae as much as Imperii) to conceal
the Authors from whom they had their Intelligence or Imformation. This Method
makes men start at the citations of ancient Fathers, as the Disciples did at
Christ's person walking on the Waters, supposing them as evil Spirits to seduce
them.

But I pass from this to the other branch of this Consideration, which makes me
astonished to think how some Orthodox persons have been cavilled with for
defending the Church in too severe and bitter Methods, and a charge laid on
Prelates, as if they designed the defense of the Church as St. Mallos is
guarded with snarling Currs, and those who assert their Authority esteemed as
Cock Hectors, who win Battles more by Carlick than Strength, whilst a stinking
Breath defeats the Combatant.

These need not my Vindication (they have done it themselves) but suppose some
Excursions not so commendable; let it be considered that it is as impossible
for a man to modelize his language so when he disputes with an Adversity as
shall not offend him, as it is for a man who fights a Duel, to keep up to all
those rules which he prescribed to himself before the engagement. Polemical
Arguments are like a Bolt or Shot which contracts Heat by flying. Laws in such
cases cannot be observed, and the Disputant cannot be so accurate in his
Language as Hortensius in his Cown, as well as Oration, (such a one deserves to
be called Smyrk or the Divine in mode) to be in a set accurate form without a
wrinkle. He who disputes with Suarez, must make use of his language.
Metaphysical Notions which are necessarily mixed in Divine Dispute, cannot be
so plainly controverted by Scripture Phrase, which in some cases cannot confute
the Adversary any otherwise than the Idiot did Bellarmine, by giving him the
Lie. To say all Adversaries must be disputed with by their own weapons; St.
Paul warrants it, who draws an Argument from a Poet, when he might have cited
the sense out of the first Chapter of Genesis.

But this perhaps may not seem so pertinent to the present case, for the age is
sufficiently wearied out with Distinctions and terms of Art, which like dry
Bones knit together, only make a Skeleton, not a man, but that which is
censured is the launching out the licentious phrase of Stage.

It Is true, this is unworthy of Divine Discourse, and the Priest ought to scorn
variety of humor or fancy in his language, as much as the Spaniard does a
fantastic Dress; his language ought to strike so much aw according to the
Character given of Job, Though I smiled (says he) they believed me not; though
any thing drop which seems not of equal moment with the rest of the Discourse,
the weight of the one overpoyseth the levity of the other.

This may be well supposed; for Gravity and Levity in discourse seem to be as
natural and as necessary as they are in Bodies: And as no bodies are so dense or
thick, but some subtle matter lurks in the Pores; so no discourse so close but
it may have its airy matter intermixed and in imbodi'd with it. The grave
Writings of the Ancient Fathers are as a Witness of this. I could instance in
some, if it were necessary.

To say all Arguments like, Arrows, to which a Plume is no less necessary than
a ponderous Metal, whilst one gives it flight, the other makes the wound. Such
necessary Levity at least may be pardonable, but Scurrility is a vice in
Morals, much more in Religion. However a sharp and severe way of Arguing must
not be omitted, for it is as necessary to the Priest as an Acid humor to the
Stomach, without which the meat would not be digested: There is no new Method,
Nazianzens (...) is an evidence of it, and primitive Fathers sharply check the
Gentiles for their folly. Yet all this was without Scurrilous Language,
altogether unlike to Luther's railing Method, which occasioned some of the
Roman Church to call him and his Disciples Mad Men. However he deserved well of
the Church (I presume none will deny) and it may be retorted on those who
object it, that some of theirs have fixed odious Names on Protestants, Dogs,
Infidels, Magicians, nay worse, as a great Doctor signs their Banishments, in
these words, Ut magos publica Authoritate arcemus, civitate pellimus, etc.

I might cite others to this purpose no less Black-mouthed, but I forbear to do
that, and shall only suggest this to the Readers thoughts. As the Church of
England, though the first Reformers (if it can be reasonably imagined that its
first Reformers, gave any credit to the Objections of some of the Roman Church)
were sensible that the Reformation was begun as in a storm of passion and
irreverent language, yet disowns not the consequence of it, seeing it as a
Tempest cast them on a happy shore, now shall not all sincere Christians do as
the first Reformers did; who when they saw Religion, well defended, though in
an unbeseeming and boisterous way (For which there is no reason of complaint in
this case) would not have Religion suffer for it, for that would have argued as
much folly as if a Prince should disown a Victory because gotten by rash and
imprudent means, or like casting Joseph into the Pit only out of spite to his
Coat, if Religion suffer, because not pleasingly worded. I speak not this as an
Abettor of Lucians scoffs, or a Rabshekah's railing, but only to show how
prudence makes use of them. To conclude with a late observation of some
Anatomists, who say there is not known a certain use of the Spleen, and that
some creatures may live without it. I determine nothing in this case, but only
say I am confident there is no use of a Petulant Spleen in Religious Debates.

Consideration II. Whether belief, which relies and depends on the Authority of
the Catholic Church, and as it is encouraged by the Civil Magistrate, may
properly be said to be forced, and to proceed from an unwarrantable usurpation
of the right of natural reason.
THe Church has not been so effectually undermined by any Method as by
representing its Authority under the odious names of Tyranny, and calling all
obligation to belief unwarrantable Impositions or force. Wherefore it is
necessary to examine what is meant by force in its several acceptations, and
then assert the Negative of the Question.

Sometimes it is taken philosophically; for that Power which rests a being
beyond its natural inclination or tendency, according to this account of it:
the determination of the Will must be accounted violent so far as it is
concerned in Religion, and Grace it self is not able to escape the imputation
of force: for grace may as well be said to be an enforcing influence on man's
nature in his corrupted state, as that power which according to philosophy
diverts the natural course of the Elements in bodies, and imprisons them in one
mixture, otherwise they would retreat to their own first home. The fire and
volatile parts would be always moving toward heaven, and the sluggish parts of
earth fettered to their center. This is demonstrated in another Treatise N. F.
viz. that men's thoughts are with as much difficulty composed to a settled and
true notion of God and the Soul, as the Elements are commanded to comply in the
composition of natural Bodies; Therefore I shall wave this, and consider it in
another sense, as it is more directly and boldly complained of, and that is it
which relates to the authority of the Church and interest of the Magistrate in
matters of Religion, which is looked upon by some as a Battery to destroy all
Religion.

This is the Force generally exclaimed against by the Libertine, which is an
unreasonable and an unjust imputation; for if the constant and universal
Doctrine of the Church, which has an obliging influence on Religious minds,
must be called force, our Reformation and Separation from the Church of Rome,
must be esteemed violent, and consequently illegal. For I cannot apprehend that
Separation was justifiable on any better terms; but that the Doctrine of the
Reformed Church is agreeable to the Scriptures, with the consent and evidence
of Councils and Fathers. Besides, this not only condemns holy Councils and
Fathers, being usurpers of Christian Liberty by imposing matters of Faith, but
makes the whole Church liable to Error, which was never yet asserted by any
sober mind. For though it may be granted that Councils and Fathers, each have
been liable to some errors, yet when there is a consent of all, it is an
infallible argument of Truth, vid. N. F. The Bishop of Rome is so sensible of
this, that his Assertors know not how to invest him with Infallibility till
they have entitled him to be the Virtual Church.

Having considered Force as it relates to the Church, in the next place I
cannot but take notice of that, as it concerns the Magistrate or Civil Power.
This is the Force which the Libartine most complains of, for that of the Church
in its dreadful Censures, is looked on but as (...), like a Weapon which hurts
not, or Thunder discharged without a Bolt. To evade this power they alledg the
plantation of the Gospel, not by force of the Magistrate, but by winning
persuasion, and to make this appear, cite Christ's words ( John 18. v. 36.) If
my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight. This does not
conclude against the authority of Kings in Ecclesiastical Cases, for the design
of that in this place, was to take off the opinion which the Jews had of his
coming, that his Kingdom was not Spiritual, but Temporal. This Interpretation
is given by St. Augustine. Audite ergo Judaei and gentes: audi circumcisio: Audi
praeputium: audite omnia regna terrena: non impedio dominationem vestram in hoc
mundo, regnum meum non est de hoc mundo August. in loc.

To this purpose are many Deductions from places of Scripture, which I shall
not largely consider by showing how distorted by Faction beyond the intent of
them, which I shall only name, and briefly discover the crookedness of the
perverse Interpretations; amongst which none seems to be pressed more than that.
Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5. In this place the
design of the Apostle is not to deliver up each man to his own private
Interpretation or extravagant Fancy, as to command an attention to that which
was delivered by him and the rest of the Apostles, which is the greatest
Authority. For to suppose each man to rely on his own intrepretation, is to
imagine him to contradict that which he advises in another place, That ye may
with one mind and one mouth glorify God, Romans 15.6. For it seems to me to be a
Paradox not intelligible, that men may be said to be at unity, with as many
different opinions of Christ (which may extend to Fundamentals) as there are
Persons. So long as their Faith is terminated in Christ, as Aliquo tertio in
which they agree. By the same reason they may conclude that there is a Unity of
opinion in Philisophy concerning all Creatures, whether Animate or in
Inanimate, because all agree in this general notion of Substance or Animality,
and that it is sufficient to know them in Gross, without more distinct knowledge
of them. So that Metaphysics and natural Philosophy would be esteemed as
useless in Reason, as some Creeds or Decrees of Councils in Religion. But I
pass further, I cannot omit an Objection of a great Agent, for Libertinism
suggested to the Parliament, in 59. showing the impossibility of the powers
interposing in Matters of Religion in some cases; for ( says he) the Magistrate
must be obeyed for Conscience sake; how therefore can a man be obliged to obey
him, when some duty is commanded which his Conscience contradict. To this it is
enough to say, that the fallacy lies in the word Conscience, which in that
place must not signify each man's persuasion or apprehension of the Duty, for
if it were so, some men would not be obliged to obey their Prine, and their
fancies exempt them from subjection.

Thus far have endeavored to assert the right of Princes in matters
Ecclesiastical, but I shall not undertake to define particularly in what their
power consists, or bound it by limits; It Is enough to my design, if I can but
stop the mouths of a factious Multitude by breaking and diverting the force of
their Current, by showing that these places of Scripture conclude nothing
against Princes power, to be exercised in suppressing Schism and Heresy.
Neither shall I be so Dogmatically bold as some late Smyctimnians, who, as
Magisterially as others, out of a consistory, declare their opinion of the
power of the Supreme Magistrate (as if the title of our King had been distasted
by them, because once derived from Rome, Proclaims him only Churchwarden of the
Church; Neither shall I wildly follow their Metaphor, nor criticize the Name
with which Princes are called by them, for then I must consider the Church as
it was once represented by the Ark, so by a Chest with three Keys, the King to
have one, the Clergy another, the People or Elders another: Each have their
particular Suffrages; so when all agreed it was to be opened; which if it were
so, it is to be feared it would be always shut. Neither shall I take notice of
another, who ordains the Laity Clergy, and the King himself according to him
must be a Clergy Man, else he can have no right or power in the Church, But I
cease to go further in this extravagant Tract, and shall rather propose these
Considerations.

Seeing it is certain, or at present may be supposed that a Council and
determination of the whole Church, is the most expedite means of ending
Controversies. Is it not reasonable that the Magistrate should press the use of
them. Add to this that Councils are called by Princes power (as is confessed by
all true Protestants) now is it not reasonable that the Decrees of Councils in
order to be put in practice, should be as much the Princes care, as the Council
was when it was called to Ordain them. This considered, will make the Christian
not to esteem this Method of searching Truth, as a piece of forced Servitude,
for it is no more force to Reason, than Children suffer when they are sent to
School. Let not any think themselves injured by this Instance, as Pedantick for
the Doctrine of the Gospel, as well as the Law, may be styled a Pedagogy in
that sense.

But here I may expect a check from a late and not Assertor of Libertinism, who
blames Constantine, at least pities him, as if he had an oversight for using
this means to settle the Church, because it occasioned several bloody
Persecutions. This is a weak Battery against the Church, and only deserves to
be confuted by the Poet.

Exitus acta probat; careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
Success is a very bad test of the prudence used in the means, for the one is
not to be measured by the other, especially by men who are not able to pass
Judgment on the success, which is more intelligible and palpable always, than
the means. Thus the Author is mistaken, for the success of that Council cannot
be said to be bad because Divine Providence made use of those Persecutions for
the more undoubted settling of Faith sealed with so many Martyrs blood. Let this
also be considered, that the same would prevail against the Gospel it self, as
well as Councils, and Christ himself blamed by this Observer as much as
Constantine, because his coming occasioned strife, as he says, Mat. 10.34. I
came not to send Peace, but a Sword, as condemn other pious means.

Another way of asserting Libertinism, is by invalidating the examples of good
Kings. Josia, Asa, etc. who had more conference with God, and so their Law more
obligatory to the People; but succeeding Kings have no such warrant to do the
same.

This Objection seems valuable, but has no strength, for if the want of an
immediate consultation with God, destroys Authority, or at least weakens it,
what will become of other Kings under the Law, who had not such a privilege
intimately to converse with God, or at least in so high a degree. To say all,
It may as well be concluded that the Pastors of the Church are not obliged to
follow the practice of the Apostles, in all actions (some of which Miraculous,
others suited to the exigency of the time, the one of which cannot, the other
may not be imitated) because none in these days can pretend to the like
Inspiration, as deny that Princes may not follow the examples of good Kings
under the Law, because later things cannot be so much Secretaries of the
Almighty, as they were in that Economy. Thus they have endeavored to
invalidate the examples of the Jewish Kings, persuading them that the
constitution of the Mosaical Law and the practice of Moses and the Sanedrim, or
the practice of David and Solomon, to oblige no more to Imitation, than the
lives of Numa, Lycurgus, or other Lawgivers in Plutarch, or the constitution of
Heathenish Priests by the Roman Senate. This is true, if it is understood of
those Rites and Laws which were purely Judaical, but otherwise in those which
were not only Typical.

It is further urged, as the first and second Economy differ in many things,
and so do the Governors in the several Dispensations; for (says he) all the
Jewish Religion was in External Rights, Civil and Religious Acts so interwoven,
that it was not easy to say whether the Church were more like a Commonwealth,
or the Commonwealth a Church. Then concludes that the Magistrates buisiness was
only to compel outward actions, but the Christian Magistrate has no such task,
Christianity consisting in inward acts of the mind. This terrifying Objection
may find a check from this consideration, viz. That it is false when it says
that all the influence good Kings had on the People, was only to promote
outward acts, for that was not only conversant aabout the Ceremonial, but
Instrumental in promoting the Moral Law, which certainly respects the powers of
the Mind as much, if not more, than the outward Act. Besides in the ceremonial
Acts of Law, and offering of Sacrifice, there was implied an Act of Faith, as
well in other persons as Abraham; otherwise their Altars would have been no
better than Shambles, and their Priests than Slaughtermen. Hence it appears
that Kings pressing the outward act, might be said to be instrumental in
promoting Faith or inward Piety, in which sense it may be said good Kings, as
of Josiah, They made the People to serve the Lord their God, 2 Chronicles. 34.33.
But I must meet with an Objection which may be urged thus, granting that there
was acts of Faith required in acts of Sacrifice; yet those being inward acts of
the mind, Kings could not command or compel them.

It Is true, no earthly King can lay claim to such Spiritual dominion: However
Christianity being not such an invisible Religion, but that it exerts it self
in several visible acts, as confession of Faith, Communion, etc. which
certainly will challenge the Magistrates care in case his aid is wanted;
neither will this appear as impertinent to his Office so long as he has reason
to suspect that those whom the Church cannot reduce by her Methods, cannot be
as good Subjects as others, when they are declared not to be so good Christians.

Schism and Heresy, though they do not by necessary consequence imply
Rebellion and Schism and Rebellion not always terms convertible, yet they are
such as a Prince may suspect, and seem as Vapors under the Earth, which do not
always cause Earthquakes, but when they are confind to a natural Prison, and
cannot break forth, for as the one does not always put the Earth in such
Convulsions, yet excite fear, so the other may have such influence on a Princes
mind, which though it cannot shake him (for that supposes weakness) yet may
create a prudential Caution.

Consideration III. Of the authority of Reason, as it stands in competition
with the Church, and of Schism and Heresy according to the new account of it,
and whether reformation or separation from Communion of the Church, can be as
sufently and legally justified without an appeal to the constant Doctrine of
the Catholic Church, as with it.
TAking it for granted, that Reason is not the last Object Faith and its
principles, the Elements into which it is resolved, as the Reasoner phrases it,
it being not able to make a distinct discovery of the nature of God, and unfit
Judge of rules of his Worshop. I refer the Reader to another Discourse, N. F. It
therefore at present seems only necessary that I assert Ecclesiastical
Authority with its due right, above private Judgment of single persons, who so
far become the Proselytes of humane Reason in that sense, which a late Author
asserted it, as they appeal to nothing but the evidence of their own Reason
conducted by its own natural Method, only having the information by reading the
Scriptures; and fortifying their Opinions with mere natural Arguments (without
any respect to the consent or authority of the Church. Many such Proselytes
have appeared in this late Age, and cloakt their Foxish principles with Sheeps
clothing of Piety and Tenderness; yet still seem to have a reverence for the
Church and its Authority, as appears in late Pamphlets, which nearly looked
into, is but as an Ecclesiastical Compliment (if it is not a Solaecism to say
so) for rational Authority is not Authority properly called, for whilst men
cause other men's Opinions to be tried by the tests of their own judgments, they
cancel the authority of other men, and make their own as an (...).

This consideration minds men of a Stratagem or Plot to subvert the authority
of the Church, and establishing their own, which is not by any way more
plausible done to an unwary Multitude than by partial citations of Authors,
without considering the Coherence, Circumstance, or Scope of the Author, which
they cite. If I designed to be large in this discourse, I might show how some
undermine the authority of the Church, by sinister and malicious application of
Ecclesiastical Story, as the Author of a late Pamphlet by the success of
Constantine, would prejudice all Princes against the authority of Councils, and
a partial citation of Gregory Nazianzen (afterward to be considered) but I
shall not spend time in canvasing that Story and its application, nor show the
weakness of Reason in its several particulars, only shall take a prospect of
Religion abused by some late partial Citations by which the Church is
threatened, Holy Fathers made to speak contrary to their scope, and Religion
exposed to each cavilling Adversary.

Thus Jerome has been represented by some, an enemy to Episcopacy, as asserted
by the Church of England. Thus the Church of England, whilst some of the Roman
Church urges it with Citations out of the Fathers, which speak the danger of
separation from the Catholic Church, they apply it to their own, as if to be
Roman and Catholic were all one. Thus a late Author would persuade the Unwary,
that the most Puritan Protestants, Mr. Perkins, and many others, do agree with
Papists in several points controverted, which they were as far from, as we can
imagine they thought the Romish Religion distant from the true. The Fathers
themselves are cited against themselves, which minds me of some opposers of the
authority of the Church, who make them as a Patronage to their factious
Presumptions. Thus Lactantius is cited, the words are these, Lib: de Orig.
Error. Cap. 8. having in the former Chapter removed the superstitious Rites and
custom of some ancient Fathers who instituted them in Paganism; he infers
this, Quare opportet in ea re maxim, in qua vitae ratio versatur sibi quemque
confidere, suoque judicio ac propriis sensibus niti, ad investigandam and
perpendendam veritatem, quam credentem alienis erroribus, decipi, tanquam ipsum
rationis expertem. Now how injuriously this is affixed as a Preface, to
authorize a factious Discourse (as it often is) against the authority of the
Church, may appear from the scope and design of the Holy Father in that
Chapter, viz. to oppose Heathenish Traditions, Dreams and South sayings, which
began before Christianity had footing in the word. But let it be applied in
opposition to the defintions and impositions of the Church, all that can be
concluded from the Words in this, he condemns those who in a stupid observation
of the Traditions of their Fathers More pecudum ducuntur, as he phrases it, an
unreasonable implicit Faith, which the Church of England does not commend to
her Sons, but rather opposes its Assertors. To say all, this Holy Author,
though an accute Disputant, and of a peircing wit, yet is so far from
disdaining Authority, that none more frequent than he in Citations of Heathen
Authors, of Poets themselves, to prove the weightiest matters of Religion when
he disputed with Infidels, as he was, necessitated to do, as he says, Lib. de
falsa Relig. Cap. 5. Sed omittamus sane testimonia prophetarum, ne minus idonea
probatio vidcatur esse ab his quibus omnino non creditur. He though a Father of
the Church himself, lib. de justitia c. 4. cites St. Cyprian, arguing against
Demetrius by Reason, only because he was not capable of being confuted by any
other Method, as appears by the account given in the same Chapter, Nam cum
ageret contra hominem veritatis ignarum, dilatis paulisper divinis lectionibus,
formare hunc a principio tanquam rudem debuit. This gives me occasion of
considering what esteem Reason was in matters of Religion, being esteemed only
fit to dispose Infidels for Belief, and to instruct Novices; but in this Age it
is so exalted, that it is thought worthy of the highest place of Judicature, to
judge of all Controversies, in so much that the Smyctimnian Divines, in their
late Papers, declare it to be as the Eye and Religion, as the Light, or the
Object. Sic res ingeniosa est esse Christianum, in another sense than formerly,
and that which the Author of Smyrk says of Wit, in a Jeer, may be retorted on
them, for whilst they make Reason an intrepreter of Scripture, we may ask them
too, if their reason is an extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost.

To conclude this part of the Consideration, that those who interpret Scripture
thus, may not boast themselves Lactantius his Disciples, but rather Proselytes
of the authority of Humane Reason, and by this method of making their Reason
the only Standard to measure Controversies, seem to appropriate the Preface
used in General Councils (at least one) and corrupting, Visum est nobis and
Spiritui Sancto by changing the terms to every particular person who is
adjusted with equal authority, to say Visum est mihi and Spiritui Sancto, which
boldness exceeds Poetical License, which seeing extraordinary acts of
Providence, attributed it to the Gods whilst they said Sic visum est superis.

This being premised, I pass to the other part of this consideration, viz. of
Schism and Heresy according to the new account of it, and how Reformation is
not so justifiable without Appeals to the constant Doctrine of the Church.

This Assertion must expect to find as furious a return as Water does when cast
on hot Iron. Whilst I affirm that Schism and Heresy are two of the greatest
evils of the Church, and affirm (as I think I safely may) that some have abused
Religion almost as much by their extenuation of these horrid sins, giving a
soft account of them suitable to the humor of the Libertine, as the
Schismatic and Heretic by practice: for such Theory makes way for practice
whilst they teach men that Schism and Heresy are only terms of Art which the
Church has used to impose on the Christian Scholars what Doctrine it pleases,
and that it is the terrors of the two Greek words (which have not so dreadful a
signification as they say) affrights the poor Christian like thundering and
lightning to run to his Litany to pray for deliverance. This slight of subtle
men will miss its aim if it is considered that the Church is not only as a
Lexicon or Dictionary, to tell the English of (...) and (...) but has power to
inflict its Censures when unjustifiable separations are attempted. This unity
of the Church is as much to be endeavored by the Pastors of it as the being of
the Church is, and that is so necessary, that I may say of the Catholic Church
in matters of Belief, unum and verum sunt idem, Unity and Truth are
undistinguished.

Now as it is certain that without the Catholic Church there is no Salvation
(for it is more than a Parenthesis in our Creed) so is the Unity necessary in
order to it. Wherefore all Churches who at any time endeavored a regular
Reformation, made Appeals to some beside their own private interpretation of
Holy Scripture, which might be esteemed unreasonable. For if it may be imagined
that each man may make interpretation of the Scriptures; it is very difficult,
if not impossible for men (especially those who will have communion with none
but those of whom they are assured are of the same opinion with them in all
things) to maintain so perfect charity with a single person, much less with the
whole Church. For suppose two different interpretations of some part of Holy
Scripture, viz. This is my Body, and one takes the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist to be only figuratively, and the other corporally, and both agree in
this, that the Consecrated Bread is rightly called the Body of Christ, and the
worthy Communicants receive it. Thus supposing that these words appear in
different senses to different persons, how shall one convince the other that he
is of the same Faith with him, if he do not express it in the same words and
manner of interpretation, (which the Humane Reasoner according to his account
of faith esteems not necessary) except he could creep into his Soul to see the
thought and the intimate motions of the mind, without which he will not
conclude any man can be declared a Heretic, This is an unreasonable and
impossible way of discouraging errors in Religion, which will take away all
power from the Church except it can keep Court in each man's mind, and see each
motion of it. Such private interpretations are like Visions or Apparitions
which appear to some persons only when they are alone. Now as no man is obliged
to believe the History of such Apparitions no further than the Authority of the
persons obliges them to it (I speak not of Holy Visions to the Prophets) so no
man will think himself bound to believe any private interpretation of a single
person, any further than he is possessed with the authority of the person, except
he could enter into his fancy, and borrow the whole Scene as it was
represented to the Visor or Seer, which is impossible. Therefore it is
necessary that there be an open profession of faith by plain and pertinent
words, which are as Ligaments to knit together persons in outward Communion.
This minds me of the charge given by Saint Paul to Timothy (2 Timothy 1. v. 13.)
of taking care of the form of sound words, Whilst he gives his character of
them, that they were sound, he omits not the form of words, which in some cases
may so alter the sense, for it seems as necessary to Religion to distinguish
the true Religion from the false, as the Philosophers form of distinguishing
one being from another. An Instance in the word so often repeated in late
Pamphlets, is a great evidence of it for when by a Holy Father without
superstition or Adoration of words (which Objection some have made against the
name Jesus it self, whilst, commended to be bowed at when named) which was
preserved for the alteration of (...), would destroy the Creed, at least change
its sense, the pulling out of an Iota being as dangerous as removing a Pin,
from a curious piece of Mechanical Art.

This considered in its consequences, will further appear more reasonable for
the idle conjecture of the Humane Reasoner (thoughdrest in a Theological habit)
is as much to be suspected as Jesuits Oaths, prompting men to think that
equivocation in belief, as well as oaths, is to be tolerated, whilst it is
concluded that an open profession of the most obscure Texts of Scripture is
sufficient, making each Man's fancy a Comment on the Text, and the rule of
Faith.

The most valuable Objection which comes to my thoughts, at present, is this,
That Jesuits equivocate in their Oaths on design; but the other, if they
appear such, it is on necessity: let charity believe this and suppose them
sincere; yet let it be considered that the Jesuit will plead this, that he uses
this art in swearing, only to evade the force of some Obligations which the
Magistrate would bind him to, and this he will tell us he does that he may
guard and not violate his conscience, and what can the Libertine say more, (I
speak not this to patronize either, rather conclude them both worthy of
censure) who refuses some Creeds, or at least part of them, because they
descend to particulars to prevent all Equivocation. To say all, the only
difference of the persons practice is this, the one uses his art to impose
upon Man, the other on God himself; I cease to start more Objections, but
rather pass to that which is granted by all who are not Enthusiasts, viz. that
in all Disputes there must be a third to appeal to. When the Heathen is
disputed with, reason must be pitched upon as the Umpire, and the Jew appeals to
the Prophets, and the Christian to the Scriptures, interpreted by the Catholic
Church, without which Tertullian's question may be asked. Quiestis vos? under
and quando venistis? ubi tamdiu latuistis? etc. Tertull. de Praescrip. Con.
Haer.

Besides, to make each man's reason judge of Controversy, is to make it both
judge and party too, which may be retorted on the Church, which is a party too
in deciding the Controversy. Let this be granted, yet the reason is not the
same of private persons as a party, and the whole Church, and let the Libertine
pitch upon any third Interpreter, wherein the Objection will not return and
make it the party. This so generally obtains in most cases, that a man's own
mind is not past possibility of having parties, for an interested reason may
assert that which true reason will deny; and a man may by habit so frame his
mind to tell lies, and believe them himself. But let it be granted that the
Church is a party, yet not such as to be suspected. It is a prodigious kind of
distrust to think the whole Catholic Church should pass a partial sentence.
That Fathers will not design to deceive their Sons in matters of Divinty, is so
true, that some have made use of it to prove the existence of God, and shall
the ghostly Fathers be esteemed such Monsters, to deceive their Sons in matters
of such moment. To say all, that which a Roman Doctor asserted of their Church
so peremptorily, may be said of the whole, that it ought to give testimony of
it self.

Before I conclude this Consideration, I cannot but take notice that some who
have extenuated Heresy in its name, would also make it impossible that a
Heretic should be discovered, because to an obstinate opposing the true
Doctrine (in which the nature of Heresy consists) it is required that the
intimate motions of men's minds be seen. This is illustrated by an instance from
Murder, to which I shall only oppose this, that he may as well conclude it is
impossible to discover Murder. Besides, that similitude fails in the main part
of it, for a Heretic has opportunity of recanting, and must be an obstinate
Opposer of the Truth three time before he is declared so. Now the Murderer is
not capable of such respite or pausing, and opportunity of stifling his fault,
or making it rather to be none, except he was capable of committing the act
three times (as well as the Heretic opposing truth) which cannot be except a
man had three lives.

Consideration V. Of Creeds and Impositions, with some Reflections on the
Apostles and other Creeds, and of the extent of Creeds, how necessary for
deciding Controversies.
ALthough there is no absolute necesity implied in the nature of Religion, that
there must be Creeds or a symbol of Faith, yet it may be safely concluded they
are not superfluous. It is convenient that we have an Enchiridion, and
necessary for the well being of the Church, though the substance of the
Doctrine may be but as an Index to direct to its fuller Explanation in
particulars; and a good mean to preserve the true Faith. Though Christ did not
immediately draw up his Doctrine in such Articles, it is past doubt he directed
the Church to do it, and that perhaps that he might create reverence to the
Pastors of the Church, that they should not be only as Library-keepers, but
Authors too in that sense, that a Publisher of an Epitome may be called so,
whilst they compose the contents of Scripture in a short abridgment by Divine
Direction. It is observed that Christ did some things to create a Reverence to
his Evangelists and Apostles, by committing the charge of the publishing of the
Gospel in writing, when he himself could as easily have done it, as wrote on
the ground with his finger, and shall not his Apostles Successors be esteemed
worthy to interpret these holy Writings. To deny them this Authority, and only
allow them such a mere Ministerial office, and that to be only understood as if
they were only Mercuries, with a hand stretched out with a Scrol for the People
to read, it seems rash: And to confine them only to be judge of Circumstantials,
is to minorize their Authority, and makes them but Registers to keep the Divine
Books. It Is true, this is honor enough to be but Door-keepers; and Saint Paul
said the Jews might glory because the Oracles of God were committed unto them,
which may not be restrained to the bare letter of the Law, according to each
man's apprehension; but in doubtful cases Appeals were to be made to the
Sanedrim, which has no small affinity with the proceedings of Councils, though
some disputes set them at further distance; besides. I do not remember that
Christ taxes in general the Jewish Doctors for Exposition of the Law, but when
they either clearly perverted the sense and meaning of the Law, or plainly
altered it by sinister Interpretations, making the word of God of none effect.
For if all Illustrations of the Law by Jewish Doctors must be laid aside
(though we know and avoid the fabulous Interpretation of the Thalmudist, many
parts of the Old Testament would not be so plainly understood, even those which
relate to the coming of Christ, and the manner of his Kingdom. If it is said
that the Jewish Doctors often erred, so their Authority suspicious, if not
invalid, the same will be granted (I presume) of Councils and Church, when
their Assertions (if it may be supposed) are manifest contradictions to plain
Scripture. This Bellarmine confesses, when he says Councils may not be
opposed, Nisi manifestissime constet intollerabilem errorem, Committi lib. 2.
de Council. But more of this in its proper place. In this only I shall take
notice that the authority of the Church has been rendered odious to weak
minds, whilst some part of it (I do not mean the Catholic) run into extremes
in Creeds, as some men in habits or clothes; sometimes the humor of the Age is
such that men affect to appear in the large size of Primitive Ages, others
desirous to appear as small as Nature will admit, one time as Giants, another
time as Pygmies. This vanity has crept into the Church, some will only own the
Apostls Creed, others not content with those which the Church has received,
but must make it larger by Phylacteries of Decretals.

The Roman Church will have each Article of the Creed (as Astronomers say of
the Planets) each must have its Assecla or Page attend it. They will scarce
believe that they ca satisfy the first Article of believing, in case it is not
represented by Images, neither will they believe the Communion of the Catholic
Church, except Rome may pass for it, and the Resurrection, and day of Judgment
not to be explained without Purgatory, some run in another extreme, tream, they
will admire nothing so much as the Eunuchs Creed to be imposed on as matters of
Christian belief. However they magnisie the Creed of the Apostles at the same
time, decrying others allowed by the Church of England, which gives just
occasion of suspicion, that those very persons who own the Apostles Creed in
words, if pressed by the general interpretation of the whole Church, would boggle
at that as much as at the Athanasian Creed, for though they commend it (as it
justly deserves it) for its plainness of matter, and the phrase (so esteemed by
the Fathers) yet it is certain there are doubts in some Articles which are not
agreed on, so as to be past dispute, for instance, the Communion of Saints, the
belief on the Catholic Church, and the manner of Christ's descending into
Hell, not yet agreed on by all parts of the Catholic Church, besides those who
will have nothing in other accounts of Religion, but in Scripture phrase, must
be content with other Language in this. That word Catholic has lately been as
much controverted, as the threadbear word (...), which word was so hard to
Luther, that he went about to translate it into the German Language, and alter
the phrase; for which boldness he was justly charged by Tanner the Jesuit; for
I am of nazianzens mind, not to have a word changed, for as he says, One drop
of Poison may corrupt a great mass.

I would not have this which is said of the Creed, as to be said in derogation
from its reverence due to it above other Creeds, which are but Comments on it,
yet there are two questions I hope may be started without violence done to it.
How it appears to be a sum of Fundamentals. This is well Answered by some late
Authors, That the Apostles wrote the whole sum of what is to be believed, for
if they had omitted any part of it, they might have as well omitted all.

Then it must be inquired how far this Creed as Apostlical depends on the
Churches testimony or authority; on this latter question the present
Controversy depends; therefore it must be considered what it is to be called
Apostolical. Apostolical is that which is agreeable to the Apostles practice
and doctrine. So the title Apostolical is fastened to some Churches and several
persons whose piety had, has alliance to that of the Apostles, but when it is
given to any Doctrine as the rule of Faith, Ubique semper, and ab omnibus,
obtains in this sense the Apostles Creed cannot be called Apostolical as to all
its parts, for all were not received at the same time, as it is observed that
St. Austin, Origin, and Tertullian, commenting on the Creed, make no mention of
the Articles of the descent into Hell, though it is confessed Saint Austin owns it
as Catholic in other places. It Is true, Rufsinus an ancient Doctor makes
mention of that Article, but says the Roman Church did not receive it at that
time, but since generally received; I speak not this out of any irreverence or
light esteem to the Creed, as an Author I heard of, who wrote a scurrilous and
malicious piece against the Creed merely in opposition to another opinion.

That which I infer from what is said, is only this; All Doctrines if they are
not immediately received by the whole Church, not rashly to be rejected. This
also I could infer, that seeing it is not certain the Apostles wrote it
themselves, but in several Ages it had its Ratification, at least the
compellation of Apostolical from the Church, its plain that the authority of
the Church, which makes it above other Creeds, and to be the sum total of all
that is to be believed, makes it depend on that authority of the Church, which
gave it its compellation, which (I hope) though borrowed from the authority of
the Church, which since the Apostles time has been abused, will be no greater
a prejudice to discerning minds, than the title of the King, though first
derived from the Pope can minorize the honor due to him. This which is said,
perhaps may be retorted by an instance in Books of canonical Scripture, by
saying we may as well conclude that the Gospel owes its name of Gospel to the
Church, and the Law its name of the Law, as conclude that the Creed as to its
denomination, or being Apostolical, depends only upon the Church which calls it
so.

This Objection may find an Answer from this consideration, that although the
Church is Ministerial, in both holding out a Light to declare unto us that the
Gospel is the Gospel, and the Law the Law, as much as it does evidence that the
Creed is the Creed; yet there is this difference, the Books of the Law and
Gospel its probable had their compellation or name written by the same Authors
that wrote them but the Creed owes its title to the restimony of the Church so
far as it is called the Apostles Creed. By this limitation I hope I have
prevented another cavil which might conclude, I make the Doctrine of the Creed
to depend on the Church, when I only speak of the compellation as being
borrowed from the Church, which compellation is the only hinge on which the
present Controversy turns, for take away the name (the Apostles Creed) and it
can be no more said to be the sum of all Religion, than other Doctrines, or
Theses generally received by the Church.

If it is further urged that all Titles of the canonical Books bear not
(without doubt) the Authors names as several Psalms and the Epistle to the
Hebrews, because it is not certainly known who were their Authors. This may be
granted, yet the case is not the same with the Creed and some parts of the
canonical Scripture; for the latter it may be safely said that the Church gave
no new Titles to those Books, but delivered them as they found them waitten, or
were assured of their Titles by infallible Traditions, but the same cannot so
certainly be said of the Apostles Creed. From all that is said it is easy to
observe how some men are ready to own the Authority of the Church when
serviceable to their designs, and disowns it when it thwarts private Opinions.

It may be granted that the Apostles Creed is Regula fidei Tutissima, as a Rule
though but a foot in length, may discover the crookedness of the greatest
quantity, and is useful in thousands of cases, so the Creed may measure and
discover though not so accurately, the many Volumious errors in Religion, but
not in direct terms but by consequence. To illustrate it by Instances, Christ
sums up all the Commandments in one word Love, which, modo implicito, concludes
against all Vice, otherwise it could not be an abridgment of the whole Law,
this must be granted, but it is rashness to say that this Command alone is able
to check all Vices, and conclude against each particular Sin. It is also said
of Manna (a fit Emblem of the Creed, always to be kept in the Ark of the
Church) that eminently contains all savours to gratify the Taste and Smelling,
and the Opall and Iris have a lovely commixture of all colors. Now as a man
who would pass an accurate Judgment of a sweet body would not appeal to Manna
which has it mixed with others, but to some particular object of the same kind,
and he who would pass judgment on Colors, Yellow, or Blue, etc. will not
compare them with that in the Rainbow, but some other Object of the same
complexion or tincture; the same may be said of the Articles of Faith, which
are severally comprehended in the Creed, yet are not to be an exact measure of
their numerous Errors implicitly condemned by it. It has been doubted by some,
whether the principles of Chemists, Salt, Sulphur, etc. are really in the
Bodies, or whether they were as matter fitly prepared, and by Extraction made
such. I shall not presume to determine any thing in this, but only apply it to
the present case, by saying there are the Semina or Principia in the Creed but
particular Articles which confute particular Errors, though they have their
Foundation from it, yet their whole Superstruction cannot be said to be taken
from it.

It is impossible it should be done, therefore weakness to attempt it, for it
argues as much weakness in those men who undertake to assert the Creed the sum
of all to be believed, and to confute all Errors, as some when urged by some of
the Roman Church, to show how the Sacraments were contained in the Creed, have
answered out of Aquinas. 2.2. q. 1. a. 8. Eos Articulos continueri and includi
in Articulo fidei quo Credimus unam sanctam Ecclesiam, Sanctorum Communionem,
Remissionem peccatorum, that they are contained in the Articles, where we
profess a Belief in the Catholic Church, Communion of Saints, remission of
Sins. And being urged particularly to show how Baptism was included there, run
for Sanctuary to the Athanasian Creed.

This seems to be a far fetched and an unnatural deduction; for though it may be
concluded that the Sacraments are necessarily employed in the Remission of Sins,
as he gives his reason, Ibidem, nam per Sacramenta peccata remittuntur, it will
conclude the necessity, but says nothing of the nature; wherefore that great
Doctor, with all the subtilties of his School-companions, could never extract
any thing thence of the nature of them; so if Transubstantiation could not find
any other confutation than from those Articles, it would be to little purpose
to dispute against it.

Thus one of our Church, who being urged by a Papist how he showed in the Creed
that Doctrine of the Devils forbidding Marriage, was expressed in the Creed,
answers that neither meats, nor marrying of any persons could be unlawful,
because a Christian believes in God in his Creed to be maker of all thinks
good, so not to be forborne, and all his Institutions holy, therefore not to be
abstained from by any persons: This seems to me as vain an Attempt, and as far
fetched a way of Arguing as those men use, who will undertake to show there is
nothing New, but demonstrate all new Philosophy to be taken out of Aristotle. I
would not have that which is said so understood, as if I did imagine there were
to be Virtuosos in Religion as well as Philosophy, and that this Age made new
discoveries of Doctrines as the Astronomers have of the Stars, and that new
Creeds in Divinity are as necessary as new Systems of the World. I am not so
ignorant to think that Novelty can commend Religion though it may Philosophy,
and that for this reason, the one is God's work and command, fully revealed at
once after Christ's coming. But the product of Humane Observation suffers
nothing in its Reputation by being new. Neither does Religion suffer, but is
rather honored whilst new Arguments, for they must needs be so at the first
springing up of Heresy against new Hersies. This therefore which is said will
not minorize or lessen the esteem of the Creed, which the Ancients had of it,
for I cannot but own the commendation which Cyril of Jerusalem gave of it,
(...), Catech. 4.

And having before showed the concise and complete Abridgment of it, says,
(...), compares it to Muster-seed, more fitly and pertinently than the Eunuchs
is by Smyrk.

Consideration V. Though the Apostles Creed may maintain Charity and Union
between members of the Catholic Church, whether it can preserve charity in a
particular Church, and in what sense short Professions of Faith so much
insisted on by late Reformers, and commended to the Parliament as the full
matter of Christian Belief, and in what circumstances they must be, and what
persons they are to whom they are sufficient.
IT may be said of matters of Faith in Religion, as Aristotle distinguishes in
Philosophy, (...) principles of Doctrine, and that which comes by deduction,
the first which are as the grand Ligament or Tie, which knit the parts
together, or as a foundation to support a building though the root and other
parts of it are demolished. This is enough to denominate the Church a Church,
but if there be disagreement in other Doctrines which may endanger Man's
Salvation, though not so immediately as those in the Creed, it takes off from
the beauty of it, and makes it look as in the former instance, like a Skeleton
knit together by the Articles of one Creed, as sinews not agreeing in any other
parts, or like a frame or case of a house without a Roof or Ornament. I speak
not this as uncharitable to the Catholic Church, but to show how the want of
Unity in all Doctrines disguise it. By this Assertion the Catholic Church is
not condemned for those Divisions, which destroy not the Internal communion
with it (though External may be wanting) but to show Charity beautifies it.
Wherefore those who separate themselves from another Church, must have some
other reasons of their separation than are in the Apostles Creed, otherwise the
Reformation cannot be justifiable, for the Roman Church professes to believe
the fame Creed as a late Author pleads; therefore Separation not altogether
founded on that. Wherefore it remains there must be Doctrines which justify
Separation from other measures than the Creed, etc. This may unite in the
Catholic Church, but not a National or particular Church; for the Church
cannot be minced into Individuals without being destroyed, at least breach of
Charity, and that for this Reason. God under the Law and Gospel was never since
Adam's Innocence worshipped alone. Elias was mistaken when he thought he was
left alone, the only votary of the true God. I am sensible of an Objection
which may be this; That Luther in the beginning of the Reformation was the only
open professor of the Protestant Faith, which being granted (as it need not)
must suppose some critical time of Luthers Protestation, in which he had no
followers, which with preciseness will conclude that Christ himself Head of the
Church, was without any votary at his first birth, except his Mother was one;
and there must needs be a certain time when the Apostles were without a Church
or Converts: But Religion takes notice of no such Niceties; and as the Common
Law takes that to be done immediately, which is done in the same day appointed
in some cases, taking no precise notice of the hours; I am sure the Divine Law
does not distinguish such critical moments. But to wave these niceties, it was
always the method of Reformers to make profession of their Faith. Thus did the
Lutherans in their Augustane confession; for without this, Charity would not
have been maintained within themselves: So then what would the Reformation
signify if there may be as many, and as dangerous and different Opinions among
themselves, as there was between them and the Church of Rome; their Reformation
signifies little more than a Change, not for the better, but worse; their
dissenting from the Roman Church might be justifiable, but amongst themselves
(especially in matters absolutely necessary to be believed) such separation
intolerable, for though the Catholic Church like Joseph's coat, may have, and
be of diverse colors and parts, but particular, must be like Christ seamless
coat, or to speak the Apostles Language, like minded, and speak the same thing.

Now this Unity of the Church is not better preserved by any means than by
Appeals to several interpretations of places of Scripture (which are ambiguous)
by the Councils, Fathers, and Pastors in several Ages. Thus the Champions of
the Reformation always owned that Authority as the best means to win
Reformation, and the best subsidy to support it. The necessity of this seems to
be employed in the Apostles Advice to submission to Pastors, and the Pastors
being to give an account for the Peoples Souls. I know these words may occasion
a voluminous Dispute.

But I shall take them in their plain acceptance, and only desire the Reader
to observe that in case this submission to Pastors, is only to circumstances
confined, as some will have them, and yet Pastors give an account, it is like a
Man who is invested with the power of a Tutor, yet only to take care of his
Pupils Clothes.

This must be restrained to places which have a doubtful sense, and the
definitions or interpretations, such as the words will bear, for I am not so
bold to conclude with some of the Church of Rome, that it has a power to
command a Doctrine, which has no probable foundation in Scripture (as Doctor
Stapleton concludes that some things are to be believed, and the Church
propound them as matters of Faith, Etiamsi nullo Scripturarum evidenti aut
probabilis testimonio comfirmetur, though he at the same time concludes the
Church in its definitions is, Suo modo Divina.

It fares with the Church in its desiring matters of Faith, as it does in
prospects, for though Telescopes and Perspections help the Sight, yet there
must be a rude discovery of the Object by the naked Eye, thus the Milky way is
discerned without the help of a Glass to be a bright tract of Heaven, by the
Telescope which discovers that troop of small Stars from which it borrows its
Luster. The case is the same between Scripture and the Church (I mean obscure
places of it) the one gives an ambiguous Twilight prospect, the other shows it
more distinctly.

Thus I have endeavored to commend the Churches Authority as a necessary
Supplement to the Apostles Creed, or in order to maintain Charity amongst
members of particular Churches (for I do not design in this Paper to answer all
Objections that the former discourse may be liable to.

I now pass to the other branch of the Consideration.

In what sense short professions of Faith so much insisted on by the Reformers,
and commended to the Parliament, can be said to be the full matter of Christian
Faith, and in what circumstances they must be in to whom they are sufficient.
And whether such curtilizing Creeds do not again introduce that implicit Faith,
which this Church complains of whilst under Papal impositions.

For further demonstration of the necessity of the extent of the Apostles
Creed, by Explanation it seems convenient that I suggest that usual distinction
of Fundamentals in respect of their matter, and the persons to whom they are
offered as objects of Belief. To the first it is enough that I say one Assertion
may be a Fundamental though not primarily so, which in respect of another, is
but as a corrollary or branch of it, as it is easy to instance in the Apostles
Creed. To the second it will be sufficient to say that all Doctrines are not
pressed on all persons with the same necessity or upon peril of Salvation,
which will plainly appear from the consideration of the Requisites necessary to
make such necessity. The first of which is this, viz. A conviction of the mind,
that what is proposed as matter of Faith, must be commended to Man by God, for
there is no humane dictator can command any matter of Belief to Man merely as
Humane. Thus the Apostles themselves doubted of the Resurrection, or at least
were not sufficiently convinced of it till matter of fact convinced them of
their Masters being God as well as Man.

Another Requisite, is, that there must be a sufficient proposal of matters of
Faith, otherwise it is insignificant to a man, for what is Revelation to him to
whom it is proposed, for matter of Faith is like Objects which are in their own
nature visible, yet the Eye does not always actually see them, neither can it
in some cases till more conveniently situated or impediments removed. Thus
Apollos ignorance and imperfect Creed, excusable till he was more fully
instructed of Saint Paul for the Doctrines of which he doubted before, although
as the Sun they always shined, yet as the one cannot be seen till above the
Horizon, though it is obvious to other eyes, so the ot her not assented unto
till sufficiently explained. If this seem not opposite, take an Instance more
Divine. As none could see the City of Samaria (though it was naturally as
visible to other persons) but the Prophet, so none discern Divine Truth till
Grace makes the discovery.

The last is a disposition of men's minds fit to receive such Divine
impressions; thus Mad men and Fools are not to be expected Converts to
Religion, who are Aliens and Strangers to their own Reason; and in this sense
that applauded conclusion of the vanity of holding a Candle, and attempt to
make one see whom nature designed for darkness, and to this head the citations
out of St. Chrisostom (afterward to be considered) and others must be reduced
leaving such Idiots, to the censure of God himself.

This being promised, I hope I may more fairly conclude against those
conclusions which factious heads have drawn from thence, for all that can be
inferred from such charitable censures, is only the modest censure of the
Church, whilst it respects God's Judicatute; so that those persons who have so
formally made address to Authority for tolleration of short Creeds, must plead
their cause in the same circumstances they thus indulged were, which is
impossible, except they can Antidate time and be as the Apostles were then, or
men now, who are incapable of Divine Mysteries, wherefore I may ask those men
this Question, whether they speak for themselves, as of the Clergy, or for
other persons, if for others (which I presume they will be ready to own as
officious Advocates, they bring in the Doctrine of the Author of Humane Reason,
the Reasoner supposing it to a sufficient assent to Christian Doctrine if
Scripture is commented on by a private invention.

This part of the consideration (if I design to be tedious, would lead me to
examination of the several cavils against Councils as to the quality of
persons, etc. and to answer an Objection of Nazianzen, who says he never saw a
happy event of a Council; which words concording to all I have met with,
condemns not Councils, but rather is a complaint of the want of free and
general Councils, as is obvious to any who considers that Author's drift and
design. But I pass from this and other curious cavils by considering that such
niceties in Religion are like questions about the Stars, whose Nature and
Influence we are sensible of, and can probably demonstrate their Natures, but
not in such a way as can answer questions that a roving brain can start, and
can show greater probability that they are such, than the extravagant invention
can, they are not, but I shall not continue this Digression rather return to
the former case.

This being granted, it must be considered that these persons with their
slender stock of Faith, are admitted into the Church as men into an Hospital,
and charity rather than Reason, concludes them in a safe state of Salvation.
Now is it not unreasonable to propose that as a Model or measure of Faith to
all which is only indulged to Mad men and Fools, or at least men of weak
capacities, and that on no better ground than that tender one of extensive
charity, suitable to which are the accounts of the Church given by the Ancients
whilst it is thus described, (...), a certain number of the Elect in which may
be babes in Christ, foolish as well as wise, and compared to the Ark, when
there was a universal reception of Creatures, which were clean.

If these Zealous Petitioners speak for themselves, then that small measure of
Faith and narrow capacity, will be an argument against them in the opinion of
their own party. But if it is alleged that Rahab had but a small measure of
Faith, and yet Sainted by St. Paul (at least) in the catalogue of eminent
Believers) and the Centurion with his slender knowledge of Christ had no less
commendation from Christ himself. Let it be considered that this is not
applicable to Pastors of the Church. What a medley and ill favored being of a
Church would that be in which a Rahab or Convert-Harlot, 2 Centurion or
Soldier, should assume a Clerical power. The Records of late times, the odious
face of the Church (if it may deserve that compellation of the Church) prevents
me in saying more.

This which is premised will make way for this conclusion. That the exacting of
necessary Oaths, Subscription, etc. and other means of Comformity are no
otherwise an intrenching on Liberty than the exigency of Christian Society
requires, and the Savage may as well complain of Policy, which reduced them
from their wild and natural extravagancy, as the Libertine of a Test or trial
of his conscience so far as it concerns the Magigistrate.

This perhaps may appear too Magisterially said, if I do not give the Reader
the plea for Liberty, and suggest this as a conclusion.

Before these considerations are closed, I cannot but add this, That some who
disdain all Auxiliaries and Aid from the authority of the Fathers and Councils,
seem to press them into service of the Church, when they find any clause that
may aid them in their wild and arbitrary Model of Ecclesiastical Government.

Thus I find Saint Chrysostom among the Ancients, cited as an enemy to the
Method which seems to force Religion, and Grotius amongst the latter, which
practice seems like that of Interested Politicians, who will let Statutes lie
as an old Armory (fit for service) but not to be used till occasion furbishes
them and gives the rusty Iron an edge. That this may not seem gratis dictum.
Let the former Author be considered, whose Paternal Indulgence and Instruction
to the Priests speaks favorably of weak Christians, his words are these, Lib.
2. de Sacerdot. (...).

And Grotius his favorable words extend only to the not propagating of
Christian Religion by force, not contradicting the use of the Civil Power in
settlement or well composing a Church already planted.

This I presume will be granted, that the Church of England has endeavored to
reduce refractory men, by all imaginable means, and when that takes not effect
the Civil power begged to assist them, which contradicts the sense of the Holy
Father, who only designs to show that Clerical power proceeds not in the method
of a Temporal Prince; and another citation of Salvian, is to this purpose,
whilst he says they are to be tenderly handled, Qui bono animo. Errant; or as a
late Author says, Ill Believers. For speaking of the Arrians, he makes this
Plea for them, Non Odio sed affectu dei honorare and se Dominum and amare
credentes.

This plea cannot be made in this Age, for it may well be supposed that the
Arrians (of whom he speaks) had not the same opportunity of being confirmed in
Religion, the Question debated being only confirmed by one Council, but that in
dispute now by many. So that Refractory Patrons of factious Zealots may be asked
Tertullian's Question, Interea perperam Evangelizabatur tot millia millium
perperam tincta, tot opera fidei perperam administrata, tot virtutes, tot
Charismata perperam operata, tot Sacerdotia perperam functa, tot denique
Martyria perperam Coronata.

To say all, time which blots out other characters, makes Religion more
legible, and Martyrs blood as a Rubric to each clause of the Divine Law so
plain, that Man may rnn the course of his Temporal life, and read his title to
Heaven.

But if this unhappy Age gives instances of those which cannot, and desire to
be tolerated in their ignorance, their only plea must be their weakness, which
in matters of Religion can have no other way of process than Sub forma pauperis
(if I may borrow the Lawyers term) as men of weak apprehension; and the defect
of their narrow Faith must be supplied or relieved from Heaven, not Earth, from
God (who alone knows how to rate the poverty of Spirit according to its true
value) not Man. And such a Toleration (if its term may be allowed as it
concerns God himself) must have its complete Ratification, not only from the
Princes and Churches Clemency, but God's highest and last Judicature.

To conclude all, it seems a more pertinent way for such to address themselves
to the Divine rather than humane Judicature, and endeavor that God may incline
his ear to their Prayers, and increase their Faith rather than attempt to
supple and bend the Magistrate to compliance by fervent petitions.

FINIS.
Errata.
REad St. Malo Page 5. r. launching out into p. 8. r. Arguments are like p. 10.
r. all error p. 19. r. the design of Christ in this place p. 21. animate or
inanimate p. 23. r. before I pass p. 24. r. except some of which that were
miraculous p. 32. because latter Kings p. 33. minds me p. 41. footing in the
World p. 45. r. three times p. 63. Articles of the Creed such p. 70. r.
threadbare word p. 72. r. defining p. 98. Perspectives ibid. and disown p. 80.
r. expressed and condemned p. 85. for God under Law and Gospel never since, r.
God never since Adams Innocence was only worshipped but by one Votary, p. 92. r.
probabili p. 97. r. complained p. 100. p. 112. r. (...).


