Religious LOYALTY, OR OLD ALLEGIANCE TO THE NEW KING.

A SERMON, Preached On the Eighth of February 1684. (It being the First Sunday
after our most Dread SOVEREIGN JAMES the Second His coming to the Crown) in the
Parish Church of Worlington in Suffolk.

By ERASMUS WARREN, Rector there.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock, at the West end of St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

To the Right Worshipful Sir HENRY NORTH, Baronet.
SIR,
AS for my Preaching this Sermon, there needs no Apology. I hope it was a word
(...) Prove. 25.11. Verbum dictum juxta modos suos. Vel super, suis rotis.
Fitly spoken: and that is enough not only to excuse, but also to justify the
speaking of it.

If there needs one for Publishing it, I have one ready. the whole Nation is
now (as it were) upon a Vie of Loyalty; and Good Subjects are zealously
expressing their Duties to their MIGHTY SOVEREIGN in all meek acknowledgments.
And my sending out this Sermon, being but an Attempt or Instance of that
nature; here is sufficient vindication for the doing of it, though otherwise it
might have seemed too forward a performance. For thus I act but as a Living
Member of the Whole; and as inclined or drawn by true natural sympathy, into
decent compliance with the General tendency.

Who may not lawfully run with the Public, when its Course is not only Regular
but Commendable? And when all sorts are eager to pay their just Tribute, why
may not I also tender mine? If it be but a Penny, yet it must be current, as
having CAESAR's Image and Superscription upon it.

And then besides; Joy is a volatile and vehement thing; and when it is strong
and high, is hard to be suppressed. So that if amidst those common Triumphant
Joys, which swelled our Hearts, to see our Rightful PRINCE succeeding to these
Crowns (when our last GREAT MONARCH laid them down with His Mortality) my share
was too big for my Breast to contain, and I was fain to give vent to my
Exultancy thus: none surely will turn it upon me as a fault. But in case they
do, I am willing to bear all the Dint of their Censure, for the Redundant
Satisfaction I feel in my self, transporting me into this LOYAL Guiltiness.

The Papers I presume, Sir, to put into your Hands. But not so much as a Guide,
or fit Rule for your Practice; as an imperfect Idea, or Copy of your Virtue. Of
that RELIGIOUS LOYALTY (a Thing as noble as necessary) in which you are eminent
according to, if not beyond the Character here given of it. I nothing doubt,
but for the Honesty of them (which is al^ they pretend to) they shall be
favorably accepted. And the rather, as being a real (though too slender a)
Testimony of my Observance and Veneration of your Known Worth. The deep and
lively sense of which, makes me justly desirous of being ever continued, in the
Relation of,

Sir, Your Worships most humbly devoted Servant Erasmus Warren.

Since we worshipped GOD last in this Place, it has pleased Him to make a Great
Change in This Nation; a change of our Prince, our most Dread Sovereign. But
this is to make no Change in our Duty. We must serve our NEW KING (whom the
mercy of Heaven bless and prosper:) with our old and best Allegiance. Which
that I may (according as the Apostle directs) Tit. 3.1.
(...), Remember you of (as it is now most reasonable to do) I ground my
present Discourse, upon that Excellent Period of Scripture, which occurs in
PROVE. XXIV. 21. My Son, fear thou the LORD and the KING; and meddle not with
them that are given to change.


HERE are two great things recommended or given in charge to the Sons of
Wisdom, to keep them from joining in the Intrigues of the Seditious: RELIGION
and LOYALTY. And in vain do those persons pretend to either, that do not
seriously study and act them both.

To say we fear the LORD, when we fear not the KING; is to be canting Traitors.
To say we fear the KING, when we fear not the LORD; is to be courtly Atheists.
But when both these meet and concenter in us, and grow up together in fitting
measures, and to a just increase: then the union proves venerable and
auspicious: and does not only serve to show our Integrity, but is highly
conducive to our greatest Interests. For he that is faithful toward GOD, and
the KING; as he has made good progress in his work upon Earth, and is far
advanced in his way to Heaven; so he is in hopeful Circumstances of finishing
his Task and his Journey fortunately.

For these two Principal Wheels of Duty, being true in their motions; they will
not only help one another on by joint concurrence and reciprocal assistance;
but moreover set most of the Inferior ones a going, and so carry us along to
our desired end, with a great deal of ease, and peace, and pleasantness.

The consequence of which will be this at least. That we ought not to content
our selves with One of these, as many in the World seem to do (tho in truth
they cannot have them singly) but must strive indefatigably to partake of both.
As being well assured, that they are no whit useful to any good purposes, but
where they are found in blessed conjunction. And therefore Solomon who was so
wise as to know this, was also so faithful as to impart it to us in the words
before us. Where, twisting them together in one Sentence, he makes them an
Antidote against a dangerous Infection, which might be taken from a sort of
most pestilent Men.

The Text consists of a Precept, and a Prohibition:

The Precept: My Son, fear thou the LORD, and the KING.

The Prohibition: And meddle not with them that are given to change.

The Precept, without forcing, flows out into several Theses or Positions. I
touch upon such only as do more particularly relate to LOYATY; they being most
proper for this juncture.

The first is this:

LOYALTY and RELIGION are no incompatible or inconsistent things. A Man may be
a good Christian, and at the same time a good Subject. The Bible does never tie
us to impossibilities; and could not both these Fears (if I may call them two)
be regularly exercised or expressed together, it would never have laid them thus
jointly upon us.

Let none therefore cast off duty to their Prince, under pretext or color of
Devotion to GOD. That Is to make Christianity patronize Rebellion; which teaches
nothing more plainly, and urges nothing more powerfully, than humble
subjection. All the LORD's people are holy, was the old plea to justify
Sedition, and to palliate tumultuous and treasonable insurrection. But the
vanity and frivolousness of the Apology then, assures it would be empty and
insignificant now; and may well beat Men off from ever resuming it. Can any be
too good, too holy to be Subject? Then never let them seek a place in Heaven;
for there the best and holiest of all, must both have, and own a Sovereign.

St. Paul writing to Rome, inscribes his Epistle to the Saints there. But
notwithstanding their sanctity and eminence in Religion, he puts the Yoke of
Obedience on every one of their necks: Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers, Romans 13.1. Where he must mean the Civil Powers too: for he
speaks of those Powers that did (...). bear the Sword: which to do he knew
belonged not to the Powers Ecclesiastical. And when the temporal Magistrate is
thus set over all, upon what account can any be exempted?

Where people are placed under lawful Authority, Religion is so far from
discharging them from Duty, that it ties them the closer and faster to it. Nor
indeed could it dissolve or loosen those bonds, whereby we are obliged to
rightful Governors (in way of just subordination and service) without casting
disparagement upon its glorious Author. For should Religion excuse us from
acting our parts, where GOD sets us down in scenes of Obedience; His Doctrine
would plainly interfere with his Providence; and His Worship undermine and blow
up that Order, which his Wisdom has established, in the Political Frame or
Constitution of the World. But the fear of this, or any thing like it, would be
groundless and unreasonable. For where the hand of the ALMIGHTY brings us under
command; the word of his mouth still enjoins us to obey. The fear of Him, never
was an Enemy to the fear of Kings. It never stood in opposition to it, nor
tended to the least diminution of it. No, both may grow up and flourish
together in the same people; in one and the same individual person. And
accordingly we find them here in Connection. Fear Thou the LORD, and the KING.

Whence issues a Second Position.

True LOYALTY, and true RELIGION are utterly inseparable. So far from being
inconsistent, that they cannot be divided. They dwell not apart, but are always
combined and linked together. Where there is One, there must be both; and where
they are not Both, there can be neither, to any good effect. As many as fear
the LORD as they should, fear the KING: And as many as fear the KING as they
ought, fear the LORD. It cannot be otherwise, the FEARS we speak of, are so
coupled and united.

The Men therefore that are zealous for GOD and his ways, and yet go about to
murder the KING; we know their RELIGION: And they who are fierce and high for
the KING; and yet at the same time, will be licentious and impious toward GOD;
we may guess at their LOYALTY. RELIGION in the one, is for certain, but vain
show without truth: And LOYALTY in the other, we may well suspect, is but mere
shadow, without substance; and both but artificial and shining Formalities.
However they may glitter and deceive the Eye, yet let them be brought but to a
searching Test, and they will soon appear to be false and counterfeit.

And this methinks puts a proper Key into our hands, whereby to unlock the
doors of Treachery, and to open, and discover the grounds of Conspiracies and
horrid Treasons. They spring from want of LOYALTY, or fear of the KING. But men
fear not the KING, because they fear not the LORD; and so they are for lack of
RELIGION chiefly. Excellently therefore is it charged upon Traitors, in their
respective Arraignments, as the occasion of their guilt and treasonable
Offenses; That they had not the fear of GOD before their eyes. Nor was it
possible they should, when they had wickedly thrown off the fear of the KING:
Both which are so consolidate and knit together, in an union so firm, and
close, and compacted, as can never be broken. For they are eternally conjoined
in their own Nature, as well as by this irreversible Command. Fear thou the
LORD, and the KING.

Whence arises a Third Position.

True LOYALTY, is altogether as Indispensable as true RELIGION. As little
Arbitrary and indifferent as That: To evince as much, it is here ranked (by
divine order) in Parity with it: For the same inspired and unerring Pen, that
recorded the first part of the Precept, (never to be altered) (...) Fear the
LORD; entered and ratified the latter clause also (to hold immutable) (...) and
the KING. So that we must be forced to cancel Canonical Scripture, and to raze
this Text out of the Sacred Volume, and to trample upon the Authority of GOD's
most infallible and veracious SPIRIT; before we can shake off the bond of our
Allegiance, or crowd it into the number of things Indifferent. Yea, before we
can slip or relax it in the least, so as to make it any whit less strong or
obligatory upon us, than RELIGION is. The Fear of our Sovereign is no more ad
libitum; at our Discretion, no more to be taken up and laid down at our
pleasure; than the Fear of the LORD of Heaven and Earth. We may as well quit or
cast off This; as venture to resign or reject That: For the Command is equal
touching both. Fear thou the LORD, and the KING.

Whence resulteth a Fourth Position.

True LOYALTY, is true RELIGION. Not only Consistent with it, Inseparable from
it, and every whit as Indispensable as That: But a real and considerable piece
of it self. It Is part of that Fear, which we owe to GOD, as the Text intimates.
For it does not say, Fear thou the LORD, and fear thou the KING; as if they
were two distinct Fears: But fear thou the LORD, and the KING; insinuating that
in good measure they are but one. Differ they may, and do, in Degree: being
plainly subordinate as their Objects are: but yet in Quality they are much the
same. Are we to fear the LORD truly and unfeignedly? so we must the KING. Are
we to fear the LORD at all times? so we must the KING. Are we to fear the LORD
for Conscience sake? so we must the KING. Are we to fear the LORD above all
things? and because the Divine Law requires it? so we must the KING above all
Men.

Nor need we wonder at this, that there should be so near a Cognation, and so
true a likeness betwixt these Fears, as in some sort to make them one and the
same, when between their Objects there is such an affinity and fair
resemblance. For GOD is but the GREAT KING of Heaven; and KINGS HE affirms to
be GODS upon Earth. Psalm 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods. Where, as the Communication of His Name to them,
denotes them to be partakers of GOD's Power; so their participation of His
Power, entitles them to a suitable proportion of His Fear; and implies their
fear, to be as it were a Slip or Off-shoot of His; as their Authority is. Which
might well occasion Solomon to advise as he did; Fear thou the LORD, and the
KING.

Whence we have a Fifth, and the last Position.

To be LOYAL and RELIGIOUS, is the best Wisdom. Else the wisest of Men,
assisted and inspired by the most Wise GOD would never have persuaded to both
at once, as he here does: I mean in so grave, and serious, and powerful a
manner. For that he might effectually prevail, and win upon us, he puts on all
the sweetness and tenderness imaginable. He personates the near and most
endearing Relation, of an affectionate indulgent Father to his Son; My Son,
fear thou the LORD, and the KING.

That to be RELIGIOUS, is WISDOM, we are well assured; for the HOLY GHOST has
so pronounced it: And to man he said, Behold, the fear of the LORD, THAT is
WISDOM, Job 28.28. Yea, the best Wisdom it is, or the noblest part of it. For
the fear of the LORD, says the Psalmist, is the BEGINNING of WISDOM, Psalm CXI.
10. (...) the choicest, as well as the first piece of it. Caput sapientia
(according to the Vulgar) the HEAD of Wisdom. And the Head, we know, is usually
the most eminent and excellent part of the body.

And then to be LOYAL, must be great Wisdom too; because it is a Branch of true
RELIGION.

But then hence it follows (by the rule of contraries) that not only the
Irreligious, and most rank and professed Atheists; but also that Disloyal
(though never so crafty and seemingly GODLY) Traitors, must be stark fools. And
so indeed they are, or will be in the Event, whether they miscarry, or prosper
in their proceedings. In case they miscarry in their evil Enterprises, and fall
under just and condign punishment (which God grant they may always do) the
whole World will be sure then to condemn them, of most egregious folly. And
truly if they chance to go on and prosper (which, blessed be God, they have not
done of late) yet they are really not the less, but the greater fools for that;
as to the monstrous effects and issues of their folly, which immediately grow
unreasonable and most intolerable. As a raging fire is never the less hot, for
its disastrous burnings; nor a frentic person the less mad, because he does the
more mischief; no more are Rebels the less, but more grievous fools, for their
being prosperous. For then their folly gets up and rides in triumph. We want
not Instances of this nature; Instances of the folly of prosperous Rebels: When
instead of submitting to the KING for the LORD's sake, they fought against Him
for JESUS CHRIST; and instead of submitting to him as SUPREME, O black Deed!
they threw him down from his Throne, and cut off his Royal and most Sacred
Head: They gave us amazing proofs, and astonishing Specimens of the madness and
folly that attend and actuate a thriving Treason. Yet this (as sad and dismal
as it is) is but the best side of this folly neither; that which we see of it
here in this Life. But O how hideous will it appear in the next! when its guilt
shall be changed into consummate Punishment; and all the Actors and Abettors of
it, shall be consigned to torments without measure or end. O what fools, what
mad men were we, and ten thousand times worse! will condemned Traitors then cry
out; in that we ever suffered our discontents to ferment against the lawful
Government; and our factious thirst to grow so high, as not to be quenched but
with our Prince's blood.

These are the Assertions concerning LOYALTY, couched in the Text. None of
which shall ever fail while that holds good; Let but that foundation stand, and
the superstructures we have raised upon it, can never fall. The Conclusions
drawn from them must needs be true, if the Wise Man's Premises be not mistaken.

But therefore perhaps it may be scrupled by some: Does not Solomon strein
things too much here, or stretch them too far, when he thus joins these Fears
together, as connatural? Does he not attribute too much to KINGS, while he
incorporates LOYALTY, as it were with RELIGION; and makes the fear of them,
seem to be as needful as the Fear of the LORD? We well remember he was a KING
himself, and so might speak as he did upon his own account. He could not but be
an Hearty friend to Monarchy, as wearing the glorious Crown of Israel; and so
might write at this rate out of private ends and oblique respects: in favor
that is, of his Royal Prerogative; and to strengthen and support his Throne and
his Interest. And which is also as considerable, his Wisdom was nothing
inferior to his Dignity, if it did not exceed it. And he being so notable and
shrewd a Statist, his letting fall these words, might only be a subtle Fetch of
his; a politic Artifice, or cunning Stratagem, to make the Imperial Crown sit
the surer on his Head. That he might the better claim his peoples Obedience on
Earth, he would make them believe that his Title to it, was derived from Heaven.

I Answer:

As Solomon was a Man of extraordinary Privileges; so in this he excelled for
One, that he was (...), inspired by GOD, and a trusty Amanuensis or Secretary
of his Will. And therefore when he spoke or wrote this Text, he did but the
work of his Sacred Office; and what he did, proceeded from Divine impulse, and
direction. The Paragraph before us, contains not so much his own private sense
(with design to assert and maintain his Regalities) as the Eternal Mind, and
pure authentic Will of the DEITY, therein proclaimed aloud to Subjects. The
words were registered by Solomon, but descended from GOD; and are a truth sent
down directly from Heaven, without any Misprision at all in the Revelation.

If this will not serve to arrest the Cavil, and to silence and satisfy the
persons that suggest it: we need but look a little farther into Scripture, and
we shall find that it speaks the same thing in other places: Chap. 3. v. 5.
They shall fear the LORD, and DAVID their KING, says Jeremiah: And if in the
mouth of two or three witnesses, Chap. 30. v. 9.
every word shall be established; Solomon's is confirmed by sufficient
Testimony: and it is evident that RELIGION and LOYALTY go hand in hand, as
things nearly allied, and of like necessity.

But some again (glad of any slight evasion) may be sit to reply; That the
Passages cited were Legal Directions: That they were given out in the time of
the Jewish Economy, and so reach only to such as were contemporary with That;
living under the Mosaic State or Polity. Whereas we being people of another
Dispensation, they are foreign to us, and insignificant.

To this I rejoyn:

The Scriptures alleged, are not only Legal Prescripts or Injunctions, but
Evangelical Predictions. They not only show what was to be done under the Law;
but what is to be done under the Gospel. And though some by DAVID the KING,
understand the Messiah, who was David's Son after the flesh; yet the expression
admits of a wider Interpretation, and the Scriptures quoted are very applicable
to temporal Princes, as pointing out Fidelity and Obedience to them, and
ranking it in a kind of equality with RELIGION.

And then farther; LOYALTY or OBEDIENCE, is as peremptorily required of all
God's people now, as ever it was of the Jews heretofore. Yea, it is as
vehemently and importunately exacted of them, as RELIGION it self: which seems
to argue that they are no very different things. S. Peter 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the LORD's sake; whether it
be to the KING as Supreme. (...), That Is the Topic whence St. Peter most
cogently argues; For the LORD's sake. So that how could he have urged the Best
RELIGION more forcibly upon them, than he here does this submission to the
KING? And yet (which is worth observing) the KING he speaks of (the Roman
Emperor) had no such clear Hereditary Title to the Authority he held, as our
KING has. For instead of ascending the Throne by descent from Ancestors, and a
long unquestionable lineal Succession; Nero (who is thought by some to have
reigned at this time) was introduced in a Illud dementer, quod praeterito
Britannico filio, Neronem privignum haeredem imperii fecit. Hor. Turselin.
Epit. Hist. Lib. 4.
mad and irregular way. For Claudius brought him in, over his own Son
Britannicus's head, who was the right Heir. Yet to this Nero, were the
Christians to submit: Even those Christians, who just before were styled an
holy Nation, a royal Priesthood, a chosen Generation, and a peculiar People;
Yea, they were to submit to him for the LORD's sake, and that as to the
Supreme. As to One, (...).
who (in St. Peter's judgment) was above the Soldiery; and above the People;
and above the Senate; and supereminent to all Mortals, with whom they had to
do. And if the Primitive Saints thus yielded Submission to this Heathen Ruler,
whose coming to the Empire was indirect; and whose Title (so far) turned upon a
wrong hinge: Who but Men as mad as Claudius would refuse Obedience to our
present SOVEREIGN, or raise the least shadow of scruple against it, whose RIGHT
to these Crowns is so undoubted?

And (which is something more still) Christians are charged by the same
Apostle, and that in one and the same breath (as well as in the same Epistle
and Chapter) Verse 17.
FEAR GOD, and HONOR the KING. Which as it obviates all Pleas that might be
drawn from the Gospel to confront or pervert the Doctrine of LOYALTY; as
Christian Liberty, the having no other KING but JESUS, or the like. And as it
baffles all Arguments, for kicking against Government, or endeavoring to
subvert it, which might be fetched from the Prince's being of a different
Religion, from his being an Atheist or an Heretic, a Tyrant or a Persecutor
(while the chief Apostle commands the first Christians to HONOR one of the
vilest and cruellest of the Ethnic Emperors:) so it gives us to understand
again, that RELIGION and LOYALTY are near akin, and in some respects very much
the same thing. And therefore St. Peter (we see) links them fast together, and
by a very quick and direct Transition, passes over coherently, from one to the
other.

And truly when Solomon and St. Peter (the one the wisest Prince and Preacher
in the Jewish; and the other the Prime Apostle in the Christian Church) concur
thus fully in point of judgment, touching the near affinity betwixt RELIGION
and LOYALTY, and the necessity of both; why should any question the truth of
either? And yet they are not only fairly agreed in the case, but so perfect
and absolute is the Consent betwixt them; that they signify and declare it, by
connecting or tacking both of them together, in almost one and the same
Expression. For, Fear GOD, and honor the KING; differs but little from, Fear
thou the LORD, and the KING.

But how can FEAR which is a thing arising from apprehension of Evil, have GOD
for its Object, who is the CHIEFEST GOOD? Fear thou the LORD.

The Question is pertinent and answered thus: Fear in the Text, is not to be
taken for a mere natural Passion, or according to the Definition that Moralists
give of it: But for an ingenuous, filial, and respectful awe, to be testified
in the reverential Veneration of the DEITY. If this be too narrow a notion of
it yet, and not adequate to the full Latitude of its meaning here, as in
likelihood it is not, (for Fear is a very comprehensive term, and is commonly
in Scripture put for the entire Systeme of RELIGION) we must then amplify or
enlarge its signification farther, and think thus concerning it. That it is a
Complex or body of holy Virtues and Duties. Fear thou the LORD; that is (if we
would express it in particulars) Love thou the LORD; Honor thou the LORD;
Trust thou the LORD; Obey thou the LORD. And therefore we find in the Bible,
that those Graces or Duties, are the usual Concomitants (if not Constituents)
of this excellent Fear. Thus, what does the LORD thy GOD require of thee, but
to Fear the LORD thy GOD, and to LOVE Him? Deuteronomy. 10.12. And as Fear is there
placed with Divine LOVE; so sometimes it is joined with Divine HONOR: Where is
mine HONOR? Where is my FEAR? Mal. 1.16. Sometimes with Divine Confidence: Ye
that Fear the LORD, TRUST in the LORD, Psalm 115.11. Sometimes with Divine
Obedience. SERVE the LORD with Fear. Psalm 2.11.

Now this being the full sense of FEARING the LORD here in the Text; it will be
of singular use to direct us into genuine expressions of our LOYALTY. For the
Fear of the KING, being much the same with the Fear of the LORD, though
subordinate, and inferior to it, as above was noted: Hence it will follow,
that our Fear of Him, must be a set of Principles, and a Conjugation of Duties
amological to those that compound or make up the Fear of the LORD. And if we
would act it aright, we must do it in Correspondent or suitable Instances; only
with abatements equal or proportionate, to its comparative inferiority.

To speak more plainly, and so as all may understand.

As they who Fear the LORD aright, must have their Fear constituted of and
exhibited in Affection, and Honor; Confidence, and Obedience: So they that
fear the KING aright, must have their Fear made up of the like Ingredients, and
signified in the like Expressions: only (as I said) we must keep to due
measures still.

Yea, as true RELIGION, or the Fear of the LORD, must consist of and be
manifested in, Heartiest Affection; Highest Honor; Firmest Confidence; and
most Cheerful Obedience: So our true LOYALTY or Fear of the KING, must
symbolize, or partake with it here again, and come up to it in a meet and
laudable resemblance. We must Love him Cordially; Honor him Greatly; Trust him
Fiducially; and Obey him Readily. Should I not press this with earnestness,
upon the present occasion, I might well be thought to forget mine own Duty, for
not minding you of yours. I shall do it therefore as briefly, and yet as fully
as I can. He that has ears to hear let him hear.

First, If we would Fear the KING aright, we must LOVE him Cordially. The
Christian Law does bind us indispensably to love our Neighbors, and our
veriest Enemies. But must it not in reason then lay more hold on our Affections
in reference to our SOVEREIGN? Though the truth is, there would be little need
of any Law in the case, were we but thoroughly sensible of the great Obligations
of Nature and Interest. For so has the Wise and Mighty GOVERNOR of the World,
ordered the matter betwixt the KING and his People; that they can in no degree
slight and disaffect Him: but in the same degree they must be unkind and
unnatural to themselves. For as we are members of the State, He is Essential to
our welfare; and that full out as much, as the breath of our Nostrils is to the
life of our Bodies. So we are taught by a great Prophet (and I hope you will grant
he knew very well, and will therefore believe him) The BREATH OF OUR NOSTRILS
was taken in their pits, said Jeremiah, of a KING, Lam. 4.20. And impossible it
is that there should be any thing of Complement or Flattery in the Phrase. For
it was not only spoken by that holy Man, but in the depths of his affliction
and pious anguish; when he was deploring a conquered and broken People, and
condoling a captivated and undone Prince; Whom then to have caressed or soothed
up in the least, with any gay, unbecoming, or undue Titles; would have been
unreasonable vanity on all accounts. I, and gross and damnable hypocrisy too,
considering to whom he made his complaints. For GOD and he were now alone (let
me say) and he poured out his bitter doleful Lamentations, unto none but the
ALMIGHTY's Ears. Yet in these heavy, mournful, solemn circumstances, where
nothing of sneaking, clawing Courtship; nothing of fawning parasitical
Assentation, could possibly creep in and mingle with it: We see what a
Character he gives the KING; and so what his Relation to his People was. I need
not make it out to be true and just, forasmuch as we know it came down from
above, and to this very day stands upon Record amongst the Oracles of Heaven.

For many among us (God in mercy disabuse and rectify their crooked Judgments)
are meanly and basely opinion'd of a KING. They deem him no better than a mere
superfluity, an overgrown Wen, or monstrous Excrescency, rather than the Head
of the Body Politic. But O! that these Men would keep Jeremiah's Description of
a KING in their Eyes; that they would but revolve it in their thoughts, and in
their minds but seriously consider it. Then I hope they would see, and be
ashamed of their impious Error: I Am sure they would have cause enough to be
so. For that holy Man speaking by the MOST HOLY SPIRIT of GOD, faithfully
informs them, that their lawful Prince (though wicked and unfortunate as
Zedekiah was) is no spare or supernumerary Piece of the State; no useless
redundance or needless appendage, but (as Breath is to Mortals) a vital of the
Nation. And if ever we should chance to be deprived of KINGS, (which GOD
forbid) we are sure to die for it, if not to Nature yet to Order; even to the
best sort of Rule or Government, and the best expedient of Happy Society.

And when our KING is so necessary to our well-being in the World; can we choose
but cherish dear Affections toward him? Who would not be chary and infinitely
tender of their Breath and Life? Why our KiNG is no less in a Political sense:
For in that sense we are unable to live or breath without him. Indeed we might
be able Spirare, to breath, without a KING: But then it must be as Saul did,
minas and caedas, threatening and slaughters against one another: But how should
we be able Respirare to rest, and breath together in peace? much less
conspirare, rest and breath together in Amity.

Let all good Subjects remember this, and they will not fail to act
accordingly. As we are bound to Love our KING upon other great and numberless
accounts, so even by the Laws of Nature and Interest; in point of affection or
kindness to our selves.

Secondly, if we would fear the KING aright, we must Honor him greatly. Which
Honor, though it be to be exhibited in outward carriage, upon all occasions;
yet it must spring up from an inward value and esteem.

And to such as enquire for a RULE of Estimate (as willing to know how they
must rise in the intrinsic value of our KING, which is the root of external
Honor and Deference) a fit one is tendered by the brave Commanders of David's
Forces, or by his Soldiers in general, 2 Samuel 18.3. For when Absalom his Son
was up in Arms, and engaged in open Rebellion against him; they would by no
means have David take the field in person. But when he resolved to go forth in
the dangerous Expedition, they humbly addressed in dissuasion of his Majesty;
Thou shall not go forth: for -- thou art worth ten thousand of us. A meet
Standard whereby to measure out the value of our KING. Of all things in the
World, we prize our selves most, and think we have very good cause to do so.
But if we be stamped with the impress of true LOYALTY, we shall rate our
SOVEREIGN much above our selves, and reckon (as indeed we rightly may) that He
is worth many hundreds and thousands of us.

And the same Heroes, or others, like them, have left another RULE upon Record,
in their exemplary carriage toward the same Monarch. For when in a terrible
fight between Israel and the Philistines, he had like to have been slain by the
Giant Ishbibenob; they solemnly swear that He should go no more out to Battle
with them. And their reason was, That Thou quench not the light of Israel. So
that they esteemed their KING as the light that they enjoyed; without which
there could have been nothing of Ornament, nothing of splendour or delight
amongst them. His violent and untimely end, would have been to them like
quenching the Day, or putting out the Sun, or like a total Eclipse of that most
Comfortable and glorious Luminary.

But O inhumane Traitors then! and Monsters, Wicked beyond all Epithets! that
once hurled Midnight over three great Nations, and shut them all up in black
Confusion. That wretched and ignominious Crew, had none of this esteem for
KINGS I speak of; but were sunk as low in unworthy contempt of them, as on the
contrary they should have risen in generous Admiration. Let their hateful
Degeneracy move us to aspire; I mean, to that due estimation of our SOVEREIGN,
of which they were destitute: And let us never cease aspiring till we find we
are arrived at such noble Heighths as may be equally signal with their lewd
Declensions.

The Mark we see, is fairly set up for us in Scripture, and fly above it we may
as far as we can; but we must be sure to take our aim so high, as not to come
under it; that will be shame and disparagement to us. For if we remember, they
were Jewish Royalists, who reached this gallant and lofty pitch. But we being
Christians, have greater Privileges, and so should not take up in less
Seize.

And here to swell our esteem or value of our KINGS, into its proper fullness
and just Dimensions; I shall briefly mind you of their Original, and their End;
declaring first Whence, and then Why, they are.

As for the Rise or Original of a KING among us, it is from GOD alone. Not at
all from his Subjects in any way of Derivation or Dependence whatever. Elect
him they cannot; Confirm him they need not; Depose him they may not. His Title
is from on high, and his Claim from heaven; and none but he who granted him his
Charter of Inheritance, can bring his Quo Warranto against it, that is, the
ALMIGHTY. The KING, said Constitu.
Clemens of old, (...), is the Ordinance of the LORD. Inde est Imperator, unde
homo antequam Imperator, said Apolog. Cap. 30.
Tertullian. The Emperor is from HIM from whom he is first a man. Inde
potestas illi, unde and Spiritus. Thence is his Power, whence is his Spirit. So
that it is as much GOD's act, and as peculiar to HIM, to make EMPERORS and
KINGS, as it is to make Men, and Souls. Right was the Opinion of the Essence
also in this matter, that no Man ever came to be KING, (...), without GOD. And
the very Poet could affirm Ascre.
; (...), KINGS are from Jupiter.

But, which to us is more than all beside, Scripture speaks the same thing, By
me KINGS reign; says the GOD of Wisdom, Prove. 8.15. BY ME, that is, as the
Author or Institutor, as well as the Protector and Upholder of them. And
therefore where HE complains that KINGS are not BY HIM, Hos. 8.4. He disclaims
not the Office or Dignity, but only censures the Acquisition or Administration
thereof; or perhaps finds fault with both at once.

But it may be here Objected: The citation taken out of Solomon's mouth (as a
great many more in the Old Testament) touching KINGS, is to be understood of
the Jewish ones only: But that Other KINGS are from or by God, because the
KINGS of Israel were so, will not follow from thence by just consequence.

Know therefore in Answer, that there are clearest Testimonies of the Divine
Institution or Origination of KINGS under the GOSPEL likewise, I mention but
two:

The first from the lips of our Blessed SAVIOR. He told Pilate, that he could
have no Power against HIM, unless it were given him (...), S. John 19.11.
from above. Whence it is manifest, that the Regalities he had (and so that
others have) were from on high, or from Heaven. And therefore our dear LORD
submitted to the Governors Authority as competent, even where his blood and
life were concerned. Nor does it in the least alter the case, that Pilate was
no absolute KING, but Viceroy to Tiberius. This rather makes the more for us;
in that it plainiy shows, that a Power delegated from lawful Superiors, is as
truly from GOD, as the Primitive one is, from which it is derived. And
accordingly Jehosaphat told his Judges, that in distributing justice, they
acted not for Man but for the LORD, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

The other Evidence is St. Paul's; who declares to the Church * Verse 1.
in the thirteenth of the Romans, that there is no Power but of GOD. And what
Powers does he there speak of? Verse 1.
Why, they were (...), the Powers then in being; the Emperor of Rome and his
Deputies. These therefore were of GOD. And how were they of HIM? Why, they were
not only tolerated allowed, and approved; Ib.
but (...), ordained of HIM. And therefore in that Chapter, 4. 6.
he makes the Ruler to be not only (...), and (...), the Minister, 2.
but also (...), the Ordinance of GOD.

Yea Nimrod Himself (who is made an Instance of Tyranny, and usually brought in
as an argument against Monarchy) might yet be of GOD, as he was a KING, or a
greater Title. For when he began to be Mighty upon Earth, that is to erect his
Empire, or enlarge it (for who can prove he was the first Monarch?) he is said
to have done it, Genesis 10.9.
(...) before the LORD. Which however some interpret to an ill sense, as if he
set up his Government against the LORD, in a way of violence or affront to
Heaven; yet it is as capable of a good meaning, and may signify no more than
his doing in the sight of the LORD, as with his consent or approbation. There
seems to be nothing in the Context, that bars the Exposition as evil or
incongruous, if well considered.

Now granting it to be thus, that KINGS are of GOD, and Ordained by Him; and
consequently that the Power which rests in our KING descends directly from the
MOST HIGH; the same Reason and Religion, that teaches and ties us to Honor
GOD, must lead us to Honor our KING likewise in his proportion: Who is Deo
secundus, ad Scap.
next to GOD, and solo Deo minor, only less than GOD is, as says Tertullian.
And the same great Father thought this very necessary for Christians to do,
even when the Government was lodged in the worst hands: Yea, with his Pen he
openly made profession and acknowledgment of as much, to an Heathen President
of Carthage, who threatened the Church with bloody Persecution. Id. ib.
Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris. The Christian is Enemy to
none, much less to the Emperor: Quem sciens a Deo suo constitui, necesse est
ut and ipsum diligat, and revereatur, and honoret, etc. Whom he knowing to be
ordained of HIS GOD, it is necessary that he should both love, and revere, and
honor Him.

And this (the Emperor's being vested with GOD's Auhority) was that (by the
way) which kept the first Christians in quietness, and obedience, when
according to the same Si enim hosts extraneos, non tantum vindices occultos
agere vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum? Plures nimirum Mauri
and Marcomanni, ipsique Parthi vel quantaecunque unius tamen loci, and suorum
finium gentes quam totius Orbis? Hesterni sumus and vestra omnia implevimus,
urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus,
decurias, palatium, senatum, forum. Sola vobis relinquimus templa. Cisi bello
non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares copiis, qui tam libenter
trucidamur? Si non apud istam disciplinam magis occide liceret quam occidere.
Tertul. Apol. cap. 37. Civitatem obscessam vociferantur: In agris, in
castellis, in insulis Christianos: Omnem sexum, aetatem, conditionem, and
dignitatem transgredi; ad hoc nomen quasi detrimento moerent. Id. Apol. cap. 1.
Father) they wanted neither strength nor courage to Rebel. Though some
unworthily detracting from their Pieties, would bear us in hand, that they were
dutiful and patient merely through impotence and inability to resist, and to
make their part good with the secular Power. So Quod si Christiani olim non
deposuerunt Neronem and Diocletianum Apostatam, ac Valentem Arrianum and
similes; id fuit quia decrant vires temporales Christianis. De Romano Pont.
Lib. 5. cap. 7.
Bellarmine expressly affirms, that the reason why the Christians of old did not
depose Nero, and Diocletian, and Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arrian and
the like, was because they wanted temporal Forces.

Thus we see from whence KINGS are, and by whom appointed. But the Inquiry runs
on a little farther yet, and we are next to know why they are, or to what End.
And the End indeed is great and high; noble and excellent; every way honorable
and worthy of them. For it is to rule and command part of the World, under GOD,
who is absolute Monarch of the whole.

As we are capable of Government, so our Nature and condition make it Omnem
naturam quae non est simplex, sed cum alio connexa, necesse est habere aliquem
in se principatum. Cicero de Not. Deorum, Lib. 2.
necessary for us. So necessary that impossible it is we should be happy
without it. Nor do we read of any People that ever were so. And the reason is
clear (as Nazianzen gives it) (...), Anarchy is always accompanied with
Confusion; and that is fatal not only to the felicity and welfare, but even to
the Communities and lives of Men.

And though the GOD who created us, could have ruled us, if he had pleased with
a more immediate hand, appointing good Spirits for his Viceroys below, and
leaving things wholly to their care and management, (who according to their
several Provinces or Jurisdictions, might have set up Majestic Thrones, and
Tribunals, and have conducted Affairs in their respective Lieutenancies, in
rarest Methods of Polity and Righteousness) and so have made the Regiment of
this inferior World Angelic or Theocratical: yet (as being more suitable to
his wise designs, and more natural, agreeable, and advantageous to us) He
exalted frail Men to be his Representatives on Earth: He has assigned such to
preside over us, as (bating their Presidency) are exactly like us. And as He
did thus to other great purposes, so undoubtedly to this for one; that they
might be the more kind and easy to us, and more ready to pity and sympathize
with us, as being thoroughly acquainted with humane infirmities, from their own
Nature and passions, which are the same with ours.

And as we share in this commune Privilege, of being ruled by Men; so we are
further happy in this Nation, in a Government Monarchical, which is highly
preferable to any other. And so indeed it was reputed of old. Famous Homer
almost three thousand years ago, avouch'd it to be the best. For in
condemnation or defiance of (...), the Rule of many, he cried out -- (...),
(...) --
Il. 2.
Let there be one LORD, one KING.

And thus we have learnt also what the Design of Heaven is, in giving us a
KING: namely, that he may rule us under GOD, and that in an humane and gentle
way proper and accommodate to our frame and weakness. Whence it is evident,
that his advancement above us, is for our Benefit. He is GOD's Minister (as
before:) but then he is so, (...), to us, (...), for good, Romans 13.4. Which
Plato considering, he pronounced vid Sen. Ep. 44.
Neminem non servum ex Regibus, every KING to be a Servant. He meant in an
honorable notion and capacity. Just as Shepherds are Servants to their Flocks,
or Fathers to their Families; who at the same time have Dominion over them. And
therefore a KING is said to be both, in reference to his People, De Clem.
and that as well in the Sacred, as Profane writings. Seneca also would have a
KING to reckon, non Rempublicam suam esse sed se Reipublicae. Not that the
Commonwealth is so much His, as He the Commonwealth's: in regard of his
superintending it, and the many and great advantages that He brings it. Yea,
Emperor (a Title above that of KING) is but nomen officii, a Term of Office.
And so fairly insinuates, that as many as are signalized with that lofty style,
are but Public and illustrious Servitors of their Countries; as having the
principal Charge, and care, by having the supreme command of the people under
them.

But this then lays farther Obligation upon us to honor the KING; as making it
necessary in point of Gratitude, as well as Duty. In that he is our SOVEREIGN,
he is our Patron also, and our great Benefactor. And so the Honor he may
demand, he first deserves; deserves it, by earning it, or purchasing of it, and
that at a very dear rate too: I mean his Royal care and pains in the
Government. May this thought weigh with us, and work effectually upon us. Else
we Christians, in giving Caesar his due, shall come short of Heathens. One of
which taught, (and has left it upon Record) Necesse est auctorem hujus boni ut
parentem colunt. Sen. Ep. 73.
as a needful Doctrine: that they must Honor the KING who is the Author of
good to them, as they would honor a Father, that is, greatly.

And so I pass to the next Particular:

Only as I go, I must let fall this Note, not to inform, but excite still; That
as one special way of Honoring the LORD, is, with our substance, Prove. 3.9. So
one proper expression of Honor to our KING, is granting and paying him Taxes
and Subsidies to supply his necessities, and support his ROYAL Grandeur and
magnificence. In confirmation of which, it is memorable of St. Paul, that he
joined Tribute and Custom, with the Fear and Honor due to the KING, Romans 13.7.

Thirdly, If we would fear the KING aright, We must trust him fiducially. And
have we not greatest reason so to do? Remember, by virtue of his place he is
Father of his Country. And which we must never forget, he has exposed Himself
to danger and death for our safeguard. Yea, I may say of his MAJESTY, as St.
Paul of himself, 2 Cor. 11.23.
that for our sakes he has been (...), in deaths often. To which add, that he is
most illustriously descended, from great, renowned, and most glorious
ANCESTORS, And this GOD Himself has made to be a ground of Trust for us, and of
rare Expectancies. For blessed art thou O Land, says He, when thy KING is (...)
THE SON OF NOBLES or WHITE ONES, Eccles. 10.17. So that what may we not with
humble Confidence look for, that it is fit a good Prince should do for his
Subjects. For those Subjects of His, who as they think, and own, that they are
bound in Conscience to serve Him with their lives; so I trust will always be
ready at His first command, faithfully to perform, what they heartily profess.

You therefore that hear me this day, as you tender your RELIGION, be not
defective in this piece of LOYALTY. which is a part thereof. TRUST your KING,
and trust Him BOLDLY, as it becomes ingenuous and honest Subjects. Banish all
unreasonable Doubts; down with all Ill-natured Fears; cast off all unbecoming
Jealousies; and let no vainly diffident surmises boil up in your hearts, or
sloat in your minds. Our RELIGION and our LAWS; our LIBERTIES and our
PROPERTIES, are things most Dear and Precious to us. Believe therefore that he
will take due care of them; that he will graciously patronize and protect them.

It was the Greek Orator's saying of the KING of Macedon, (...). Demost.
Olynth. 2.
I should verily think Philip to be formidable and wonderful, if so be I could
see he grew great by just proceedings: Question not but we have a KING who will
keep and increase his Grandeur, by his Justice: and that at such a Rate as to
become a meet Object both of Dread and Admiration. I will venture to speak but
one word more. Never fear but he will answer or come up to that most true
Character or Definition of a KING, which the learned Father has rightly drawn
up: (...) Clem. (...). St^om. Lib. 1.
HE is A KING, WHO RULES ACCORDING TO LAWS. So none shall have cause, Just
cause to complain, either of the Weight or Crookedness of his Scepter.

Lastly, If we would fear the KING aright, we must obey him readily. Kings and
Rulers are said in Scripture, to be (...), Powers; and as they have power to
command and make Laws: so we that are under them must execute and fulfill them,
with all humble and faithful readiness and obsequiousness.

And here to smooth our way to this important Work, I shall endeavor to remove
one grand Impediment, or considerable Stumbling Block, which Prejudice or
Mistake is apt to throw before many. I mean, a conceit that Submission to the
penalties of good Laws, is Equivalent to Obedience. So have I heard some stiffly
argue, and I have seen their practice correspond to their reasonings. For they
have made light of violating most wholesome Laws, upon this presumption; that
they could salve the violations they wilfully ran upon, by undergoing such
punishments as those Laws inflicted: which in their Opinion would be tantamount
to punctual observing them: But this is a weak and groundless imagination; and
a fancy most wild and monstrously nonsensical. To hold that suffering
Penalties is a proper Supplement, of totally absent, or deficient Obedience; is
as much as to assert that cutting down Trees, or stubbing them up for
Barrenness; is the same thing with their Fruitfulness. There is no such
miraculous virtue in these sufferings, as to rectify Obliquities into
Obedience, or to work so strange a transmutation in them, as to render them
like it, or equipollent to it. Let none therefore venture to infringe Penal
Laws, upon this vain persuasion, that the smart they shall endure, be it either
in corporal or pecuniary Penalties, may be surrogated into the place of real
Obedience; and by an adequate vicariousness so exactly fill up the room
thereof, as to be in any measure as good as that. It cannot be so for these
gross absurdities which thereupon would ensue.

First, It would change the use and utterly invert the Influence of Penalties.
They are applied as Sanctions to establish those Laws whereunto they are
annexed. And not only so, but to enforce the direct observance of them. But
were suffering of Penalties equal to Obedience; they would not only fail of
this use or end; but produce an effect clean contrary to it. For then instead
of ratifying and enforcing the respective Laws, to which they are appendent;
they would justify Delinquents in their most malicious contempts and
violations of the same. For let them break these Laws as heinously as they
please, it is but their undergoing the appointed punishments, and then it is all
one as if they had never broke them, as if they had faithfully kept them. And
so Penalties which are intended for the defense and conservation of Laws and
Government; would effectually work the subversion of both, by making way for
disorders inconsistent with either.

Secondly, Suffering of Penalties cannot possibly be equivalent to Obedience,
because it does not answer the Obligation of the Law, and is by no means fully
commensurate thereunto. Even slight Consideration will make any Man sensible,
that penal Laws have a double force or virtue in them: The one, preceptive or
directive, which binds to Duty: The other punitive and inflictive, which ties
to Penance, in case the Duty imposed be wilfully neglected. Whence it is
evident, that they who suffer by such Laws, cannot reckon their sufferings
equivalent to obeying them. Inasmuch as their sufferings imply such a failure,
as leaves the best part of these Laws unsatisfied and eluded. For therefore do
they fall under their punitive, because they slighted their preceptive force.
Which we must own to be far the best, as containing the noblest Obligation, an
Obligation to duty. To which if they had come up or regularly conformed, they
could never have been attaqued by the punitive strength or power thereof. And
that Penal Laws do primarily and chiefly oblige to Obedience, which I justly
call their noblest obligation (and so that Penalties affixed to them do only
enforce the Obligation) is clear from hence; in that the same Laws, were they
made to be not penal, but purely imperative; would still bind the Conscience as
firmly as ever.

Thirdly, Suffering of Penalties cannot be ranked with performing Obedience,
because it answers not the scope, and fulfils not the design of the Law. The
intent of the Law, is to make Men Cives bonos, good Subjects. But good Subjects
we cannot be, unless we obey those good Laws under which we live. But then who
can think they are obedient, who break wholesome Laws, and are punished for it?
Much less who can think this is real Obedience or equivalent to it?

Lastly, Suffering Penalties can hold no just proportion with Obedience, or be
in any measure like it, or comparable to it; because it does not excuse before
GOD. A Law is a Law because it is Obligatory. And therefore it is called Lex
(say some) a ligando, from binding. But the reason why Laws do bind is, because
they are made and promulgated by rightful Ligislators, who have curam
communitatis, the charge of the People over whom they preside, at least in the
work of Legislation. But whoever are placed in this capacity of (...), or
making Laws; while they exercise that Power, they stand in loco Dei, in GOD's
stead, and are to be looked upon as his Agents. And so the wholesome Laws they
enact, do not only oblige us in respect of men (as being drawn up by persons
fitly qualified, and that had plenam condendi potestatem, full power to make
them) but moreover in regard of GOD, to whom these Lawmakers had a special
relation. And consequently if so be we transgress these Laws, we do not offend
against man only, but GOD; whose Providence it was that brought us under these
Laws, and whose word requires us (so far as they are just and righteous) to
keep them. And hence it comes to pass, that our submitting to Laws in the
punitive effects or issues of them; cannot make us innocent or set us right
again in all respects. Indeed the ^enalties we endure, may discharge us as to
men, and place us out of their reach, that they shall be able to lay no more
hold upon us; but still till unfeigned Repentance comes and wipes it off, our
guilt will remain in the sight of GOD. And therefore suffering by penal Laws,
which leaves fresh and uncancel'd guilt behind it: can by no means be equal to
hearty Obedience, which keeps all guilt from entering upon us. Let none
therefore be ruled, let none be influenced by so vain a thought, as if the
sufferings we speak of, could absolve us from the transgressions for which we
suffer. It Is not only a vain but an evil thought, that. It will be so far from
acquitting us, that 'twill only betray us into more intanglements; while by
prompting and animating us on to Disobedience; in our Purses or our Bodies it
will make us pay dear for the sins of our Souls; which when we have done, shall
yet be set down, and stand in a black account against us, ti^l true Repentance
does wipe them out and abolish them.

But though none upon this or any other shallow or deceitful pretense, may
refuse to obey the King's Laws or Commands, I mean so long as they are good and
allowable: yet here a material Question may be put.

Suppose impious Laws should be made and imposed, and unrighteous commands
should be laid upon us; what must we do then? Must we go on to obey still? By
no means. For to such Laws and Commands, there is no Obedience due; that is, no
active Ob^dience. Yet in this case (mind what I say, and while ye live remember
it) there is not the least resistance to be made upon any terms. No, when we
have advanced as far in humble compliance, as with Innocence we can: then
unless we can quietly withdraw, we must suffer contentedly, if that be our Lot.
1 Ep. 2.19.
And this St. Peter calls enduring griefs, (...), for conscience toward GOD.
Which however it be a suffering, (...), wrongfully, or unjustly (as he says)
yet there is very great reason for it, and encouragement to it. Forasmuch as in
this sort of Patience we shall but tread in the steps of CHRIST, following
(...) the example which he left us: and moreover do a thing that will be (...)
(as the Context assures us) both acceptable to GOD, and rewardable by Him, and
this, among Men, is known by the Name of Passive Obedience.

Some would bear us in hand that there can be no such thing as Passive
Obedience. They are offended that is, and quarrel with the Phrase, accusing it
of plain contradiction (in terminis). And truly perhaps it will not be over
easy to give clear satisfaction to the captious concerning it. For how can one
obey, and yet at the same time suffer as disobedient? which the word Passive
Obedience, seems to import. But however we need not be so critical here, as to
engage in a nice and needless Logomacy, or strife about the word. Admit there
be Solecism and Incongruity in it, and that the Expression be somewhat forced
and chatechrestical. Yet sure it may pass as well as other vulgar Schemes of
speech, which if taken in a Literal or Grammatical strictness, would be of
every whit as uncouth a significancy. Yea, I nothing doubt but we speak as
intelligibly and as good propriety, when we say, Passive Obedience, as the best
of the Orators do in many of their terms, which because they are figurative are
accounted Elegant. Though this is no time, nor place, to make full
demonstration of so low an Assertion.

But a little to expedite it from cloudiness and ambiguity. I will lay down
this short, and rude, and hearty Description of Passive Obedience.

It is a voluntary or chosen sufferance of Severities, either from the Law, or
Supreme Magistrate, for our noncompliance with crooked or unwarrantable
Injunctions.

It is a sufferance of Severity. Otherwise why, or how Passive?

A voluntary or chosen sufferance. That is, as Misery is chosen before Sin: or
as of two Evils, we will and choose the least.

Either from the Law, or the Supreme Magistrate. And so it is Obedience. For
therefore it is called by that denomination, because it is a kind of Obedience
in one sense. Namely, an obeying the Magistrate, in the effects of his Wrath;
or the Law, in its penal force or Rigor: For that the one could not be obeyed
according to his will, nor the other according to its Precept or Letter. But
unless the Law, or chief Magistrate, or both of them at once, do direct and
impose the punitive Severities; we have no reason to bear them, because they
proceed from an incompetent Power. And so indeed the nature of our sufferings
would be quite changed. For though under the sense of them we could not but be
passive; yet our submitting to them, could not be reckoned Passive Obedience.
For that does imply that the Inflictions still come from an hand above us; from
an hand that has Sovereign Dominion over us.

For our Noncompliance with crooked and unwarrantable injunctions. For did we
comply, we need not suffer. And were not the Injunctions and Ordinances upon us
(by reason of some curvity or other in them) evil or unjustifiable; we need not
boggle at them or refuse them, nor indeed ought we; especially when our
recusancy will expose us to misery. And for these Reasons the sufferings of
Malefactors cannot be reputed Passive Obedience. Because they are involuntary
and fall not upon them for Noncompliance with evil Laws, but the violation of
good ones. Which states the difference between Passive Obedience, and suffering
for Disobedience making it most manifest. For in the One, we are Innocent; in
the Other Guilty. In the One, we smart for the prevention of Sin; in the Other,
for the perpetration of it. And so in the One, we are culpable and punished as
Delinquents; in the Other, calamitous and pityable as Martyrs.

Now if naughty Laws do urge and pinch us, and offer to drive us upon unlawful
things: this alone is the Obedience which we must practice under them, or in
reference to them. And the same Passive Obedience we must exercise or yield to
the Supreme Power, in case (that without or against the Laws) it should ever be
harsh or severe against us. In such circumstances there is no resisting, unless
with those known weapons of the Church; Holy Prayers and Tears. Never say this
is hard and heavy; never complain that flesh and blood cannot endure it. If we
be true Christians and loyal Subjects, we have Grace and Spirit in us to enable
us. And upon those Principles, we shall as naturally run this way at our LORD's
Command; as others do, or can go the contrary. For then we shall be thoroughly
sensible that this is our Duty, our necessary and indispensable Duty, whatever
some Pens upon incompetent grounds, and by trivial Arguments endeavor to
persuade. For if our lawful Sovereign come against us himself, or others
authorized by his Royal Commission, set upon us with violence; there is no
encountering them, or making head against them. If so be we can fly from them we
may; but in case we cannot, or will not do that, we have no other remedy but
Christian Patience; which we are duly to exercise, in quiet Submission to their
unkind attempts, and a sweet toleration of their rigidest inflictions. For we
are Subjects to an hereditary Imperial Crown. And if the rightful King who at
any time wears it, should strein the Government, and by vehement luxations
loosen our Laws, and disjoynt our well-knit and compacted Order; and then
(during this juncture) should lay most heavy burdens upon us: we must stand
under them courageously (unless we can innocently decline them) till Providence
is pleased to alleviate or remove them; though they be so ponderous as to crush
us to Death. We must not then fly in the face of his Authority, or meet his
Power with armed opposition. We must not rise up against the hand that strikes
us, much less go about to return its blows, and offer to repel its force with
fury. We must not dare to bandy or combine against our Prince (be he who or
what he will) nor chase away the grievances brought upon us (though never so
irksome) by acts of hostility. But (as I said before) we must slay for shelter,
where we can best find it; and if none can be had, be content without it. Yea,
if the fatal stroke it self should approach, we may not draw our Swords to ward
it off; but meekly expect it till it falls upon us, and then bear it with
equanimity and holy resolution; as believing it is time for us then to die,
when we can live no longer unless we rebel.

But is not this Doctrine, or would not the practice of it, be point blank
against the Law of Nature? By no means. In this case we are so far from
deviating from that Law, or going against it; that we act in a smooth
compliance with it, and in a direct and proper Obedience to it. For by the Law
of Nature, we not only may, but sometimes must choose to suffer a less evil to
preserve us from a greater, especially when it is the best and only means left
us, to effect that Preservation. Now divine Revelation having well assured us,
that there is another life to succeed this, infinitely better than this is; and
that he who saves his present life upon sinful terms, shall lose the future
happier one above: we may without any breach of the Law of Nature, yea with
real and laudable conformity to it, part with this Life, rather than keep it by
Sin, and forfeit that. Just as a Man may cut off his finger to save his Arm, or
cut off his Arm to save his Body: so we may lay down this temporal, to prevent
the loss of Eternal Life. And yet all the while (acting as Christians, upon the
sure Principles of revealed Religion) we shall do nothing repugnant to the Law
of Nature; nothing but what is consistent with it, and indeed enjoined and
required by it.

To suffer Death, I confess, is grievous and against Man's nature; but then to
suffer Damnation, is more intolerable and contranatural still. Yet we know how
the case is stated from Heaven: That if we resist the lawful Power (upon any
account) though to save our Life, we shall receive Damnation. If therefore we
be reduced to this miserable strait, that we must either die, or else save our
life by a sinful resistance, which will infallibly expose us to endless
Damnation; we must submit to Death, that we may keep our selves clear from that
damnable guilt. And so far shall we be from offering violence to the Law of
Nature by our doing thus; that there is no other way to fulfill that Law, in the
supposed Circumstances, but by this procedure. Which however sneaking and
pusillanimous it may seem with Men (who often view things by halves, and on the
wrong side) will yet be brave and generous in the Eyes of Angels; gallant and
Heroic in the sight of GOD. And though it may a little prejudice the Body, and
hasten the diminution of our present Being, by a short anticipation of our
inevitable change; it will be greatly beneficial to the Soul immediately, and
perfective (in conjunction with other Virtues) of our whole Nature, at last.

That for the Precept in the Text.

A very short glance upon the Prohibition, shall conclude my Discourse. Meddle
not with them that are given to change. Whatever it is that they would alter,
in way of Treason or Rebellion, meddle not with them; not with any of them; in
any manner, or in any measure. Be not of their number; come not in their (...)
Ne commisceare.
consults; do not abet them, do not encourage them; do not countenance them; do
not conceal them. They are wicked persons: they neither fear GOD nor the KING
(as the Text intimates,) their Sin is Read the 3d. part of the Homily against
wilful Rebellion.
great, and their punishment shall be grievous. They are no other but eldest
Sons of Lucifer, and so a double portion of their Fathers plagues they shall
inherit. Some that are fast asleep in Sin, may dream such wretches shall escape
with impunity: but any Delinquents shall sooner be connived at and spared than
these. Traitors fly high, and therefore their fall must needs be heavy. They
would not only shake the frame of Order; but blow it quite up and break it all
to pieces. They design not only to shatter the boughs, and to beat down the
fruits; but to lop off the arms, and dig up the roots of the Tree of
Government. In one word, they strike at the Thrones and Lives of Princes, and
so they assault the Majesty of GOD: And can we think that Heaven will put up
this? No, no? Justice will pursue them, and Vengeance will overtake them, and
pour down such Penalties on their prodigious Crimes, and shall be every way
answerable to their rank Malignity.

Remember Korah; he was a Peer or potent Man in Israel (Cousin-german to Moses
and Aaron) but was or would have been one of the (...) or Rebel changers in my
Text: and what became of him? Why, the Earth clave in sunder and swallowed him
up alive; and he was never seen above ground since.

Or if a Gospel-example will be more affecting, cast your Eyes upon Judas. He
was the best Traitor for us, that ever lived. His cruel fact was kindness to
Men, and his perfidiousness turned to universal Benefit. But what was the
reward of his officious Treachery? Why, He was made to punish the Treason he
committed; and as if no hands else had been bad enough for the work, was given
up to become his own Executioner.

But put case, the evil Men I speak of, should be so good natured as to spare
their own lives. And say the patient ground should be able to bear them, and
they should not sink down into the hideous mouth of the yawning Earth. Yet may
not the Ax or the Halter meet them? Or if they can get out of the reach of the
Law; must they not die soon, and be plunged into the Abyss of eternal
punishment? That Is ten thousand times more than all we can say or think
besides. Yet so it is recorded touching one of those unhappy Creatures now
mentioned, that when he died, Acts 1.25.
he went (...), to his own place. And where should the Son of perdition have
property, unless in Hell? And of the other we have account, that when he took
his leave of this present World, and dropped a living morsel into the frightful
jaws of the gaping ground; he went down vivus in infernum, quick into Hell.
Numb. 16.33.
A sad Story to be told of any: but nothing more true of all Rebellious
impenitent Changers.

And yet I have one higher Instance still, of the formidable portion of such
lewdly insolent and presumptuous Offenders. Angels themselves were undone by
the Evil we now treat of, and that wholly and finally without Recovery. They
tumbled into Hell, and that even out of Heaven it self, by being given to
change. Those Morning Stars, which once shined above in happiest splendors,
being incrusted with the worst of sinful Maculaes, that of proud aspiring
Treason; were instantly absorpt: and having lost their pristin strength and
luster, are now become, in St. Jude's phrase, (...) Planets, or wandering stars.
Which like a company of lost and forlorn things, desolately rove and straggle
up and down, in these wild and black inferior Regions, never more to fix their
woeful Errantry. Nor do they only haunt more solitary spaces, and like poor
forsaken dejected Beings, wander through the wide and melancholy Deserts of
this sublunary World; where perhaps no other Creatures ever come (all which
ranging Liberty of theirs, is worst Confinement:) but moreover are racked with
incessant fears, and torn with anguish of incurable Despair; and excruciated
with bitter pangs and uneasinesses, in all their subterraneous or aereal
ramblings.

This, and much more, is signified to the Church, where S. Peter gives notice
that GOD spared not the Angels, 1 Ep. 2.4.
but cast them down to Hell, for rebelling, that is, against him their
SOVEREIGN.

Thus it is evident, That neither Jew, nor Christian, nor the Angels in Heaven,
could avoid that Venegeance which is due to Treason. From the severity of its
Punishment, let us learn the greatness and danger of the Sin: and so not meddle
with them that (in way of Sedition) are given to change. And that we may not,
let us Fear the King; and in order to that, let us Fear the LORD. To whom be
all Fear, and Love, and Honor, World without End. Amen.

FINIS.

