THE Resurrection of Loyalty and Obedience, out of the Grave of REBELLION: By
the sacred Force of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which have lain as
dead, and out of mind, for diverse years; and here raised up out of the dust,
and discovered in their great inviolable Force and Power unto the PEOPLE.

For the Humbling of those that are Guilty of the Breach of them; The quelling
of Rebellious Principles, and excitement unto the Duties of Obedience and
Subjection, according to the Tenor of the said OATHS.

I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath
of God.

Eccles. 8.2. And all the Congregation made a Covenant with the King in the
House of God, and he said unto them. Behold, the Kings Son shall Reign, etc.

2. Chron. 23 3. For the transgression of a land, many are the Princes thereof,
but by a man of understanding and knowledge, the state thereof shall be
prolonged.

Proverb. 28.2. LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for William Shears in Bedford
street near Coven-Garden, at the Blew Bible, 1660.

To His Eccellencie the Lord General Monck, General of all the Forces of
England, Scotland and Ireland: The reviver of the dying hopes of these
distressed Nations, and of the afflicted Churches therein.
May it please your Excellency,
IF the Lord were as forgetful of our Obligations as we are, or if he did
remember our sins no better than we do remember duties: or if our
unsensiblenesse of our iniquities were the cure of our maladies; or if there
were any security to our souls in our security, in our transgressions; I might
expect with some justice to be censured, as troublesome and impertinent, in
going about to revive these Oaths, that have lain so long for dead in these
Nations; and have been for so many years buried in the grave of Oblivion; or to
amaze or disquiet the Nation with the noise and the clamor of them: but when I
have considered how dangerous it is for people to sleep by the Devils Opium,
and how much better it is, that a people should be troubled, than that they
should be destroyed; and that they should be desturbed out of their most
pleasant slumbers and dreams, than that they should enjoy their quiet with the
dreadful flames of Gods wrath and indignation, menaced against a perjured
People about their ears, ready to seize upon them, both to their temporal and
eternal destruction. I cannot but conclude it to be much safer for them, and
much more tolerable unto them, to be awaked to Repentance, by the voice of
these Oaths, and by the discovery of the Obligation, that thereby lies upon
this Nation; and of the grievous sins that have been committed, and are still
too much justified against them, than that they should be awaked by the
surprizal of that dreadful judgment of God, which hangs over them for such
high transgressions. The law of Oaths, is one of the most awful, and most
inviolable precepts that God has given to the world, and may seem to have as
much of the fire of Mount Sinah in it, as any commandment of either Table. The
second Commandment has indeed a dreadful stream and flood of flaming wrath
running down upon the transgressors of it, from generation to generation; but
it is allayed as it were, with a flood of mercy, unto those that love the Lord,
and show their love in obedience thereunto.

The fifth Commandment, which is the Command of obedience unto those powers,
that God has set over us in the world, which is the importance of these
Oaths, is the first Commandment, with promise, and sweetened with the assurance
of Gods blessing, upon those that shall perform their duties thereunto. But the
third Commandment is fortified with a wall of fire; wherein God threatens not
to hold them guiltless, that takes his name in vain. The offense whereof, is
most grievously committed in the dreadful and heinous sins of perjury, which
is the mark of that flying roll and curse, that goes forth over the face of
the whole earth, to consume those that offend therein, Zech. 5.2, 3, 4. in so
much (that as Wonarinus observes, out of the Book of the Jews, concerning the
regative Precept) they were wont to terrify those that were to take an Oath
with these expressions, Scito totum orbem horruisse in illa hora in qua Deus
dixit non assumes nomen Dei in vanum, etc. Know thou that the whole world
trembled at the hour wherein God said, Thou shall not take the Name of God in
vain: and all the sins which are written in the law, God punishes according to
the merit: But for this sin of perjury, he punishes posterity; the punishments
of others sins are sometimes suspended, but this is speedily punished. Perjury
consumes and destroys even those things which fire cannot consume: Since
therefore there is so much danger in the sins committed against these Oaths;
exposing not only to the judgment of the second Commandment, as they are the
most horrid sort of sins against that, and to the forfeiture of the blessing of
the fifth Commandment, as they are sins of disobedience against that
Commandment; it can be no way safe for the people of this land, to be suffered
to sleep in such grievous sins: I hope therefore, there needs no further
Apology to secure me from the just displeasure of any, for that I have
endeavored to rouse up the people of this Land, by the publishing of these
Oaths, to a deep sense of the great and heinous sins that they lie under, by
the violation of these Oaths, and to a return unto those duties that they
require of them: What I have done in the Explication of them, and in the
Observations upon them, is in order to the discovering of the meaning and force
of them; wherein I intend not to impose upon the judgment of any, but desire
they may be received according to the evidence wherewith they are offered;
which I hope will appear to be sufficient, to engage unto Repentance for these
evil practices, that have been acted in these Nations, and are yet still on
foot against these sacred Obligations, and to better performances to the
future; and to excite your Excellency, whom God has raised up to be an
instrument of his glory, and of mercy unto these Nations; to give your
countenance to this my loyal and religious endeavor, and your assistance to
the desired effect thereof: Which will be a means not only to increase your
Honor amongst men; but to bring more and more blessings from God, upon you and
your Posterity; by the gracious work that you shall do by delivering this
Nation from so great a Sin, and from so great a Wrath that hangs over them for
it: which is the earnest desire of him, who desires to approve himself,

An Humble and Faithful Servant to your Excellency, and a sincere Honourer of
your Worthy Proceedings. T. W.

The Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; which heretofore was taken by every
Member of Parliament, and all other Persons, before they were admitted to any
Office of Truth.
The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual and Ecclesiastical
things (or causes) as temporal: and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
Pre-eminence or authority eclesiastical or spiritual within this realm: and
therefore I do utterly remounce and forsake all foreign jurisdiction, powers,
superiorities and authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear
faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his heirs and lawful
successors, and (to my power) shall assist and defend all jurisdiction,
privilege, pre-eminence, and authority granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his heirs and successors, and united and annexed to the imperial
Crown of the Realm. So help me God, etc.

The Oath of Allegiance, etc.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare,
in my Conscience, before God and the World, That Our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, is Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by
any Authority of the Church or See of Rome; or by any other means (with any
other) has power or authority to Depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to Authorize any Foreign Prince to
invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of
their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty; or to give license or leave to
any of them to bear Arms raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State, Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects
within his Majesty's Dominions; Also I do swear from my heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration or sentence of Excommunication or deprivation,
made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his sucessors, or by
any authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his seed,
against the said King, his heirs or successors, or any absolution of the said
subjects from their obedience: I will bear faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, and his Heirs and Successors; and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason
or color of any such sentence, or declaration, or otherwise; and will do my
best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs, and
Successors, all Treasons, and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or
hear of to be against him or any of them; and I do further swear, that I do
from my heart, abhor, detest and abjure, as impious and Heretical, this
damnable doctrine and position, that Princes, which be Excommunicated and
deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed or Murdered of their subjects, or any
other whatsoever; and I do believe, and in my conscience am resolved, that
neither the Pope, nor any other person whatsoever, has power to Absolve me of
this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority,
to be lawfully ministered unto me; and do renounce all pardons, and
dispensations to the contrary; And these things I do plainly and sincerely
acklnowledge and swear, according to these express words by me spoken; and
according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same words,
without any equivocation or montall evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever;
And I do make this recognition and acknowledgment, heartily, willingly, and
truly upon the true faith of a Christian; So help me God, etc.

Some brief Observations concerning the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.
Discovering the great obligation that lies upon the Consciences of the People
of this Land, binding to the performance of them, and the great and horrid
Impieties that have been committed in their violation.
Observation I.

THat of all Obligations, that it is possible for the Creatures to lay upon
themselves, there is none more sacred, none more inviolable, none of more
dreadful consequence in the violation, none of greater importance to Religion
toward God, or to the good and peace of humane society; than an Oath. It being
an appeal to the great God of Heaven and Earth, as a Witness and a Judge of
the Truth of our Assertions, and the fidelity of our Promises; together with an
Obligation of our selves, to the forfeiture of his Mercy and Favor, and to the
Curse and Judgment of God upon our souls, in case we deal fraudulently and
unfaithfully with him.

Obser. II. That a public Oath that is made by the public Authority of a
Nation, to bind the people of the Land, is of so great force and power, that
it does not only bind those that made it, and have taken it, but also all the
people of the Nation, and not only those that are then in being, when the said
Oaths were made and taken, but also all their succeeding Posterity, that are
within the design, and the purpose of the said Oaths; as does eminently appear
by the force and power that was in the Oath, which was made and taken by
Joshuah and the Princes of Israel, in the 9. chap. of Joshuah, which bound not
only Joshuah and the Princes, who made and took the said Oath; but also all
the people of the land, and all their succeeding posterity: as is manifest by
comparing that passage in the 9. of Joshuah with the 21. chap. of the 2. book
of Samuel, from the 1. verse, to the end of the 14 where the breach of the Oath
of Joshuah and the Princes by Saul in slaying of the Gibeonites was punished in
the time of David with three years Famine upon the land and people of Israel.

Obser. III. That though there be many infirmities and miscarriages committed
in the making and taking of these public Oaths, and although the things that
they oblige unto, prove to be against the Interest of the people; and although
the breach or violation thereof, has the countenance of fair and specious
intents and ends, seemingly conducing unto the public good of the people; yet
neither all nor any of those pretentions does either make void the Obligation
of those Oaths, nor deliver the people from the great guilt of the sin which is
committed in the violation thereof; nor secure them from the dreadful Judgment
of God? As appears clearly by the severe proceeding of Almighty God, in the
judgment that he sent upon the people of Israel, for the breach of that Oath
that was made unto the Gibeonites, notwithstanding that it was obtained by a
palpable lie and falsehood, assumed rashly without consulting with God: Proved
to be against a direction that God himself gave unto the people, for the
destruction of those very Gibeonites, amongst the rest of the Nations that
inhabited the land of Canaan, and expressly prohibiting them to make any
Covenant with them, or to show them favor, as appears, Deuteronomy. 7. v. 1, 2. and
was manifestly against the consent and interest of the people, and was broken
by Saul, in his zeal to the house of Israel and Judah, as appears, 2 Samuel 21.
viz. which yet was punished with so great a judgment, as three years Famine
upon the children of Israel, and could not be expiated without the destruction
of diverse of the posterity of Saul

Obser. IV. That the custom of Oaths made unto Princes by the people, is no
act of unlawful Tyranny or Oppression, but has its foundation and warrant in
the word of God, as in the 2 Kings 11. v. 4.17. Where Athaliah had usurped the
Kingdom, was deposed and slain, and the people were engaged in an Oath and
Covenant unto Joshuah the lawful Successor in the Kingdom, by the means of
Jehoiada the Priest: and in the 8. of Ecclesiastes v. 2. Obedience unto the
King is required of the people, in regard of the Oath of God; and in the 17. of
Ezekiel v. 13, 14, 15, 16. as also in the 18, 19, 20. verses of the same
Chapter, you find God severely threatening the breach of that Oath of Fidelity
that was taken by Zedekiah unto the King of Babylon, notwithstanding he was an
enemy to the truth of God, and a great oppressor of the people.

Obser. V. That the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance must needs be allowed to
have in them all that sacred force and binding power that has been before
mentioned, to bind the people of these Nations, and all their succeeding
posterity, either to the just and faithful performance of them, or to the
undergoing of the dreadful Judgment of Gods wrath and eternal indignation,
which is invoked upon the breach of them, if it be not prevented by timely
repentance, and that upon these several Considerations.

1. Because these oaths were made and taken by the public authority of these
Nations, who in that and other public acts did represent the whole people of
the land.

2. Because they are not avoydable by those infirmities that have been formerly
noted in the oath of Joshua, and the Princes of Israel, which as they cannot be
imputed unto these Oaths, so neither if they were imputable unto them, would
they be invalidated thereby.

3. Because these oaths appears now clearly enough by the sad consequences of
them violations not to stand opposite to the interest of the People, but to
conduce exceedingly thereunto, and if it were otherwise; the validity of an
Oath does not depend upon the compliance with politic interest, as has been
before showed, but stands firm and binding with a non obstante there against,
so that no pretense of the mistake or change of interest can be pleaded in
bar to the obligation of these Oaths.

4. Because the force of these Oaths cannot die of age, no more then the Oath
made unto the Gibeonites did, in all that time, which interceded between Joshua
and Saul, but are still in as great and full force and power for the binding of
conscience, as if they had been made and taken but yesterday or this very hour.

5. Because no specious pretenses of the good of the people to be obtained by
the breach of them, nor fair intention of those that violate them, can either
justify them or discharge from their obligation, as is manifest in the case
before propounded,

So that by all that has been said, these Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance do
remain at this day in their full force and vigor, to bind the people of this
land, and their posterity unto the King and his Heirs and Successors, to all
intents and purposes, for which they were first made, and that under the
penalty of eternal destruction, if they shall wilfully continue in the breach
thereof.

Obser. VI. Observe that no succeeding Oath, or Covenant, Protestation, or
Engagement whatsoever, that does either contradict or limit a precedent lawful
Oath, can either be lawfully taken, or being taken, is of any force at all,
either to make void, or diminish, or circumscribe the force of the foregoing
lawful Oath: For Oaths are not like Wills and Testaments, which being but the
free declarations of the present wills of them, that make them are controulable
by any succedent declarations, or Testaments, so that the last Will does
prevail against all that have gone before it; but Oaths and promises and
obligations, whereby we bind our selves to others, whether God or man, put such
limits and bounds upon our wills, that we have no power to contradict or limit
them by any succedent Oaths, or obligations whatsoever. But the first lawful
Oath stands firm and inviolable against all that shall betaken afterward, in
the whole, and in every part, and the full extent of the tenor thereof:
otherwise an Oath were not an end of all strife, as it is declared to be, Heb.
6.16. nor were there indeed any valid security in a promissory Oath, since a
succeeding Oath to the contrary, or setting limits, conditions or exceptions to
the former might renew the strife, and destroy or diminish the security
thereof; so that no Engagement, Covenant, Protestation or Oath of Abjuration,
contrary to the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance can be taken, without an
horrid sin against God, exposing the soul unto his eternal wrath. Or can it be
at all of any force against them, though they should be never so often taken:
neither can that limitation in the Covenant, wherein they oblige themselves to
the preservation of the King, in the maintenance of the true protestant
Religion, the privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject, limit
or abate the force of those absolute obligations, whereby all Subjects are
obliged to the King and his lawful Heirs and Successors, which are upon them by
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; but as such limitations look very
unhandsomely; so they have not at all any force of abatement in them, but ought
to be abhord, disclaimed and rejected by all honest Subjects and Christians, as
an evil gap opened to rebellion and sedition to those that have a mind to make
such an evil use thereof, under pretense that the King does (that which indeed
he ought not to do) either depart in any thing from the true Religion, or
violate the Privileges of parliament, or the Liberties of the Subject.

Obser. VII. That those forementioned Oaths, as they have a binding influence
upon all; so especially, do they bind those, who have personally and solemnly
taken them, and are enjoined thereunto, by the laws of the Land, and must have
a peculiar influence obligatory upon them in the execution of those Offices or
places, and in the performance of those Acts and Operations, which they do by
law enter upon, with the solemn taking of those Oaths, so that whatever they
shall do therein contrary thereunto, are not only grievous and perjured sins,
but are to be looked upon in religious reason, as utterly void, and of none
effect, as those wherein they exceeded their limits, and broke the bounds of
that power and authority which was committed unto them, which were
circumscribed unto their operations as the sphere of their activity, by those
Oaths which they took at their entrance thereupon; for it is neither religious
nor reasonable, that any man or society of men should have power to act against
the lawful Oaths that they have taken; and then if we remember that the
lawful Members of the long Parliament, did as they were enjoined by the law of
the Nation, take the Oath of Supremacy or Allegiance, every one of them
personally, at or before their admittance into the House; and that in order to
their entrance upon their power, to act as members of the Parlia. of England;
it will be easy to conclude; first, how sinful, and then how altogether
invalid and forcelesse all those acts that they have done, or shall do, must
needs be, which are or shall be any way contrary, or in the least derogatory to
the aforesaid Oaths; and how great work there is for Humiliation, both to God
and his substitute; for many and sad things that have been done by some of
them, as highly and diametrically contrary to those Oaths, as it is possible
for actions to be contrived. The cry is so loud, I need not instance; but now
to come a little closer to the view of these Oaths, and to discover what they
import and oblige unto.

Obser. VIII. That in the first clause of the Oath of Supremacy, the King is
utterly and conscientiously declared and acknowledged upon Oath, to be the
only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions
and Countries, as well in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things or causes as
Temporal: Mark the supreme Governor, therefore he has none above him, not but
that he and his great Counsel together may have power to do more than he can
do alone; but that none can act above him in opposition unto him. Secondly, The
only supreme Governor; therefore, there is none equal unto him: This admits
of no rival in the Throne, this excludes not others from Government, as his
subordinate Instruments; nor does it exclude others from being necessary
assistants unto him in some acts of Government: as the making of new Laws, and
the abrogation of those that have been already made; but it does exclude all
others from the supremacy, from being enabled to act above him, or contrary
unto him, or without him, or his allowance in those or any other acts of
Government; and this supremacy of Government in him is solemnly acknowledged in
this Oath (which is both a law and an Oath of the Nation) to extend unto this
Realm, and to all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries, and to all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things and causes, as well as temporal; that is to
say, as far as God has committed either of them, unto humane and secular
powers; and as to the charge and oversight of religious matters, to see that
they be rightly ordered and managed by those that are the proper instruments of
Religious Ordinances; and that the true Faith be embraced, and Religious Duties
purely practiced by the people in his Dominions and to afford his protection,
defense and encouragement thereunto, and to take order that the offices of the
Church be rightly established, and furnished according to the rule of God, and
that wholesome laws be provided to those ends, and decency and order be observed
in Church Discipline, and religious performances.

Obser. IX. That wherein the said Oath there is a religious disclaimer and
renouncing of all spiritual or ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority within this Realm; it does reasonably suppose that
there is none within the Realm that has any such pre-eminence above the King
in those matters, who is before declared to be the only supreme.

Obser. X. That where the people of the Land do promise from henceforth, That
is for ever to bear faith and true allegiance to the Kings Highness, his heirs
and lawful successors; it binds to obedience, subjection and fidelity, not
only to the King in present being, but unto his heirs and lawful successors,
and does bind us to them and every of them, in opposition to al violent
usurpers and unlawful intruders into the Government of this Nation, that can
plead no just establishment from the known and fundamental Laws of this
Nation, as are all such that do either by fraud or violence intrude themselves
into the power of Govenrment.

XI. Whereas this only binds the people of the Land to their power (that is
the utmost of their power) to assist and defend all jurisdictions, privilege,
pre-eminence and authority granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his
heirs and Successors, and united and annexed to the imperial Crown of this
Realm; it does highly engage all Officers, Parliament-members, Generals,
Commanders, Soaldiers, and all the members of this Kingdom in their several
capacities, readily and diligently to afford their dutiful help and assistance
to defend the King in being from all hurt and violence, and to maintain his
state, government and dignity against all opposers whatsoever, foreign or
intestine, in like manner to defend the person, life, liberty of his Heirs, and
lawful Successors, and to maintain and assert the said royal privileges and
preheminences unto them, and every of them, and in case they be fallen into any
damage, or suffer any wrong or disparagement in any of them; it is then the
duty unto which all people are engaged by the sacred force of this Oath, to use
the utmost of their power, according to their several abilities, to restore,
recover and right them against all force and violence under which they suffer,
which does painly show what is required of all people, and especially of those
that have power in their hands at this time, for the deliverance and restoring
of our afflicted and oppressed Sovereign, and how highly they are obliged
thereunto; and then more especially, when God does by his signal and wonderful
providence admonish them of, and lead them on unto their duties.

Observations concerning the Oath of Allegiance.
1. OBserve, That the Nation by this Oath, does declare, before God and the
world; the power of kingly Government, is that which is established by Law in
this Nation; and over that and all other the Kings Dominions, and that therefore
the introducing of another form of Government, is contrary to the Law and
Constitution of this Nation, which the people are bound to maintain.

2. That this Regal and Kingly office is seated personally in the King for the
time being, who according to the Law of this Nation is said never to die, but
is presently upon his death revived, as to this kingly right and office in him
also, who is the next heir to the Crown.

3. That by the express words also of this Oath, the Nation and the People
thereof, does not only declare; That the said King for the time being is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and all other his Majesty's dominions
and Countries, and therefore not a King of courtesy, or durante been placito:
during pleasure; no nor yet quamdiu se been gesserit, as long as he shall carry
himself well in his office, and be free from exception from the multitude, or
from any others, who will take upon them to be his Judges: for then indead he
were not like to be permanent; since there is ^^^hing more easy than for a
people to be persuaded that they are not well governed, as judicious Mr. Hooker
has long ago told us: and as long as there is pride and ambition, and
inordinate affections in men's hearts, there will be discontented spirits
amongst a people, that will be ready to raise seditious clamours and
accusations against the Ruler: Besides that a Government of a people is
attended with so many difficulties, that there must needs be failings, and some
real miscarriages: In so much, that a people that will bear with no
infirmities, nor miscarriages in Governors, must upon the matter resolve to
endure none at all, and there is no miscarriage equal unto that. But the King
is by this Oath acknowledged and declared to have a lawful right of Government
in him, and then whatsoever force is used to divest him of his power, or to
disable or bar him from the possession or exercise thereof, is true violence,
and the exercise of might against right, and such as flies in the face of God,
who is the God of Justice and Righteousness, and the great asserter and
maintainer of the right of Kings, as that which is under him, the safeguard and
security of all other inferior rights and proprieties, so that no success of
violent and illegal practices or enterprises, can be justly pleaded in bar
against this Ruler, we will justify that frantic axiom or resolution of the
Son of Beliall, in Wisdom c. 2. v. 11. Let our strength be the Law of
righteousness; for that which is feeble, is found to be nothing worth, and this
right of Kings is established by the word of Christ himself, who is the King of
Kings, Math. 22.21. and is declared to be very consistent with the right of
God. Give therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods; where the right of Caesar is asserted by Christ himself,
though he was an Heathen, and an enemy to the Gospel. And however that of
Ezekiell 1.27. (as the verses are numbered in our Bibles) is interpreted of the
right of Christ. Yet it may seem to be applied in some sort by the wonderful
operations of Divine providence in this Nation, at this time, unto our present
affairs and concernments, and to the business we have in hand; I will
overturne, overturne, overturne it; until he come whose right it is: and I
will give it him; I am sure it stareth or at least supposes that there is a
right of Government, and of the Kingly office, and this is of so strong and
adamantine a temper; that no Steel nor sword can cut it or destroy it?

4. It is declared by this Oath, that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other,
has any Power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his
Majesty's kingdoms or dominions, or to authorize any foraign Prince to invade
or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of their
allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear arms, raise rumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majestyes
subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Where it is observed, that the intent of the Oath, is to secure the King of
the inviolable right and safety of his Government of the obedience and
allegiance of his people against attempts of deposition by his subjects against
Rebellion and taking up Arms by his subjects against him, as also against
foreign invasions; and the said Oath declares, that the Subjects cannot be
authorized unto these undutifull and disloyal practices against the King,
neither by the Pope nor any other with him (and therefore it is supposed and
employed) not by any other without him, which inferrs thus much, that none,
neither the Pope, nor See of Rome, nor any other, has any Power to depose the
King, to dispose of his Dominions, or to discharge the Subjects of their
obedience or allegiance to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them whosoever they are, either single or together to do that which it is
supposed a fortiori, without such license, they have no Power of themselves to
do: viz. to bear Arms, raise Tumules, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, etc. Whereby this Oath, and
therein the Conscience of the Nation, does upon so dreadful an Obligation
disclaim and disavow all Power, to depose the Kings of this Nation in any
whatsoever. As also all taking up Arms, Rebellion and Disobedience against
him; as wicked and abominable, and contrary to the allegiance of Subjects,
which is asserted in this Oath: nor is it imaginable that the intent of those
that made this Oath, For the security of the King and his Government did mean,
that themselves or any others in their capacity should take upon them the
wicked pretense of any such power, which they do here so much abominate in the
Pope and others.

Obser. V That the Subjects of this Kingdom in this Oath, do swear from their
heart, not to admit of any Absolution of themselves from their obedience to the
King, but (as the very words of the Oath import) notwithstanding any absolution
of the said subjects from their Obedience (who ever they he that should take
upon them to give it them, much less is it to be supposed, that they can
Absolve themselves) to bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, and not
only to him in being, but to his Heirs and Successors; and the world knows who
it is that the Law and Custom of this Nation states to be the Heir and
Successor of the King, even the eldest Son of the Predecessor.

Obser. VI. That this National Oath, does bind the people of this Nation, in
the very express words thereof, to defend Him and Them (that is, the King and
his Heirs and Successors, immediately before mentioned) to the uttermost of
their power (words of a very severe and exact importance, admitting of no
negligence, coldness, or excuses) against all Conspiracies and Attempt
whatsoever, (mark and tremble to think how this has been violated) which shall
be made against His or Their Persons, their Crown and Dignity; by reason or
color of any such sentence or declaration (as is before mentioned of the Pope
or See of Rome) or otherwise, which does expressly obliege the subjects to
appear for the defense of the King, of his Person and Government, against all
attempts, against them by any whatsoever, or upon any pretenses soever.

Ob. VII. That the people of this Nation are highly obliged in the importance
of this Oath with their best endeavor to disclose, and make known unto his
Majesty (in being) and to his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous
conspiracies, that they shall know or hear of, to be against the King, or any
of his Heirs and Successors: Where the conspiracies which are against the King
and his Successors have the style of Treasons and Traitorous conspiracies, for
the Epithet or Title or Traitorous is not to be understood as a mark of
distinction, but of aggravation; and all such the people of this land are bound
by thy Oath to reveal unto the King and his Successors, with their best
endeavor whenever they hear of them, or have any knowledge of them, to the
intent, without all doubt, that they may be prevented; and the contrivers and
actors brought to condign punishment: and therefore all concealing of such
things, and much more all centriving, and acting of them, or complying with
them, or abetting of them, is gross perjury against this Oath, as well as
treason against the King, and his Heirs and successors.

Obser. VIII. That in this Oath the people do with this sacred obligation
profess, an hearty abhorring, detesting, and abjuration of that doctrine and
position, as impious, heretical and damnable; that princes which be
excommunicated and deprived by the Pope, may be deposed and murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever; which does undoubtedly disclaim and abjure
all deposing and murdering of Kings by their Subjects or others, as a
practice, as impious, heretical, and damnable as any such Doctrine, whether
they be excommunicated and deprived by the Pope, or no: Unless any shall be so
mad and wicked as to think that their Kings may be murdered or deposed by them
or others, because they are not excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, as if
Princes stood in need of the Popes deprivation or excommunication to secure
them from deposition, or being murdered by their Subjects; and then it is
obvious enough to any man's consideration, how sad and desperate, how impious,
heretical, damnable and perjurious against the faith and Oath of the Kingdom:
The mistake and miscarriage of some has been of late (who would have been
therein also examples unto others) and those too I think, that took this very
Oath, who instead of abjuring the deposing and murdering of the King, have
abjured the King himself, and thereby (with a monster of wickedness) have sworn
down the awful and lawful Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, their own Covenant
binding them to the Kings posterity; the Protestation binding to maintain and
defend, according to the duty of Allegiance, together with the Laws of God and
man, and all that not only justice and righteousness, but even mercy,
compassion, and gratitude, and thankfulness, which binds the people of this
land unto his Majesty.

And withal it may be full easily discovered, in the view of this Oath, how
wickedly forward some instruments and factours of the Jesuits amongst us, that
thought not sit to stay for a sentence of excommunication or deprivation from
the Pope, but have acted these horrid things without it, that they have done,
to the reproach of the Christian profession, and the shame and scandal of the
protestant Religion, and of this Nation; I am sorry that it is become so
necessary as it is, to deal so plainly with them in this matter; but it is of
great concernment unto them, and us in order to their salvation, that they
should be admonished of their miscarriage, that we may not own their guilt by
our silence, when the world does so much cry out against them, and that they
may, if it be possibly, repent, and be saved, which I do earnestly beg of the
Lord for them.

IX. Observe, that this national Oath, does absolutely disclaim all power in
the Pope, or in any other to absolve the people from this Oath, or any part
thereof, and does renounce all pardons, and dispensations to the contrary, as
also all equivocation or mental reservation whatsoever, and all this upon the
engagement of the true faith of a Christian.

Lastly observe, that in that dreadful expression in the close of both these
Oaths, So help me God, which is uttered with the hand upon the Gospel, and
sealed, as it were, with kissing that holy Book, our Interest in Gods help and
Salvation by the Gospel is, as it were pawned and engaged for out fidelity
therein. By all this then that has been said, it is clear and evident how
highly the people of this Nation are engaged, to perform all the duties of
these Oaths unto the present King: How wicked those actions have been, that
have been managed against his Father and himself? What a sad guilt of perjury
there is upon this Nation? And how necessary it is, there should be a public
Humiliation for this, as well as for other grievous sins in this Nation.

FINIS.

