THE Baptized Turk, OR A NARRATIVE Of the happy Conversion of Signior Rigep
Dandulo, THE Only Son of a Silk Merchant in the Isle of TZIO, from the
Delusions of that great Impostor Mahomet, unto the Christian Religion: AND Of
his Admission unto Baptism by Mr. GUNNING at Excester-house Chapel the 8th of
November. 1657.

Drawn up by THO. WARMSTRY, D.D.

Psalm. 68.31. -- The Morians Land shall soon stretch out her hands to God.
London, Printed for J. Williams, T. Garthwait in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms at the lower end of Chancery Lane near the
inner-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet, 1658.

To the Right Honorable The Countess of Dorset, The Honorable The Lord Gorge,
And the Worshipful Philip Warwick Esquire; Witnesses at the Baptism of Signior
DANDULO the Convert.
Right Honorable, Honorable and Worshipful,
TRue Honor is the splendour of Virtue and holiness, and where it has its just
derivation and place, it is a shadow of that sacred combination of Greatness
and Goodness which are originally conjoined, and even the same in God himself,
and which should never be separated in the Creatures; indeed all true Greatness
is the issue of Goodness, if it be rightly begotten, and then like a good
Child it is ordained to be the Nurse of its own Mother, it being dispensed by
God unto the Sons and Daughters of men, to be an advantage and encouragement,
as well as an engagement unto virtuous, honorable and generous undertakings.
Of which, however the blear-eyed and doting world is mistaken, there are none
so truly and eminently glorious as those that are conversant in Religion and
divine Worship, which as it is the highest end that God did, or could aim at in
the creation of Man; so it must therefore needs be the greatest eminency and
perfection, that the generations of men are capable of; for every thing is by
so much more excellent, by how much the more it is advanced toward the scope
and design of its being, and draws nearer (if we may so speak where there is
no comparison or proportion to be found) unto him who is the sum of all that
perfection which is in the accumulation of all Greatness and Goodness together;
and truly earthly Honor is then in its increment and exaltation, when it is
made the ornament of Religion and Godliness, or rather is adorned by it. When
the rays of Eminency of Birth, Place or Reputation wherewith God shines upon
persons of Dignity and Honor, reflect back again in holy gleams of heavenly
love to God, and holy beams of illustration upon his Worship and Ordinances,
and when they raise that holy return unto God that was in David's soul at the
dedication of his house, Psalm. 30.1. I will extol thee, O Lord, because thou
have lifted me up, and not made my foes to triumph over me: And certainly this
is the greatest end for which God bestows Honor upon the greatest men, that
they may be the more conspicuous, and the more exemplary in the service and
adoration of God, and not be as too many in our Age and Nation, like unthankful
clouds, obscuring the Sun that raised them; or like the Moon in the Dragons
Tail eclipsing that glory from whence she receives all her light. It is
therefore the greatest advancement that you can give to your State and Dignity
to let it shine in the Sanctuary of the Lord, that you may by your holy and
eminent patterns help to undeceive the besotted World, that looks upon Offices
of Religion as if they were a business fit only for those that are of a low
condition; that you may make them know that Crowns and Diadems, and Robes of
Honor ate never so resplendent as when they are cast before the Throne of the
great God: How amiable was it to see you of late as so many Stars in your
several spears and degrees of Glory, shining as a propitious constellation at
the new birth of this our Convert, when you were Witnesses at his Baptism! and
I hope you were orient and ascendent at that hour, and then I need not doubt
but you had your happy influence, as well in the procurement of a spiritual
blessing upon his Soul, as you honorable Madam have been special and noble in
taking care for his supportance and encouragement. And I wish you may never
want the milk of the divine breast of that God unto whose newborn Child you
are become so bountiful a Nurse; wherein you have provided not only for him,
but for the honor of the Christian, yea of the poor English Church, and for
the encouragement of others to come in to the embracement of Gods Truth, in the
entire reliance upon the divine mercy, which I wish you may see effectual in a
happy confluence of many multitudes unto the Gospel of Christ, to the advancing
of the reward of your piety from his hand whose abundant blessing I wish upon
you all, who am,

Honored Madam, Noble Lord, Worthy Sir, Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus,
THO. WARMSTRY.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Giving an Account of the last Conference betwixt Mr. Gunning and Signior
Dandulo.
After these words, page 96. line 23. After our departure it pleased God to
send reverend Mr. Gunning, who after some strugglings obtained from him at
length (as if some violent beam of light and grace had broken in upon his soul,
etc. not only a consent to be baptized, but an earnest desire that it might be
done without delay, saying, Let it be done to morrow.

THat the Reader may be satisfied, who will probably desire to know what that
last Discourse was betwixt Mr. Gunning and Signior Dandulo, which obtained from
him his consent to be Baptized, Dr. Warmstry by Letter entreated Mr Gunning,
that he would be pleased to set down that last Discourse, which at Dr.
Warmstry's request, Mr. Gunning has done in the following account.

Mr. Gunning. SIgnior, You may remember that when I was with you before, I told
you that we must found our discourse concerning our two different Religions on
that wherein we both are agreed concerning Religion; which was this; That the
Light of Nature and Right Reason common to us both, has confessedly taught us
both, that one only true God is to be worshipped, the Maker, Conserver,
Governor, and Judge of the world, and that the Dictates of Right Reason and of
the Law of Nature are the Laws of that One God, in obedience whereto, to serve
that One God true Religion. Now whatever Religion supe adds more then this,
which the light of Nature teaches, pretending supernatural Revelation for its
perfecting, clearing, and repairing what by sin is become maimed, corrupt and
obliterate, in the dim light of Nature which needs medicine, (as both
Christianity and Turcism do superadd) must either bring proofs of such their
superaddition, and pretended supernatural Revelation, or must justly be
suspected of Imposture. The proof of a supernatural Revelation and Religion
made by Jesus Christ to the world, I having instantly offered you, you tell me
it is unnecessary for that your own Religion does confess and witness that
already, and if Jesus Christ were not a true Prophet come from God, Mahomet
must confess himself a false Prophet. It remains therefore, as I told you, and
now this second time expect your deliberate Answer, viz. That you bring some
proof that Mahomet has received from God any such supernatural Revelation for
the founding of his new Religion.

I asked you if it can be well proved concerning any supernatural Miracles which
he wrought, or any Prophecy concerning him that had been known or affirmed by
any, before his affirming it himself.


Sig. Dandulo. I told you that Christ Jesus himself did foretell of Mahomet to
come.


Mr. G. If this can be proved, you say well and believe well, for I having
proved the Truth of Christianity, from the Confession of Mahometanism; if you
can prove the Religion of Mahomet from the Prediction of Christ, then you have
also the confession of Christianity: But now I Convene your Conscience, and
require you before Christ Jesus, whom you call The Spirit of the living God,
and we the Word and Son of the living God, to whose Prediction you now appeal,
and to which we Christians must certainly be most obliged and willing to stand,
to allege and assign if you can through all that six hundred years that past
'twixt Christ and Mahomets time, any words witnessed to have come from Jesus
Christ by any Disciple of his, or any deriving from them, or any Book extant
before Mahomets birth written by any of the followers of Jesus Christ, or by
Jesus Christ himself; or thirdly, any Company or communion of men that professed
Religion in Jesus Christ, who lived in that six hundred years 'twixt Christ and
Mahomet, that ever witnessed that any such prediction or promise was made by
Jesus Christ concerning Mahomet, or held any such Tradition amongst them. If
you are able to name any, let us hear the Author of such words or Books, or
such company or communion of men, where or when they lived, or who ever heard
of them. In sum, show any thing of Christ's or Christians speaking concerning
Mahomet before Mahomets first saying it of himself. Or else if nothing can be
showed, then tell me what could an Impostor have done other then Mahomet has
done in this? viz. either himself only to witness of himself without doing any
supernatural Miracles, which might bear witness to him, or to allege a
witness for himself, which none ever heard speak, nor ever said that he so
witnessed, except and before himself. If to this you are still unable to reply
any thing, we are both willing to put our selves upon that issue for the trial
of our grounds of our beleiving in Christ, which Jesus Christ himself offered
his Adversaries for the proof of his Doctrine. Joh. 10.25.
The works that I do, they bear witness of me. Joh. 10.37, 38.
If I do not the works of my Father believe me not; but if I do, though you
believe not me, believe the works. Joh. 15.24.
And in another place, if I had not done among them the works which none other
did, they had not had sin.

And secondly, We are ready to allege numberless Volumes written by the
followers of Jesus Christ within that six hundred years betwixt Christ's
Ascension, and Mahomets coming, and living Societies of Christian Professors
throughout the World, and throughout those six. Ages which witnessed to certain
Books as containing the Doctrines, and Institutions, and Precepts, and
Predictions made by Jesus Christ; in all which Books, according to any Copies
in any Language extant within those 600 years, there is not any word of mention
concerning such a Prophet as Mahomet to come, nor any Tradition ever heard of
amongst those Christians concerning such a Prophet to come: Whereas we fetch
our witness concerning the Prophesies of the coming of Jesus Christ from Books
written many Ages before Christ's coming, which our bitterest Adversaries the
Jews keep, and attest, and own as the Oracles of God, confirmed to be such at
first by supernatural miracles; and which Books our other Adversaries the
Pagans had read and acknowledged to be extant before the coming of Christ.
Indeed, whereas Jesus Christ prophesied that after his departure, he would,
send the Holy Ghost the Paraclete to lead his Apostles into all truth, and so
it must needs be whilst the Apostles were yet alive, he having promised it to
them. Simon Magus first about the fortieth year of Christ, gave out himself to
be that promised Holy Ghost, or Paraclete among the Gentiles; and about the
year 220. after Christ Epiph. Haeres. 48 Aug. Haeres. 20.86.
Montanus pretended that he was that Paraclete, and that Jesus Christ had
prophesied of him; and about the year 278 after Christ Epiph. Haeres. 66. Aug.
Haeres. 46.
Manes or Manicheus gave out himself to be that Paraclete, and that Jesus
Christ had prophesied of him; all which could show in the Books of Jesus Christ
a Paraclete foretold should come, but no reason of their blasphemous
affirmation, that they were that Paraclete: Then, 600 years after Christ
Mahomet, pretends that Jesus Christ had prophesied of him as a great Prophet
that should come into the world, but he not able so much as to show any such
Prophecy of any Prophet; now this Imposture being so gross, what can your
Conscience have to answer before God, to follow longer, and to transmit to
posterity by your adhaesion, such a cousenage in so great a matter, concerning
the Religion of the most High God, and the eternal woe or welfare of your own
and others immortal Souls, contrary to the Religion both that which the light
of Nature and right Reason, I told you taught us both, and that which he whom
you call the Spirit of God, and we call the Word of God (by and from whom all
Prophets, if Prophets of God, must speak) has taught the whole world; and
which Prophets cannot speak contrary one to another, nor to the Spirit of God,
by whose inspiration they are prophets, nor to the Word of God who speaks by
them.

Sir, I pray tell me, need I further to prove to you Christianity, or need I
further explain to you the Articles of Christianity then has been done?


Sig. D. No, They are true.


Mr. G. If so you believe, will you be baptized into that Faith?


Sig. D. How think you I can do that without danger to my life? except I should
resolve never to see more my Country, and Parents, and Friends, and all that is
in this world dear unto me?


Mr. G. I know well and consider that you cannot, without suffering that loss
for Christ his sake, and yet for your own sake also; for you must remember that
we took the rise of our discourse from what we were both agreed in, viz. the
Light of Nature and Right Reason, which teaches us, and has taught many
Heathen Philosophers, that the eternal concernment of our immortal Souls after
this life, is to be infinitely preferred before any such considerations of such
worldly and temporary losses; and that the one true living God, which Right
Reason teaches is the Author of all good things Temporal and Eternal, and
All-sufficient to make good to us any thing we lose for his sake, and is most
certainly the rewarder of them that seek out the true Religion, and honestly
follow it when they find it. Also when you began any discourse about Religion,
we took it for granted on both sides, that they are most unworthy to hear or
make any such discourse, who are not resolved to adhere to the Truth, whatever
worldly inconvenience come thereby. Also I now inform you of one part of the
Revelation made by Jesus Christ, viz. That there is no man who forsakes Father,
or Mother, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Houses, or Lands for his sake and the
Gospels, but he shall receive in this world an hundred fold (however in
spiritual benedictions and consolations) with persecutions, and in the world to
come everlasting life. Having food and raiment we are bid therewith to be
content; and that he has promised to our prayers and honest endeavors, having
left us this assurance, that the godliness of Christian Religion has the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. But tell me
Signior, is it not everlasting life, and the true Religion, which leads
thereto, concerning which you desired to discourse with me?


Sig D. Yes, that, that only is considerable, whatever becomes of my Body. But
tell me, I pray Sir, may I not hold this Religion which you have taught me
without being baptized, which is the only thing will bring danger to me from
my Countrymen?


Mr. G. Nay, you must, as believe, so also confess the Faith of Jesus Christ,
and set to your seal that this is the True Religion, and receive the seal of
Gods Covenant, and not be ashamed to renounce that shameful Imposture of
Mahomer, and own the Faith of the Lord of Glory Jesus Christ, whom we teach and
preach unto you.


Sig. D. But where is that in your Books required, that I must needs be
Baptized?


Mr. G. Hear me read out of that Book of God I pray you. Joh. 3.6, 5.
Amen, Amen, I say unto thee, except any one be born of Water and of the Spirit
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; that which is born of the flesh is
flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Mark. 16.15, 16
And another place, Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature; He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, he that believes not
shall be damned, A and. 22.16.
And in another place, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling
on the name of the Lord.


Sig. D. To morrow, to morrow I will be baptized.


Mr. G. Nay, our Religion and Discipline permits not that hastiness in this
weighty matter, you must first be more fully instructed in the necessary works
of Repentance, and Articles of Faith and Vows to be made in your Baptism, all
which we will immediately go about, and within convenient time, through the
mercy of God, you shall receive holy Baptism.


Sig. D. But what if I should die in the mean time of this deferring?


Mr. G. God will accept your present will, and desires for that deed, which it
is his will should not be performed, but upon due preparation; in the mean
time, let us humbly address our selves to prayers unto God through Jesus
Christ, and call upon him on whom you have believed, that he will fit you for
Baptism, by perfecting in you true Repentance, and a lively faith, and
vouchsafe you remission of all your sins, and renewing of the Holy Ghost in the
Laver of holy Baptism.


PETER GVNNING.

THE Happy CONVERT, OR THE TVRK Baptized.
GOD having been pleased of his great goodness to give a blessing unto the poor
endeavors that have been used for the Conversion of a Soul from the errors and
delusions of the Mahumetan Infidelity, to the holy Truth of the saving Gospel
of Christ Jesus; whereby a comfortable access has been made unto the afflicted
Church of England; notwithstanding all the discouragements that are upon such
designs in these evil times; I suppose it may be conducible to the glory of
God, and to the comfort of his faithful people, that desire the advancement of
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and for the stiring up of others to the employment
of their labors for the bringing home of such, and others that are misled,
unto the Fold of the Lord Jesus Christ, that there may be some account given
unto the people of this Nation, and that some public Record may be left unto
Posterity of the gracious dispensation of the Almighty in this matter. I have
therefore thought good to set forth this brief declaration thereof, in hope
that it will be no unacceptable service to God and his people.

CHAP. I. Of the Name, Lineage, and Country of this Convert.
THe name of this person whom God has thus graciously brought home unto his
Church, was before his Baptism Rigep, or in our Language Joseph Dandulo,
derived by six or seven Generations or Descents from a noble Family of the
Danduli of Venice. Of this Name and Family I find diverse in the Catalogue of
Grimstone, who have been advanced to the great Dignity of the Dukedom of that
famous and ancient Commonwealth.

The first, Henry D' Andule, in whose time Constantinople was taken, and the
Empire of the East gained, wherein he assisted the Princes and Barons of the
French. This Henry D' Andule died General of all the Christian Army.

Another Dandule chosen in his absence, in whose time the City was afflicted
with Water and Earthquakes, he made war in Istria against the Patriarch of
Aquileia, and the Count Caritia; at the instance of Pope Nicholas, he succored
with Twenty five Galleys, the Archbishop of Tripoly.

The third, Francis D' Aridule, by whose intercession (casting himself at the
feet of the Pope with a chain of iron about his neck) the Excommunication of
the Pope had been formerly taken off from Venice. In the time of his Dukedom,
they of Pola and Valese submitted themselves to the Commonwealth; Padua was
taken; he was of the League of the Christian Princes against the Turk; and in
his time there were Threescore Ambassadors at once in Venice; he governed ten
years and ten months.

The fourth, Andrew D' Andule, who caused the dearth to cease by bringing Corn
from Sicily, he obtained of the King of Babylon free Navigation into Egypt.
Zura having rebelled the seventh time was recovered; War was made against the
Genuois, and the City was troubled with Earthquakes and Pestilence; he governed
about twelve years

Besides these that enjoyed the excellency of the Dukedom, there is mention
also of one Matthew Dandalo, who was sent Ambassador, together with Nicholas de
Ponte, from Hierom Prioli then Duke of Venice, to the Council of Trent.

From this noble Stock of the Venetian Commonwealth, was this our Convert, it
seems, sprung; so that he is derived, as we see from Christian Ancestors. The
corruptions of whose blood have now, (as I may so speak) been restored and
purified in him by the water of holy Baptism, which he has now lately through
Gods mercy received.

Some of the braches of that generous Stock have been it seems transplanted
(probably) in the various events of those Wars which have been so frequent
between the Turk and the Venetians, of whom the Father of this our welcome
Christian is at this time a silk Merchant of good Estate in the Island of Tzio,
not far from Smyrna, a professed Turk, but his Mother is a Christian, of the
Greek Church; whose Christian profession, as it did invest him unto a just
title unto Baptism, even in his infancy; for the unbeleeving Husband is
sanctified by the Wife, and therefore the Child was holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. so it
may be, the prayers of this Christian Mother, like the tears of Monica for her
Augustine, have ministered unto the good providence of Almighty God, for the
bringing home of this straied sheep unto the holy Fold of Christ Jesus. This
happy Convert her Son, was the subject of the Divine Providence in many notable
passages of his life hitherto, through which the Lord has at last brought him
to this happy period of his wanderings, and change of his Profession, into the
bosom of the persecuted English Church.

CHAP. II. Of his Education, and Travails.
IN his infancy he was bred up with his parents, but according to the way of
the delusions of his Father, whose authority prevailed against thepious
inclinations and desires of his Mother, which yet now at length God has
blessed with the Victory, and with a success even beyond her desires; having
brought him into a more pure profession of the Christian Religion then that
which she embraces; even into that which is embraced by the old and Orthodox
part of the Church of England; then which (I hope we may be allowed to say)
there is none in the world that does more soundly embrace the Christian
Doctrine, and is glorious even in the rubbish, the very stones and dust of the
ruins which she is under, and whom God has so graciously owned even in this
time of her trouble and contempt, by giving this extraordinary access unto her
Body.

About the sixth year of his age he was stolen away by the Moors, amongst whom
he lived for the space of about Nine years, and in that time he visited the
great City of Grand Cairo in Egypt; the place where God was pleased to deliver
his people of old, that he might bring them into the land of Canaan: And so God
has called even this his Son, his newly adopted Son from Egypt. The Moor with
whom he lived had a great desire to have detained him with him, and for an
inducement thereunto offered him his Daughter. But God who had another and far
more happy marriage in store for him, would not suffer him to lay hold upon
that bait, but made use of the natural desire that he had to see his Parents
and his Country, to bring him from thence, that at length he might arrive at a
better Country, even a Heavenly one, which is the Church of God; and come home
unto better Parents, even God himself, and the Catholic Church. And so as Saul
sought his Fathers Asses, and found a Kingdom; he might by the desire that he
had unto a natural blessing, be set in the way to the obtaining a supernatural
Inheritance.

So that God that in his wise Providence orders all things and motions of the
World to the advancement of his Kingdom, and for the good and salvation of his
People; and that makes Nature it self serve the designs and purposes of his
heavenly grace, drew this person from his Moorish entertainment by the cords of
those inclinations that were in him toward his friends, and his native Soil,
unto his Fathers house, where he arrived back again at the age of about Fifteen
years. But his long absence having dismissed the hopes, and discharged the
expectation of his Parents to see him again, he was become now nowhere a
greater stranger then at home: The impressions of natural relation were in a
great degree worn out, and those characters that were yet left almost starved
for want of that nourishment which they usually receive from the enterview of
presence, or intercourse of intelligence; even these it seems were so far
out-grown by him, that there could be little or no compliance found between the
species or forms he left behind him in their minds, and the favor and garb
wherein he returned unto them; so that when he came to his Mothers door, and
renewed his claim unto the Womb that bare him, and to the Breasts that gave him
suck, the Mother fulfilled the word of God by the Prophet, and had forgotten
her own sucking child; she was hardly brought to own him for her Son, though
she had no other child of that sex to supply his room in her heart. For it is
not to be omitted that he is the only Son of his Parents; so that his
retirement into the bosom of Gods Church, cannot reasonably, much less
charitably, be looked upon as an earthly refuge, but as a gracious and heavenly
choice, since he had so strong an interest as is that of an only Son, both in
the affection and care of those parents that were and are so well able to
provide for him. And indeed though it be true, that it is the wonder of the
Divine Mercy that the Lord is pleased not to refuse the very rejections and
refuses of the world, and to take up those whom their Fathers and Mothers
forsake; To receive a poor returning Prodigal that is driven unto him by the
disappointment of the very trough and husks of the Swine, and take up even
outcasts into his fatherly bosom: And though the same most gracions God thinks
good to make the unhospitableness and ill entertainment of the Relations and
usage of the World, a means to bring in many sincere Converts into his House
and Family; yet it is such an Argument of sincerity, as may well advance both
our confidence and joy in this our late received Fellow-Christian, that he
comes unto us upon more noble, generous, and free inducements, then the want of
an interest in those earthly friends, that were well able to maintain him in
that profession that he was in.

Neither was he long shut out either from the doors or from the bowels of his
rechallenged Parents; for although at the first he was not acknowledge, yet (as
Mothers are curious speculators of their Children,) she had, it seems, laid up
in her memory against this time of need a certain mark that she had observed in
the body of her Child, to which she thought good to refer the trial of his
plea for his restitution unto her Family and care; and upon the search, having
found that character upon him, she and her Husband too, (as we may well imagine)
received him with great joy into their mutual bosoms and embraces (as we use to
do those comforts that come beyond our expectations) even as if they had had
him new born unto them, or had received him from the very grave of death; which
must needs stir up great endearments in their hearts, and raise up great joy
and solace in their souls, whilst they might say in the litteral sense, as the
Prodigals Father did in the spiritual, It is meet that we should rejoice, for
this our Son was lost and is found, he was dead, as to our enjoyment or
knowledge of him, and is alive again.

And this was the first remarkable return of our Convert from his Moorish
pilgrimage unto his Fathers house.

But in this he was but his own Parable as it were. This was but the dark type
and figure of that more blessed return that he has now lately made unto his
heavenly Father, and to his Mother the Church. I conceive I may well call this
a return too, because though he sprang immediately from a Turkish Father, yet
he was not only derived from Christian Ancestors, as is before declared, (and
God has mercy for thousands) but he received his conception and birth in and
from the Womb of a Christian Mother; and so according to the Apostles decision
(who allotteth the Title not unto the stronger in respect of Nature, but unto
the better principle in respect of Grace, or the Christian profession) he was
born into the world an holy Child, and in the bosom of the Catholic Church of
Christ; from whence, though he was ravished for a time by those evil principles
which his bad Education infused into him, yet the Lord has now in mercy
restored him thereunto.

Yet he did not presently attain unto this blessing, but was carried through
diverse other Providence unto that happy time and place to which God had
reserved him for the receiving of so great a mercy. Being received again into
his Fathers Family about the age (as he relates) of 15 years, he there
continued for some certain time: But after some years having both person and
gifts to encourage him, and render him acceptable for the service of the Wars,
He was engaged in several Expeditions against the Christians, and was himself
employed in that late Battle between the Turk and Venetian, and was a witness
and partner in that defeat which fell on the Mahumetans side; and by swiming
through part of the Sea unto the Land, escaped that destruction which so many
others of the Mahumetans recieved in that defeat that befell the Turkish Army.

And God made his deliverance a happy means of the escape of a poor Christian
Slave whom he met withal, delivered from his hard Master by that storm. This
poor Christian he met with when he was gotten to Land, and although he might
have made good advantage unto himself by returning him again to his Master: Yet
having received a command from his Mother to be kind and merciful unto
Christians, and that loving and ingenuous disposition that appears to be in
him, inclining him to compassionate one that had been under so great a misery,
he was willing to venture his own safety, in assisting him to make his escape
away.

Another Christian, (as it is averred) he redeemed at another time at the rate
of forty and six Dollars of which he wanting the odd six in money to make up
the ransom of the poor Captive, he pawned his Garment to make it up; and surely
as this compassion of his, whilst yet a Turk, toward those that were then so
adverse to him in their profession, may shame here and will condemn hereafter
that uncompassionate bowelless cruelty that Christians now exercise one toward
another, amongst whom every difference in judgment or practice, is not only
taken for a discharge of love, but an engagement unto hatred and cruelty, which
may well make our and other Christian Nations as red with blushing, as they are
with the blood of one another: So we may well conceive, that God that loves all
goodness, and every thing in every creature that bears any resemblance of
himself, has graciously rewarded the pity and mercy of this (then) Mahumetan
unto poor Christians, by pouring out that flood of mercy and compassion upon
him, in the illumination of his soul with his heavenly truth, and his
ingrafting into the mystical Body of Christ Jesus, yet not of any merit, but of
his free goodness.

I think not fit to forget, (though perhaps I have not remembered it in its due
place,) that whilst he was conversant with his Parents at home, it being one of
the Mahumetan Laws, that all shall take upon them the state of Marriage at the
age of Twenty five years old at the furthest, one or both of his Parents
proposed a Wife unto him; The treaty whereof was even yet on foot, when he came
lately out of those parts, and good endearment of affection was entertained on
both sides, which yet he is now content to sacrifice in the fire of that holy
love which has been since kindled in his breast toward the Lord Jesus and his
holy Gospel.

CHAP. III. Of the Age, Stature, and Qualities of the Convert.
HIS Age is now about Twenty four years, his Stature tall, his Body very
slender, his color something swarthy, and of the die of those Climates wherein
he has lived, his feature comely, and his deportment very loving and
courteous, he is very temperate in his diet, sober and orderly in his
conversation, of a cheerful and ingenous disposition, of extraordinary
understanding and knowledge for one that has been bred up in those parts, and
amongst those people where Arts and Learning are under restraints and
prohibitions; he is of a pregnant wit, and of good and elegant expression,
adorned with handsome rhetorical flowers and illustrations, he is one that
dislikes debauchery of life, and has complained before his conversion, of
miscarriages of that kind which he observed in some that walk under the name
of Christians, particularly of some whom he met with at Wapping; which should
admonish both them and others that live in an irregular course of life and
conversation, to consider seriously of the great dishonor that they thereby do
unto Christ and the profession of the Gospel, and the great danger that is upon
them, to become answerable unto the dreadful judgment of God, not only for
their own souls whom they ruin by their wickedness, but of the souls of many
others whom they may ruin by their scandals; whilst they draw some into the
like wickedness by their evil and contagious examples, and hinder others from
embracing that truth, the profession whereof they find accompanied with such
vile debauchery of life and conversation; and so confirm them in their errors
to the ruin of their souls which are like to be laid to their charge at the
last day; God grant we may all lay this unto our hearts; for I am persuaded the
wickedness of Christians at the last day, will be charged with the loss and
condemnation of the rest of the world.

CHAP. IV. Of the occasion and motive of his coming into England.
BUt that we may make haste unto the main Business, and set before you that
blessed work which the Lord has wrought upon this our Convert, to the praise
of the glory of his grace:

When he had for some time solaced himself with the enjoyment of the comforts
of his recovered Parents and their Family, and passed through some other
varieties of Providence both in War and Peace, being as it seems of too active
a spirit to be shut up within the narrow bounds of his Family-contentments; he
took a journey to Smyrna, where he met with Mr. Lawrence, Son to the Lady
Lawrence of Chelsey, with whom he fell into some acquaintance, whereby (though
then it were little dreamt of) God made some preparations for that happy change
that has bin since wrought upon him, as will appear anon.

From Smyrna he departed to Tunis, and from Tunis to Algier, where we shall
find a gracious experiment of Gods great goodness unto his people, and see how
he makes all things work together for good, and for the advancement of those
gracious designs which he has contrived in his eternal Councels, for the
bringing home of his lost sheep unto him, and for the spreading and exaltation
of the Kingdom of his Son; and how he causes even the public interests of
those Princes and Nations of the world, and their Politic and civil
concernments, (however excentrical they are in their purposes to his end) yet
in their occurrences and events to concenter with those his gracious
determinations, and that in order to those mercies which he intends to one
particular foul; so watchful and careful is God for the advantage and benefit
of his people, that designs of several great Nations and Kingdoms, nay, of the
business of the whole world shall be brought in to serve and minister unto that
blessing which he entendeth to one single Soul, rather then he shall fail of
his mercy.

Whilst he was at Algier, being through providence disappointed of another
intended journey, there was a dispatch of an Agent from thence into England,
that God appointed to be his Convoy to waft him over not only from that
Turkish Region into this Nation, but also (as it has proved in the happy
success, which is a good interpreter of Gods intendments, though not so good
for a commentary upon his Laws, nor for the discovery of his judgment of our
actions) to convey him from the Turkish Religion into the bosom of the true and
orthodox Christian Church; his desire to see this strange Nation, that is now
(upon very sad terms, as we may well conjecture) become the noise and the
wonder of the world, inclined him to comply with that opportunity, not knowing
yet what God meant to do with him therein; and so hither he came: And that
nothing might be wanting to the fulfilling of the gracious purpose of the
Almighty, the foresaid Mr. Lawrence, the Son of the Lady Lawrence of Chelsey,
was sent over about the same time to meet him here, by whom he was after some
time brought unto Chelsey to the house of his worthy Mother, where he was
kindly entertained, and in the time of his first continuance there, I had a
sight of him in his Turkish Habit; but as yet God had not stired up my heart to
attempt any thing upon him for his Conversion; neither indeed did I well know
how to assault him, he being as yet a stranger to the English tongue, nor
acquainted with the Latin, nor any but the vulgar Greek, the Arab, and the
Franck, which is a kind of a bastard Italian; but in the time of his being
there he had entered into some familiarity with Mr. Lawrence a Turkish
Merchant, who married the Daughter of the Lady Lawrence before mentioned, who
finding him, as he conceived, proper for some purposes of his, prevailed with
him to stay some longer time in England then he intended to have done, and so
became the means of that blessed opportunity, that has been since laid hold
on, for his illumination. A while after he came again to the Lady Lawrences of
Chelsey, at whose house I happily found him when I came thither one evening to
do those observances which I owe unto that worthy Lady (by whose favor I enjoy
an habitation as her Tenant in the Town of Chelsey) but little did I dream what
work the Lord had there for me to begin; but God having brought me thither
began to work not only by exciting inward inclinations in me to the
undertaking of that business of his Conversion, but also by the encouragement
and compliant desires of the Lady her self, and Mr. Shugborough who so journeth
with her; so in much weakness, with the assistance of Mr. Lawrence the
Merchant, beforementioned, who was pleased to do the part of an Interpreter
between me and this Convert, I made an entrance upon the Work of his Conversion.

CHAP. V. Of the method and manner of his Conversion.
Upon the first attempt I found him very averse, and even strongly and
desperately resolved to venture himself upon that Religion which his Father had
entertained, and derived unto him, though it should cost him his damnation; yet
at the last he was brought into some doubt, whether was the true Religion, the
Mahumetan or the Christian; and seemed to tend toward a kind of indifferency;
and some expressions, (as I remember) fell from him, intimating a desire that
God would direct him to the truth; and as such a thought, where it is sincere,
I am persuaded, seldom or never returns without a blessing, unless we be
wanting unto our selves, in the use or embracement of Gods offers: so it is an
excellent beginning to a work of Wisdom and Grace upon a Soul, for a man to be
brought so far from his Errors, as been dubitare to doubt well; for most men
perish in evil and ungrounded confidences; when therefore I found that this
breach was made in that evil Fortress wherein he had stood, I thought good to
make the work as sure as I could; and therefore resolving not to rely upon my
own strength, in a business of so great concernment, I made haste to
Westminster, and imparted the business and the progress that I had made, and
the hopes that I had, unto reverend Mr. Thirsecross, earnestly desiring his
assistance in a matter that might bring so much glory to God; at least that we
might do our endeavors, that we might not be answerable to God for the loss of
his soul; withal expressing some hopeful confidence of a comfortable success in
the undertaking: He seeing my earnestness seemed to conjecture that there was
some more then ordinary stirring of the Spirit in the matter, and showed
himself very ready to give assistance in the Work; advised me to an
Interpreter, which we much wanted, viz. one Mr. Samois, who had been a
Traveller in the Turkish parts, and so knew very well how to accost him in that
Language which is usually spoken amongst them in those Territories which is the
Frank Language, or bastard Italian. This Gentleman was but lately returned from
his Travels to his Country, and since that return made another happier then
that, from the errors and Superstitions of Popery to the true Christian
Catholic, Apostolic Religion, professed by the Church of England, to which
God brought him by the advice and instruction of his learned and worthy Kinsman
Mr. Samois, lately Chaplain to my Lord of Elgin; and so as Andrew having found
out Christ, brought his brother Simon unto him, and as Philip found out
Nathanael, so the Lord was pleased to honor him, who had been but now very
lately converted from his own Errors and Superstitions to the embracement of
the Truth, by making him a very great and active instrument of the conversion
of another, even of this our lately baptized Christian from the Mahumetan
Delusions and Blasphemies to the holy Gospel of Christ Jesus.

But to the farther and surer promotion of our design, Mr. Thirscross with my
self, thought good to engage that worthy and learned Divine Mr. Peter Guning,
who has showed himself a very able and worthy Champion of Gods Truth and his
Church, both against Papists and others, that he might employ his excellent
abilities for the bringing of this work begun unto a happy Issue.

The motion was no sooner made, but readily embraced by him.

To this purpose he with Mr. Samois addresseth himself unto Chelsey, to the
house of the Lady Laurence, who was pleased to give a very favorable and
courteouss entertainment to all that came about that holy business (which I
hope will be returned in many blessings upon her Family.)

Upon the first Discourse that Mr. Guning and my self together had with him,
wherein Mr. Guning took great and effectual pains there was yet no conclusion
produced in him answerable to desire

But the Lord himself the night after, it seems, took him in hand, and seconded
our endeavors, with a very strange and Wonderful dream, which the Convert
himself related the next Morning, and seemed not a little affected with it.

CHAP. VI. The Relation of a strange Dream, that the Convert had, after some
Discourse had with him, before his Conversion.
The Dream was this.

HE thought he saw a Table, with a very fair Vessel like a Basin, standing upon
it, and two men standing by it.

And presently after he dreamt that he was standing by a stream, wherein he
had a great Desire to wash himself; but the Stream, was such a filthy stinking
puddle water, that he could not wash himself in it: In this filthy stream he
thought he saw a Hen lie dead with her head or neck cut, and that a woman came
and took this dead Hen out of the puddle water, and when she had set it down
upon its legs, it ran away alive.

After this as he was troubled, that he could not wash himself in that filthy
stream that was then before him, he thought he saw upon the sudden a very fair
full and clear crystal stream break forth of a certain place, which came with
great force and gushed upon the filthy stream and drove it clear away, and
presented it self in the place of it.

Into this pure stream he entered, (though with some fearfulness at the first)
and but by Degrees, washed himself in it, and swam over it.

When he was gotten over the stream, and now as it seemed at some distance from
it, he began to be very thirsty, and knew not how to get water to drink: But in
this his necessity, there fell a shower from Heaven, which when he saw he
betook himself unto a poor house and knocked at the door; upon that a woman came
out unto him, who upon request, gave him a little dish, with which he took some
of the heavenly shower that fell, and therewith quenched his thirst.

CHAP. VII. An occasional Discourse concerning Dreams.
THE Relation of this Dream raised some hope in us, that God had been pleased
to own and second our endeavors; So great compliance was then between it and
the holy design we had in hand, which God was pleased as it seems to act over
in the praeludium of this Dream, as afterward he brought it to pass in a
waking performance; And indeed though many and most Dreams may go for the idle
and impertinent issues of the wandering and extravagant fantasies of men, and of
the impressions which they receive either from predominant humors in the body,
or vein, and evil affections in the mind, or from the representations that are
made in the time of sleep, by the subtle operations of wicked Spirits; and so
are either not to be much regarded, or else to be thought upon with humiliation
and sorrow, as those Evidences and fruits which break forth in our very sleeps,
of our corrupt, vain, and sinful inclinations; yet some of them are of such
excellent harmony in their frame and Method, and have such a stamp of sobriety
and holiness upon them in their design and drift, that they ought not to be
slightly passed over or forgotten, but to be diligently weighed and thought
upon, that we may receive instructions and admonitions from them; especially
since we find t^^t this has been one way whereby God has been pleased in very
eminent manner, to make known his holy will and pleasure to his people, and to
admonish and direct them, both for the avoiding that which is Evil, and for
the pursuance and embracement of that which is good and profitable unto them,
and well pleasing unto him; as is manifest in the notable and weighty Dreams
recorded in the Scriptures, as of Abimelech, Genesis 20. The Dream of Jacob, Genesis
28. of Joseph, Genesis 37. of Pharaoh, Genesis 41. of Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel 2.
Daniel 4. of Daniel, Daniel 7. see Daniel. 8. etc. Of the man of Israel, Judges
7.13. of Solomon 1 Kings 3.5.15. of Joseph, the husband of the Mother of
Christ, Matthew. 2.12.22. And that this is a way wherein God has heretofore
promised to manifest himself unto his people, you may learn by that which is
written, Numb. 12.6. Job 33.15. Jer. 23.28. Joel 2.28. Act. 2.17. Nor dare I
condemn that which is said to be related by Antoninus that famous Emperor
concerning cures by Dreams, Casaub. of Enthus. chapter 5
not only (says a learned Writter of our Church) approved unto himself by his
own, but unto others also by frequent experience. Galen is said often to have
had a Dream to write such or such a Book, to go, or forbear such a Journey;
which puts me in mind of that which befell St. Paul, Act. 16.9. unto whom a man
of Macedonia appeared in a Vision or Dream by night, and prayed him, saying,
Come over into Macedonea and help us.

Ecclesiastical History, and other Monuments that are left us of the various
and wonderful passages of the world, afford us many and frequent examples of
very remarkable things of this nature.

Alexander the Great, when he was upon an Expedition against Tire, thought in
his Dream that he saw a Satyr, which upon consultation had, this
Interpretation, (...), Tire is thine; The very syllables of the name of that
Monster which he thought he saw, importing in their signification the Victory
that he obtained; and the Success was answerable thereunto.

Another Dream of his is more famous and remarkable, as that which God seems
to have made use of as an instrument of great and gracious Providence; and it
was this: He thought he saw in a Dream or Vision, the form of a man presenting
it self unto him in rich and awful Attire, even those very Robes which were
used by Gods appointment by the High Priest of the Jews; and shortly
afterward, as he was riding toward Jerusalem, he met Jadus in a Habit directly
answerable to his Dream, which struck such an awfulness into him, that he
lighted from his Steed or Chariot, and did him great reverence, and by this
means his fury was diverted from the Jews.

It is related of Julius Caesar, V. Plutin vita Caesar. and Valor. Maxim. l. 1.
c 7.
that the night before his destruction he dreamed that he was placed by the
Throne of Jupiter, and that by and by after he was tumbled down out of Heaven.

Simonides having exercised his humanity and mercy, See Stro-zio de spirit. and
incantat.
in burying of a dead man, and being afterward determined to take a journey by
Sea, thought he saw the same dead man whom he had buried, appearing unto him,
and admonishing him to forbear that Voyage, declaring unto him that if he
should undertake it, he should miscarry therein, and lose his life. He took
this admonition, and so escaped that shipwreck; whereby all that went perished.

The Mother of Gregory Nazianzen Baldwin. l. 3. c. 6. de cas. consc. circ.
divinationem
(as Baldwinus relates out of the History of his life) having petitioned God,
in her prayers for a Sor, with a vow to destinate him to the holy service of
God, had it revealed to her in a Dream, That she should have a Son born of her,
and had his Visage presented unto her, and his name declared in her Dream or
Vision.

St. Augustine relates in his Third Book of Confessions, Aug. l. 3. Conf.
Bald. ib.
that whilst he was yet a Manichee, his Mother Monica had a Dream that she was
standing upon a wooden Rule, and being very sad, saw a glorious young man very
joyful, and of a cheerful countenance coming unto her, and that he asked her
the cause of her sadness; and when she had declared that it was by reason of the
sorrow that she had for her Son, who was then in the way of destruction; he bid
her be of good cheer, and wished her to mark and observe, and that she should
see her Son to be with her where she was, and so she saw her Son standing with
her upon the same Rule.

The same Angustine has a story of one Curmas that lived near unto Hippo where
he was Bishop, who in his sleep thought he saw himself Baptized by Augustine,
Baldw. l. 3. c. 7. de cas. cons. circa spectra, cas. 2.
and that afterward he was led into Paradise, and as he was dismissed from
thence, he thought he heard a voice saying unto him, Go and be baptized, if
thou will be in this place of the blessed; and that afterward being admonished
to be baptized by Augustine, and returning answer that that was already done
(as his Dream had before presented it to him) he that spoke unto him in his
Dream or Vision replied thus, Go (says he) and be baptized indeed for that was
but a Vision; Whereupon he went to Hippo, and was amongst others baptized by
Augustine that knew nothing of the Vision or Dream.

Sozomen in the Sixth Book of his Ecclesiastical History, and Second Chapter,
Sozom. hist. l. 6. c. 2. c. 5.
tells us, that the death of Julian the Apostate, was fore-discovered to
Didymus Alexandrinus in a Dream; and in the Fifth Chapter of the same Book,
that the Tumults of the Arrians in the Church were discovered to Antonius in a
Dream.

Lessius in his Book, Lessius de justitia, l. 2. c. 45 dub. 8.
De justitia and jure caeterisque virtutibus cardinalibus, lib. 2. cap. 45.
dubit. 8. the title whereof is, Quousque divinatio ex somnis sit licita, makes
mention of the Dream of Theodosius, wherein he being yet a private man, thought
he saw himself; crowned by Meletius a Bishop, when as yet he had not thought of
any stich thing, nor had any knowledge of the said Bishop. Theodor. Hist. l. 5.
c. 6, and 7.
See Theodor. Hist. lib 5. c. 6. and 7.

The same Lessius also, in the same Chapter rem embers the Dream of St.
Folicarpus, who thought in his sleep that his pillow was all on fire, Less. ubi
supra.
whereby was signified the manner of his Martyrdom.

It is also written in the life of Paraeus, that before the destruction of the
Palatinate, he saw in his Dream Heidleberg on fire.

In the life of Sir Henry Wotton lately set forth, we have mention of two
Dreams; one of Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury Uncle to Sir Thomas Wotten;
and the other of Sir Thomas Wotton himself, The Life of Sir H, Wotton.
Sir Henry's Father.

The first was this, Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury, being Ambassador in
France in the year, 1555. in the time of Queen Mary, had a Dream wherein he was
admonished that Thomas Wotton his Nephew was inclined to be a party in such a
Project, which (if he were not speedily diverted) wonld turn to the loss and
ruin both of his life and Family. Whereupon he remembering the Dream of Monica
concerning St. Augustine her Son; and considering that Almighty God has even
in latter times by a certain illumination of the Soul in sleep, discovered in
Dreams many things that humane wisdom could not foresee, resolved to use some
prudent remedy; to this end he wrote to the Queen and besought her, That she
would cause his Nephew Tho. Wotton to be sent for out of Kent and that the
Lords of her Council might interrogate him in some such feigned questions as
might give a color for his commitment into a favorable Prison; declaring that
he would acquaint her Majesty with the true reason of his request, when he
should next become so happy as to see and speak to her Majesty. This was done
according to his desire, and Thomas Wotton committed to prison. And by this
means he was prevented from an engagement with Wyat and the Kentish Rebels;
wherein (as he afterward acknowledged to his Uncle, when he returned into
England) he was likely to have been involved and so they both joined in
praising God for that admonition which was given in the Dream for the
prevention thereof.

The other Dream was one that befell Sir Thomas Wotton himself, who (as it is
related) had many that did usually prove true, both in foretelling things to
come, and discovering things past: That which we now desire to mention was
this; Sir Thomas Wotton a little before his death dreamed, That the Treasury of
the University of Oxford was robbed by Townsmen and poor Scholars, and that
the number of them was Five; And being the day following to write unto his Son
Henry (being then at Oxford) he gave him a slight notice thereof in a
Postscript of his Letter, which came to his Sons hands the very morning after
the night in which the Robbery was committed (being sent to him out of Kent)
and when the City and University were both in a perplexed inquest of the
Thieves, Sir Henry Wotton produced his Fathers Letter, and by it such light was
given that the Five Guilty persons were discovered and apprehended.

Take one more, Vita Cl. Salmasii per Anto. Clement.
with which we will conclude our examples of remarkable Dreams; it is that of
the learned and famous Salmasius, related in his Life, set forth by Antonius
Clementius, before the volume of the Epistles of the said Salmasius.

Salmasius having a desire to see Rome, and the Monuments that were there, and
having provided himself for the journey, and entered himself into the company
of some Merchants for that Voyage, the very night before he was to have taken
it, was troubled with a terrible Dream, and thought he heard a voice, most
earnestly dissuading him from his purpose therein, and withal threatening him,
that if he went on, he should never return alive: Whereupon he desisted from
his intended Travel, and so prevented that great danger that might very
probably have befallen him amongst those people, from whom his great fame and
learning would not likely have suffered him to have been concealed, and whom he
had so much provoked by his learned Labors in the maintenance of that truth
which lies so opposite unto their evil interest, and especially by the care
that he had taken for the publishing and polishing of Nilus and Barlaam, those
most eager Enemies of the Papal Monarchy.

He that desires to see more of this kind, may have recourse for his further
satisfaction to Sarozzio de spiritibus and incantationibus, Wierus de
praestigiis daemonum, Percerus de divinatione, Cicero de divinatione, and
others; as likewise to the several Histories of the World; amongst the rest,
there is an History that I have seen of Henry the Fourth of France, that makes
mention of diverse remarkable Dreams that ushered in the violent death of that
Great Prince, and amongst the rest one of them, as I remember, was this, That
his Queen a little before his death dreamed, that all her Jewels were turned
into Pearls; which are the usual Emblems of Tears.

All these Examples, with many other that the Records of the times will afford
us, may lead us safely unto this Conclusion; That God may and does sometimes
admonish, not only his own people, but others also, as Laban, Abimelech and
Balaam by Dreams, and then it will easily follow, That all Dreams are not to be
despised, but that some are seriously to be weighed, and made use of, as
admonitions from God.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Nature of Dreams, their Causes and Kinds; and how far we
may proceed in taking Observations and Admonitions from them, and what Rules
are to be observed therein.
HAving gained thus much, That there is some weight in some Dreams, and that as
the Poet has it, Somnia pondus habent, it will be of concernment for us not to
leave this matter, until we have given some Directions concerning the Use that
is to be made of them; the rather because they are things very subject to be
made the instruments of Delusion by Satan, and of Superstition by foolish, and
weak, and wicked men. We need not go far, I think, from our own Age and Nation
to be instructed, That there is great mischief that proceeds from miscarriages
concerning Dreams; whereby too many, it may be feared, have been and are at
this day ensnared both in errors of Judgment, and evil and vile Practices, in
Affection and Conversation, contrary to the Truth and Holiness of God: whereby
our times are become the parallel of that evil Character that St. Jude gave of
some wicked people in his own times, Jude 8.
(...), Likewise (says he) these Dreamers defile the flesh, despise Dominion,
and speak evil of Dignities: A glass wherein we may very visibly behold the
evil Features of the Dreamers and Enthusiasts of our days; They are called
Dreamers (as Deodate conjectureth upon the place) because they vented their own
Dreams and Fancies instead of Gods Truth: Jer. 23.25, to 28. Be a in Epist.
Jud. Isa. 56.10
See Jer. 23.25, to 28. Beza renders the word there Sopiti^; and Grotius
observes that the word (...) in the Hebrew, Isa 56.10. is translated (...) in
the Greek; and it signifies (says he) stulta imaginantes, it a ut ii qui
somniant. Those that imagine vain and foolish things, like them that dream.
Indeed as Dreamers may be said in some sense to be awake in their sleep; so our
Enthusiasts are sleeping Wakers, and their pretended Enthusiasms but waking
dreams, the mad and wild fancies of souls that are in the dead sleep and
slumber of sin; and though both Inspirations and Dreams may be good where they
proceed from a right principle, and are entertained and used as they ought to
be (as I have already showed in that of Dreams) yet they are very apt to be
mistaken, because they come very often in the dark, and not less apt to be
abused to evil purposes: Insomuch that (as a Learned Author has already
observed of one of them) so I may be the bolder to say of both of them
together, Causab. of Enthusiasm
that they have been made the colors and countenances of the most eminent
mischiefs that have been in the world; And therefore (as I shall be bold to
say) that it is the part of a wise man to consider his Dreams; so withal I
shall say, that it is a point of good and of great Wisdom to distinguish well
of them, and to know how to use them aright.

It is therefore a matter of concernment that we should be rightly guided in
that strange conversation which we have with our selves, and spiritual natures
in Dreams.

And at it is of concernment in it self, so of the more because it is a matter
wherein I think I may say, we are most accountable to God for almost the third
part of our lives. I mean all that time which is spent in sleeping.

And this concernment is attended with some difficulty, not only because it
may seem to require some more then ordinary light to discover these matters of
darkness, which usually move in the obscurities both of the greater and lesser
World; but because it is that business of our life which is least understood by
us, and of which we are least the Masters, and therefore since, Ars est de
difficili and bono, The proper subject of Art is that which is useful and
difficult. It requires some skill to state this question aright.

And first it will be requisite to know what these Dreams are Methinks I may
call them certain Meteors of the lesser World, which appear in the humane night
of the Microsm or little World of man.

Some kind of stragglings that the faculties of life have with the chains of
slumber under which they are bound, and as it were some breakings out from the
Prison of sleep, some agitations of the mind within it self, raised either by
some strong impressions that the Memory has received, which are so bright that
they break through the cloud of sleep, to the illumination and stiring up of
the Fancy or imagination, or by some earnest or active affections that are in
the Appetite or Iraescible Faculties of the Soul, which draw as it were the
Pictures of those things upon the table of the imagination, wherein they
delight, or wherewith they are moved, clothed either with their hopes or fears,
which make their Dreams either pleasing or terrible, or by some either natural,
or diseased and accidental predominancy of some humors. The vapors whereof
arising with some violence and thickness dispose themselves, as it were, into
some kind of figure like the clouds in the Heavens, according to their several
tempers and complexions or by the influence of the Heavens; or temper of the
Air, or by the operation of evil Spirits, or by good Angels, or by the
influence of God by his holy Spirit

And this will lead us in the second place to the consideration of the several
kinds of Dreams, distinguished by the several causes thereof:

Which are thus distinguished, and that very well I think, Less. de justitia,
l. 2. c. 45. dub. 9.
by Lessius in the Book before cited, de Justitiae. Some, says he, proceed
from the singular providence of God, to which those may be reduced that are by
the operation of good Angels. Some from the procuration of the Devil or evil
Spirits. Some from the constitution of the Heavens, or disposition of the Air.
Some from previous cogitations, in which I shall include those that proceed
from the Affections or inclinations of the Mind: And some from the affection
(as he calls it) or (as I had rather say) from the temper and complexion of the
Body.

Those that proceed from God either immediately, or by the ministration of his
good Angels, are good, and true, and move to good, and are sent unto good
purpose, and though these were more frequent and eminent in those times that
went before the perfecting of the Canon of Scripture, as were also Apparitions,
and extraordinary Inspirations, yet there is no cause to doubt but that there
may be, and are sometimes (as extraordinary divine inspirations.) So divine
Dreams, whereby God is pleased to impart himself either immediately, or by the
ministration of his Angels unto his people, either to discover some secret or
future things unto them, or to encourage or give approbation unto some good
things which they have in hand or design, or that he would set them upon, or to
admonish them to avoid some things that would be hurtful unto them, or
displeasing unto him; and these Dreams must needs be of great concernment and
consideration; Lessius de justitia l. 2. c. 43. dub. 8.
Deus (says Lessius) illa nunquam immittit nisi ad aliquid significandum quo
hominem moneat vel instruat. And as they are of great concernment and
consideration, so it is a point of great wisdom to know them.

The Marks or Characters whereby they may be discerned, are observed, and
observeable to be these.

1. When they bring with them either some certain declaration of words, whereby
God declares his will, or that which he would reveal or admonish a man of, or
some certain representation which has some likeness or analogy unto the things
whereof the mind is to be informed, or whereunto it is to be disposed thereby,
which if it do clearly and perspicuously present that which the Dream intends,
it is called, says Lessius, (...) or a Vision; if obscurely and enigmatically,
it is called (...), a Dream. So that from hence we may collect indeed three
sorts of Divine Dreams,

First, By word or clear declaration, as was that of Joseph, wherein he was
admonished not to forsake the holy Virgin, Mat. 1.20 Matthew. 2.13, 19.
and was warned to fly into Egypt, and to return from thence.

Secondly, By clear presentation of the object, or by Vision, as was that of
Paul, Act. 16 9.

Thirdly, By way of Typical or Enigmatical representation, Genesis 37. Genesis 40.
Genesis 41. Dan. 2.
as were the Dreams of Joseph, Genesis 37. of the Butler and Baker of Pharaoh,
Genesis 40. of Pharaoh, Genesis 41. of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. etc.

Indeed some may seem to be compounded of two, Genesis 31.10.
or of all these, as the Dream of Jacoh Genesis 31.10.

And yet this Mark of it self is something too wide to distinguish this sort of
Dreams from others of the worser sort. For there is none of these ways but
Satan and evil Angels may by Divine Permission make use of; but this will shut
out confused headless, extravagant Dreams from being of this sort.

2. The second Mark therefore is this, when they move unto that which is truly
and eminently good, or from the contrary evil, and have nothing in them that
stands opposite to the Truth or Holiness of the Word of God, or sound Reason,
nor that adds any thing to Gods Word, as a new way of righteousness or
salvation; nor inclines to exceed the limits or bounds of a man's Calling or
Vocation (unless in some extraordinary case) and warranted by some
extraordinary evidence. I accumulate all these together, for brevity sake. Act.
16.9
See how S. Paul gathered his Dream to be from God, Act. 16.9.

3. When they are of a wise, sober, of a just, and orderly frame and composure,
without any tincture of lightness, gingling or vanity in them, or in the
analogy that they have unto the things which they seem to imitate or represent.

4. When they come unto those that are good people, Judge. 22, etc. Genesis 20.
Genesis 31.24.
or unto others in the behalf of them, as they did unto Balaam on the behalf of
Israel, and unto Abimelech on the behalf of Abraham, and unto Laban on the
behalf of Jacob; as also to Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, etc. Yet I do not say that
this is proprium quarto modo, But it is that, that when it is present concurs
to the probability of the Dreams coming from God, although the contrary is not
concluded by the absence of this Mark; for we cannot say, but that God that
sends his rain upon the just and unjust, may also give admonitions by Dreams
tending to the temporal good of those that are not gracious, or unto the
spiritual good of those that are yet wicked, that they may be made gracious by
embracing them, or left inexcusable in rejecting them, or for some other ends
that are secret, and known only unto God, at least not unto us; or bringing
unto such wicked men the menaces of judgment and destruction, as the Dream of
Pharaohs Baker, and Nebuchadnezzar.

5. When they come unto us being in an holy temper and disposition of spirit,
not being in intemperance, or any other sinful distemper of mind.

6 When they come in some great necessity or strait, or in some extraordinary
case, or to admonish of some weighty matter tending to some end that is clearly
excellent and good; for God does not use strenue nihil agere, nor to use
extraordinary means, but to some great and extraordinary purpose, or else in
some great necessity.

7. When it leaves, as an holy and humble, so a great and strong and certain
impression upon the Mind, moving it not upon carnal but spiritual Principles
and motives, for the Spirit may be known much by the Arguments he uses.

8. When the Design has nothing in it unmerciful or uncharitable, nothing
violent or rash, not tending unto self ends, or the satisfaction of a worldly
or carnal mind

9. By the effect and consequent of it in the soul as Lessius has it, Vt si
inde remaneat illustratio animi, consolatio sive promptitudo ad ^bsequium Dei;
If there remain after, an holy clearness and consolation in the Spirit, an
increase of vigor and readiness to godly obedience and holiness. A spiritual
effect is a sign that the Spirit was at work.

10. It may be known (says Lessius) by a certain inward taste and relish in
the Soul; which I conceive is not to be expressed, nor can be understood by
those that have it not, nor can well be described by those that have it. But
this Mark, because it is hard to be discerned, and may be counterfeited by him
that knows how to appear in the form of an Angel of light, is to be attended
unto with great humility, sobriety, prudence and caution, and is to be examined
by the compliance that it has with the former Marks. Especially we must see
that that taste and relish do not encourage us to any thing that is evil or
sinful, or discharge us from duty, or carry us on in worldly or carnal designs,
or things that are frivolous and vain; but where it agrees with the rest, it
may have the force of a strong assurance. Aliter enim (says the Author
before-named) afficiunt mentem somnia divinitus immissa, aliter aliunde
provenientia.

11. When all the rest being agreeable, it agrees with some work that God has
in hand, and has something in it that seems to be above humane invention, and
has an excellent agreement in the several parts thereof, presenting the same,
or several things; is composed in a wise method and order, and is approved by
the event and exact consequence of things.

12. And lastly, When it comes unsought, and unexpected, nor has any
foundation in the fancies or apprehensions of him that dreameth it, but
presenting things above his knowledge, or above his ordinary or usual
affections.

Filliucus Quaest. Moral. Tract. 24. c. 5. n 123, 124. divides the Marks of
Divine Dreams into two sorts, 1. Those that may deceive. 2. Those that are more
certain.

Of the first sort are these. 1. The truth of them in the success; for the
Devil may speak truth in some things, that he may deceive in a greater matter
2. The profitableness of the matter of them. 3. That they are of good acts, and
seem to induce thereunto; for he does sometimes transform himself into an Angel
of light. 4. That they signify future contingencies, or internal thoughts or
mysteries of Faith; for all these things the Devil may discover by conjectures,
out of the affections of men, and out of the Scriptures.

Of the second sort are these. 1. If no filthy or dishonest thing happen in the
Dream. 2. If it be probable that it proceeded not from natural causes. 3. If it
leave the mind well disposed to devotion. 3. If the matter of the Dream
induces not to evil, or to vanity, or curiosity, but to good. 4. If the mind
after the Dream be more apt and prompt unto good works. 5 If it render the mind
certain that it is from God. In case of doubt he holds it safe to believe it to
be from the Devil.

Secondly, Those that proceed from the Devil and evil Angels are always evil,
at least in the design and end of them, and are to be rejected.

Of these Baldwinus sets down these several Marks, Baldwin. l. 3. c. 6. de
cas. cons. circa divinationem.
whereby he would have them concluded to be from the Devil, or evil spirits

1. When they tend to the investigation or discovery of things secret or
future, the knowledge whereof conferreth not to any profit (or true or solid
good) but unto vain estentation of knowledge, or to the commission of some
evil; then (says he) we may well judge that such Dreams are infused by the
Devil; for the vanities of Science, and evil designs or contrivances are the
works of the Devil.

2. When they tend to the leading of men from the holy Word of God to wicked
doctrines or opinions, which are painted over with the pretense or color of
Revelations and divine Visions, when they are indeed the mere delusions of
Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light. Such, says he, were the
Dreams of the false Prophets of old, tending to Idolatry; and of the
Anabaptists who excused their Seditions and absurd opinions and practices by
Visions and Dreams; and it were well that our Quakers and others that are
carried away into strange Fancies and irregular practices in this our Age and
Nation would try their pretended inspirations and Dreams by this rule, See
Deuteronomy. 13.1, etc.

3. It is a sign that Dreams are from the Devil and wicked spirits, when they
are such as inflame and stir up men unto lust, to hatred or revenge, or the
like evil affections, whereby the Bodies also of those that sleep are defiled,
and whereby they are indisposed to prayer, and the offices of piety to God, or
charity to one another.

4. When Dreams come upon superstitious seeking and expectation of them. Less.
de justitia, l. 2. c. 45. dub. 8.
Quando quis (says Lessius) divinationem per somnia quaerit certo modo vel
ritu se componendo ad somnium: hoc enim express est invocare Diabolum. When
any man does purposely seek divination by Dreams, composing himself thereunto
by superstitious Rites or Ceremonies; for this is expressly to invocate the
Devil. See Coelius Rhodig. l. 27. antiquarum lectionum.
Thus (says he) the Heathens were wont with premised fasting, to sleep in the
skins of stain beasts, that they might receive Answers or Oracles in their
sleeps. According to that of Virgil.

Pellibus incubuit stratis somnosque petebat.
He lay in skins bespread upon the ground,
That he might answers have in sleep profound.
As for those Dreams which proceed from the disposition of the Heavens and the
Air, or from the businesses or occurrences of the life, or from the humors,
diseases, or temper of the body, or from the affections, good or evil in their
mind, they may be discerned probably by the correspendencies that they have any
of them respectively, See Hippocrat. de insomniis. Galen de praesagio ex
insomniis.
unto any one or more of those causes; especially such as proceed from the
affections or dispositions of the Body or Mind. Thus (says Lessius) if a a man
dream of fire, it is a sign that he is troubled with choler; if of smoke, and
darkness, of Funerals, or such like sad things, he is troubled with melancholy;
if of rain, or snow, hail, or ice, with phlegm; If of mercy and cheerful things,
it seems to represent a sanguine complexion. If a man dreams that he flies, or
runs swiftly, it is observed to be a token of a light, healthy, and
temperate complexion: If a man dream that he is laden with heavy burdens, or is
in strait places where he can hardly run or turn himself, it is a sign that the
animal Faculty is oppressed with humors. Si ea quae ad libidinem pertinent,
signum est redundantiae spermatis. If a man dream that he is moiled with dirt,
or dirty, it is a sign that he abounds with putrid Humors.

There is a story of one that dreamt that he had his Thigh turned into a stone,
who shortly after had that Thigh stricken with a Palsy. And when one had
dreamt that he was in a Cistern full of blood, Galen conjectured that he was
plethorical, or troubled with overmuch abundance of blood. And thus that dream
or trouble in sleep, which the Physicians call (...) or (...) and the vulgar
amongst us, the Hag or Nightmare, the Latins Incubus, proceeds (says
Lessius) from a gross, See Galen l. 3. de lco. male affectis c. 4.
and obscure, or fuliginous vapor seizing upon the brain, and intercepting the
courses of the animal spirits.

Such Dreams as these, are clearly enough many times, at least very probably
deriveable from their roots and fountains.

And yet it is not to be denied, but that there may some Dreams seemingly
strange and prophetical, proceed from some secret seeds, or indiscernable
apprehensions of the approach of such events which are in the Soul; the manner
whereof we cannot understand no more then we can understand the operations of
the Loadstone; the presages that are found in Beasts and Fowls, of the change
of the Weather, or the sense that the Cock has of the several Watches of the
night, or approach of the day; or those secret emanations that are of causes
toward their effects, Opus naturae, opus intelligentiae, See Casaub. of Enthus.
which may perhaps be felt and apprehended by the strange intelligence of
Nature when we our selves cannot tell how we come to the sense or apprehension
of them.

Now if any shall be here desirous to inquire, why such kind of apprehensions,
as likewise those impressions that are received from God or good Angels, or
evil Spirits, should be more incident to men in their sleeps then when they are
waking: Though it may be hard to give so clear an answer unto this doubt, as
some would require; yet this may be something toward a degree of satisfaction,
that one reason may be because the soul is then usually fitted thereunto by a
twofold advantage. First, By the advantage of the night, whereby it is
delivered from those noises and lights, and other objects which are apt to
distract the notions, and hinder the intentions of the mind; which may be the
reason (as I think it is) that there is no time so fit for study and meditation
as the silent night.

And then secondly, Because of the advantage of sleep, whereby the soul is in a
great part delivered from bodily operations, and from the business of the
outward Senses, and from the commerce with external and worldly matters, which
puts it as it were into a kind of Sabbath or state of rest; yea, in some sort
into a state of separation, though not from the bond of bodily communion, yet
from the trouble of Bodily operation in some measure: Now the more quiet the
soul is, and the more sequestered from earthly and outward things, the more apt
it is to enjoy the benefit of internal light, and of discourse and intelligence
from it self, and the better fitted for spiritual commerce either with God
himself, or with spiritual Natures. Which may also lead us to understand
something toward a reason why men drawing near their departure, See Casaub. of
Enthus.
when the Soul is drawing into a separate condition by death, are observeed to
be disposed to presage and prophecy, and why people that are deprived of their
Senses seem sometimes to fall into fits of prophesying. See for our present
purpose what the Scripture says, Job 33.15, Job 33.15, 16, 17
16.17.

To this also may be added, That in the time of sleep, through the
Antiperistasis of the cold temper of the night, and by reason of the shutting
up of the doors and pores of the Body, the Spirits are like a fire in a close
Furnace, more hot and active at least to some purposes, and so more serviceable
it may be to internal and spiritual operations and receptions.

But it is time to come to some Rules, and so to draw toward a conclusion of
this matter.

That therefore we may know how to carry our selves in this matter as much as
may be without offense to God, or hurt to our Souls;

First, Let this be laid down as the foundation, That as many Dreams are to be
despised, and some to be rejected, abominated and repented of: so some are to
be observed and regarded, and may be attended to unto good advantage and
benefit. Nam vel omnibus, Baldw. de cas. cons. circa divinationem, l. 3. c. 6.
vel nullis fidem adhibere somniis ejusdem est vanitatis, (says Baldwin.)

Divine Dreams that come unto us with good testimony that they are such
(according to the Rules before set down) are to be exceedingly regarded, as
coming to us by Gods special, and sometimes extraordinary work of Providence,
which must needs be directed unto some weighty and good end, Filliucius Quaest.
Moral. Tract. 24. c. 5. n. 121. Sanctum and necessarium esse fidem adhibere
divinis somniis patet, quia quomodocunque Deus loquatur, fides ei adhibenda est.
as we must conclude, if we either consider the first Mover, which is God; or
the Instruments, which are his holy Angels. Such Dreams will challenge our very
serious consideration, and diligent care to take notice of those admonitions,
encouragements, or what else they offer unto us; and the neglect or contempt
thereof cannot be committed without great impiety; and therefore we have not
only a warrant, but an unavoidable and inviolable obligation in point of duty,
both in Obedience and Thankfulness, and in point of interest too, in order to
the good of our selves or others, to take notice of such Dreams, and to make
use of them according to their importance and purpose. Indeed we must first be
careful to examine them and try them according to the Rules; Filliuc. ib. Vt
his somnis fides adhibeatur, duo necessaria sunt; primo ut sufficienter constet
Deum vel ejus Angelum esse Auctorem ejus. Secundum, ut significatio somni
aperta sit.
and then when we have found them to be such, we may and must regard and make
the best, and the fullest, and the holiest use of them we can.

Secondly, We must by no means affect divination by Dreams, or put our selves
thereupon having neither warrantahle example, nor any precept or allowance in
the Word of God, no nor in sound Reason to encourage us thereunto; for this as
it is a tempting of God, so it is also a grand practice of superstition, and as
learned Mr. Casaubon says, Casaub. of Enthusias.
is little different from Witchcraft. And this is amongst those things which
are forbidden by God, Deuteronomy 18.10. Filliuc. ib. Non licet futurorum, seu
occultorum cognitionem desiderare per somnia, nisi urgens necessitas and ratio
occurrat, vel nisi id fiat ex instinctie Sp. S.
See Jer. 23.26, 27. etc. and 29.8 Where the people are forbidden to hearken to
their dreams which they cause to be dreamed, which does very properly prohibit
the affectation of Dreams; and all reliance upon such as are sought after:
Indeed this is a ready way to ruin our selves, and to expose our selves to
delusions and deceits. If men (says Casaubon) give their minds to such things,
Casaub. of Enthusiasm chapter 4.
there is no question that they shall fancy sometimes, nay often much more then
there is just ground for. And sometimes it may be somewhat may happen
extraordinary; Lessius de justitia, l. 2. c. 45. dub. 8.
but men, I think (says he) were better want it by far, if it come by
superstition, and not by immediate Providence, as (out of doubt) unto some
sometimes that are not superstitious. Lessius has a relation out of Gregory of
a certain man that was given much to attend unto Dreams, Greg. l. 4. dial c. 49
that he was promised in his Dream that he should live a long time, and when he
had laid up great riches for the supply of that long life, which he thought
himself assured of, He died suddenly. It is therefore well determined by
learned Dr. Sanderson in his Sermon upon Genesis 20. verse. 6 That since Scripture
Canon sealed, Dr. Sanderson's Sermon Genesis 20.6.
and the preaching of the Gospel become Oecumenial, Dreams and other
supernatural revelations as also other things of like nature, as miracles, and
whatsoever more immediate and extraordinary manifestations of the will and
power of God have ceased to be ordinary and familiar; so as now we ought rather
to suspect delusion in them, then to expect direction from them.

Thirdly, Yet because though God has now tied us unto the ordinary means and
directions of his Word and sound Reason; Dr. Sanderson ibid.
beyond which we may not expect and against which we may not admit of any other
direction (says the learned Author last named) as from God, yet he has
nowhere abridged himself of the power and liberty, even still to insinuate unto
the sons of men the knowledge of his will, and the glory of his might, Joel 2.
Act. 2.
by dreams and miracles, etc. (and let me add) since there is some promise of
this unto his Church; if at any time, either in the want of ordinary means, or
for the present necessity of the Church or of some part thereof, or for some
other just cause perhaps unknown to us, he shall see it-expedient, as these
kinds of extraordinary manifestations are not to be affected: so neither when
they come without affectation, and bring good and sound appearance of
righteous, and prudent and holy importance with them, and are upon trial
approved to be from God, are they by any means to be neglected. Sanderson ubi
supra.
But we must take heed we give not too easy credit unto them, until upon due
trial they shall appear both in the end whereunto they point, a direct tendency
to Gods glory, and in the means which they propose a conformity to Gods
revealed will in his written word.

Fourthly, Take another Rule from the last named Author: That so to observe our
ordinary dreams, as thereby to foretell future events, or forecast therefrom
good or ill luck in the success of our affairs, is a silly, groundless,
unwarranted, and therefore unlawful, and a damnable superstition.

Fifthly, As he goes on, That there is yet to be made a lawful and very
profitable use even of our ordinary Dreams, and of the observing thereof both
in Physic and Divinity; not at all by foretelling things to come, but by
taking from them some reasonable conjecture of the state of our bodies, because
the predominancy of humors, and differences of strength and health, and
diseases, and distempers, either by Diet or Passion, do cause different
impressions upon the Fancy; our ordinary Dreams may be a good help to lead us
into discoveries both of our natural constitution in time of health and of our
diseases in time of sickness. And because our Dreams look for the most part the
same way which our secret thoughts incline us; they may be useful to find out
our sins, and (as he observes) our master sin. And to this is agreeable that
of Lessius; Si somnia putantur esse ex causa naturali, Lessius de justitia l.
2. c. 45. dub. 8.
licitum est ex illis conjecturam facere de eventis quae ex illa causa
praevenire selent; if Dreams appear to proceed of a natural cause, it is lawful
to make conjectures from them of those events, Lessius ubi supra
which are wont to come from such a cause.

Sixthly, Take this from the same Lessius, When Dreams proceed from previous
cares and cogitations, they signify nothing of things to come, but do only
signify that cause from which they proceed. Yet so they may be useful to us (I
may say) to acquaint us the better with our selves, and to admonish us of our
sinful and distrustful cares, for our good and reformation.

Seventhly, Let this be observed as a Rule of great concernment; That
whatsoever may be presented unto us by Dreams or Enthusiasms, or any other way,
nay, though by an assured vision (if it were possible) of an innumerable
company of heavenly Angels, or with the testimony of many and great miraculous
operations, that stands opposite to the dictates and revelations, and rules
of God, and his Holy Spirit in the Scriptures, or intends to add any thing
thereunto, as a way or means to attain unto salvation, is to be utterly
rejected and abhorred as an accursed delusion, as likewise whatsoever tends to
the discharging of us from any duty, or to move us to any impiety, impurity, or
to uncharitable or evil thoughts of others without ground, or to any kind of
wickedness whatsoever; or to any thing that exceeds the bounds of our peculiar
Callings, unless in some extraordinary case or necessity. See Deuteronomy. 13 1, 2.
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2.
and that notable Scripture that all Quakers and pretended Enthusiasts may do
well to ponder and study Gal. 1.8, 9. Gal. 1.8, 9.
Though we, says St. Paul, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel
unto you, or (as it is in the original) (...), Preach any other thing unto you,
besides what ye have received, (...). Let him be accursed, which is repeated
again at verse 9. with such an earnest reduplication, as I think will hardly be
found again in all the Book of God; or at least very rarely; which should
admonish all to take the more notice of it, it being a Scripture of that weight
and force, that is able (if rightly understood and embraced) to overthrow all
pretense of Apostolical Authority, whsch the Church of Rome boasts of, and of
Angelical authority, or divine Revelation, which is the delusion of the
Enthusiasts of our days, to enforce us to admit of any thing that is contrary
to that saving Truth of the Gespel, which is registered in the Scripture, and
was of old embraced by the people of God, or that proposes any other way unto
salvation, then that which is to be found therein.

Eighthly, (which will follow upon the former) All Dreams, and so likewise all
pretended Enthusiasms, Inspirations, and Illuminations whatsoever, are to be
tried and judged approved, or controuled by the revealed will of Almighty God
in his holy Word, Isa. 8.19.
as also by the rule of sound Reason and Prudence; and if they bring not a
testimonial of conformity thereunto, they are by no means to be received. See
Isa. 8.19.

And here by the way, give me leave to take notice of a very evil and
unwarrantable course that has been taken up (if I be not mistaken) by too many
in these days, and has received too much countenance from those that are very
highly obliged to the contrary; so that it has been made the color of great
miscarriages, whilst some have taken upon them to seek unto God by fasting and
prayer for his direction and counsel in weighty affairs and concernments; and
neglecting to consider or embrace what advice God has laid down for their case
and purpose in his Law, they have sought and expected a return or answer by
extraordinary motions and suggestions or inclinations, which may sort better
with their (perhaps) evil interests and designs. And so whilst they have
carried the Idol or stumbling block of an evil interest in their heart, and in
just judgment from God, are left to receive an answer agreeable thereunto,
either from their own erring spirit, or the delusion of Satan, they have taken
his evil suggestions, or those that have proceeded from their own corruptions
(or at least have seemed to take them) for the holy counsel of the Almighty. I
am persuaded it would be little less, if at all less pleasing to God for them
to go to an Heathen Oracle, then to go to enquire of God upon such terms. I
wish that the serious reading and meditation of the eleven first verses of Ezekiel
14. Eze. 14.1. to 11.
might be rightly understood, and made good use of for the reformation of this
and suchlike great miscarriages.

Ninethly, As all wicked Dreams are to be abominated, and some to be earnestly
repented of, which flow from our own corrupt inclinations and affections. So
vain, and foolish, impertinent, confused Dreams (such as Dr. Jackson says
arise from the Garboiles of the fantasy, Dr. Jackson in his APANATHA or
Commentaries upon Christ's session at the right hand of God, etc. Sect. 3. chapter
9. sect. 11 Eccles. 34.1, 2, 3.
and of which he thinks that of Ecclesiasticus 34.1, 2, 3. is most true) are to
be sleghted, and those that move unto superstitious fears, that would
discourage from trust in God, or from our cheerful walking with him in duties.

But yet lastly, Those Dreams that without affectation offer themselves unto us
in a sober and calm temper, and are of a wise and orderly, of a just and pure,
of an holy and religious frame and method, not contradictory, but consonant to
the holy word of God, and sound Reason, and tend to nothing but that which is
just and holy, within the bounds of our Vocation, and to the glory of God.
especially when they come so clothed with opportunity and circumstance as that
they conduce to the encouragement or promotion of any good work that belongs
unto us, or that God has undertaken, or is doing upon us, or by us upon
others; or of any good and gracious design in hand, or to the taking us off
from any sinful doubts, sloth or impediments, that lie opposite thereunto, and
lie open to any such holy and prudent interp^etation, as they may well be
presumed to come from God, especially falling out in extraordinary matters, or
for the setting forward of more then ordinary designs; so they are to be
prudently regarded and weighed, so as to take encouragment and admonition from
them, and sometimes they may intimate unto us things that are to come.

CHAP. IX. An Application of what has been said unto the Converts Dream,
together with the Interpretation thereof.
IF we now compare what has been last spoken with the Dream we have in hand,
we shall find it to be of good and warrantable consideration for our purpose,
it being such, as first came in the transaction of a rare and extraordinary
matter or business; The conversion of a Turk being such as has been rarely
seen (I mean, of one that has been born and bred in that religion.)

Secondly, It has no stamp but of sobriety, purity, prudence, and holiness
upon it.

Thirdly, It came not upon any superstitious expectation, or preparation
thereunto.

Fourthly, it excellently complieth with the holy Word, and sound Reason.

Fifthly, It exactly answers, in all the parts thereof, unto that holy
business that was then in hand, and had been in motion the very evening before,
for the conversion of the soul of him that dreamed it to God, and for his
admission to the Ordinances, Privileges and graces of the Gospel.

Sixthly, The interpretation thereof is clear and easy for the most part, yea,
wholly indeed without any unreasonable straining or crossing of any one part of
it against another; it is very full of harmony and concent, and yet above and
beyond the knowledge of him that dreamed it, as the cafe was then.

The Interpretation thereof is clear and easy for the most part.

The Table with the Vessel upon it like a Basin or Font, The Interpretation of
the Dream.
does very well represent the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord the two great Pledges and Seals of the Christian Religion and communion,
the one of our admission or initiation, the other of our confirmation or growth
in the fellowship of Christ and the Church, and in the Graces of the Gospel.

The two men standing by; The two Ministers that were especially employed in
the work of his conversion, to bring him to the fruition of the blessing of
these Ordinances.

The filthy stinking puddle stream whereby he stood; The impure profession of
the Religion of Mahomet, wherein he was as yet held, which he had a desire to
continue in; but it could give no purgation, but rather pollution unto his soul.

The dead Hen cut about the head, and dead of that wound, lying in the filthy
stream, which a woman came and took out of that puddle, and set it upon her
feet, so that it ran away alive, we could not very well tell what to make of;
but he himself, after he was baptized (which may, I conceive, without offense,
be taken for a special work of the Spirit in him) he himself, I say, the
evening after his Baptism (as near as I can remember the time) interpreted it
thus, or to this purpose; Sure (says he) that dead Hen that lay in the filthy
stream, was my Soul that lay dead in the puddle of my errors; The Woman was the
Church of God (which is presented as a woman in the Scripture.) which has
taken my dead Soul out of the puddle of my errors, and restored me to life,
even to the life of grace, which having recovered, he now runs from that filthy
stream of the Mohammedan delusions. (Let me add this) That as that Hen lay dead
of a wound in the head, so he was dead in the blindness and errors of his
Understanding or Mind, which is, as it were, vulnus in capite, a wound in the
head, that being held to be the seat of the knowing or judging Faculties or
Powers.

The full and fair stream that gushed out suddenly, and brake in with great
force upon that current of corruption, and drove it clean away, and presentied
it self in the place of it, which he entered into at first with some
timorousness, and by degrees, and afterward washed himself in it, and swam over
it;

The holy water of Baptismal regeneration, or the stream of the Truth and grace
of the Gospel, which has suddenly through the goodness of the Lord, and very
powerfully, broken in upon his Soul, and driven away the puddle of his former
corruptions; which he was fearful to enter into at the first, but has now
washed therein for the cleansing of his soul, and will we hope swim through it
unto the Haven of eternal happiness.

The thirst that was upon him after his washing; The desire which he expressed
after the Lords Supper, or an holy longing after spiritual things, and the
comforts of the Gospel, or after happiness; which Thirst can find nothing upon
earth to quench it; the shower from Heaven, the shower or dews of heavenly
blessing, or of divine illumination and grace, which he could not tell how to
receive of himself. The poor house that he knocked at, The habitation of the
Church now in a poor afflicted condition, destitute of earthly magnificence and
glory. The woman that came forth, That afflicted Church. The dish she gave him.
The Ordinances and means of grace, whereby the heavenly dews we hope will be
more and more conveyed into his soul, to the quenching of all evil thirsts
after transitory things, and to the eternal refreshing of his Spirit.

CHAP. X. Of some further progress made in the conversion of Mr. Dandule, and
of another remarkable passage of Providence that fell out for the promotion and
encouragement thereof.
THis strange dream having made some impression upon the heart of this Convert,
as we may reasonably believe, whereby the bars of his soul were something
shaken and loosened, for the setting open of the gates for the admission of
that Gospel light wherewith God has been pleased now to illustrate his soul;
we renewed our attempts with some earnestness and diligence that morning, and
prevailed at length so far by the divine assistance, as to obtain of him, to
join with us in prayer for the assistance and direction of Almighty God in the
carrying on of the work of his conversion; and afterward he was with us in the
performance of the service of the Church for that morning, at my house, and
kneeled down and joined with us when we used the Lords Prayer; in this we made
use of the help of his Interpreter, that he might repeat it after us.

And in this holy business I cannot think fit to omit one remarkable passage of
the divine Providence which fell out in the performance of divine Worship at
that time, whereby the Lord may seem to have seconded that of his Dream and it
was this.

It pleased God (which we neither designed nor foresaw) so to order the matter
in that holy plot that he had laid for the bringing home of this soul into his
bosom, and for the reducing of this lost sheep into his fold; of this lost
piece of silver into his treasury; and of this Prodigal child from his
Mohammedan empty husks unto his Fathers house, The holy Church of Christ; That
in the ordinary course of the Church, the Second Lesson which we read appointed
for that very morning in the disposition of the Church Calender, fell out to be
the Fifteenth Chapter of the Gospel of S. Luke, where we have the parable of
the poor lost wandering sheep brought home upon the shoulders of the good
Shepherd unto his flock; of the silver piece that was lost and found again;
and of the Prodigal child returned unto his Fathers house and Bosom, and there
entertained with great love, melody and rejoicing: where also at the seventh
verse I found my Text, upon which God directed me to preach at the time of his
Baptism.

When in the reading of that Chapter, I observed that gracious Providence, I
could not pass it by without some notes upon it, and therefore by his
Interpreter I communicated unto him, that he might therein have a taste of Gods
care of his soul, that was pleased so wisely and carefully to order things that
we thought not off, for the speeding and promoting of the work of his
Conversion.

Withal, I offered him some observations upon the Chapter, tending to the
discovery of the wretched condition of one that was straied and lost from God
in the wanderings and wilderness of sin and error, and of the wonderful and
tender mercy of the Lord in seeking after, and receiving into his bosom such
poor sinners returning unto him; and of the great treasures of his goodness and
Bowels of his mercy, that he is ready to open and pour out unto them. And by
way of Application, I showed him, that he was in the several parts of that
Chapter; he was the lost sheep that Christ was even now seeking in the
endeavors of his Ministers for his Conversion, that he might bear him upon the
shoulders of his heavenly strength and mercy unto the Fold of his Church: He
was the lost piece that had been trodden under the feet of the spiritual
adversaries, and defaced by the filth and pollution of error and sin, which the
Lord was now about to recover into his treasury.

He was that wandering and wretched Prodigal that had been feeding upon the
husks of error and vanity, and that was brought unto great misery, whom the
tender Father, though he saw him afar off at the great distance of the errors
and imperfections that were in him, yet would run to meet, if he would but turn
to him with sincerity, and would entertain him with great love, mercy, and joy,
would fall upon his neck and kiss him with thckisses of divine love, would put
the Ring upon his finger, would marry him unto himself, and give him the pledge
of his everlasting love, would put the best Robe upon him, even the Robe of the
righteousness of Christ for his justification, and of the ornaments of the holy
and heavenly graces of his Spirit, for the sanctification of his soul.

Would kill the fatted Calf, would feast him with the mercies, graces, and
comforts of the Gospel in Christ Jesus, who died for his salvation.

Would refresh him, and solace him with the heavenly music and harmony of
Divine Peace, and his heavenly love, etc.

And thus the Lord was pleased to fasten another chain of his Divine Providence
upon his Soul; and added unto that dream in his sleep another testimony of that
watchful care that he had over that business we had in hand for his good.

CHAP. XI. A Discourse concerning this last Observation, and for the
justification thereof, by the proposal of diverse examples of Admonitions given
and taken from Providential occurrences of the like sort out of Scripture, and
other Histories
BUt this observation will perhaps be accounted frivol us and superstitious by
some, and may be abused by others; and therefore I crave leave a little to say
something for the vindication of it from the first, and to give some cautions
for the prevention of the second.

And first, That it may not be thought frivolous or superstitious that we have
taken notice of that Providential occurrence, I shall give you some warrant for
the justification of our observation, both out of the Scripture and other
approved Authors. First, We find the divine providence in a kind not much
unlike this, commended unto our consideration in the holy Book of God; such was
that that fell out unto the Eunuch, when the like work of conversion was
drawing near upon him, and that in order to the promoting of that like gracious
design that God had upon him, Act. 8.27, to 34.
Act 8.27. to 34. where it was so ordered by the divine wisdom and Providence
that that place of Scripture, Isa. 53.7.
Isa. 53 7. was then in reading by the Eunuch, when St. Philip was sent by the
Spirit of God to draw near unto his Chariot, by the explication whereof from
the mouth of St. Philip, he was converted to the Faith of Christ, and was
baptized in the way as he went, God making use of that Providential occurrence
to promote his commersion to the Gospel Truth; meeting him in his passage, Act.
9.
as he met St. Paul in his journey.

In the Fourth of Luke, Luke 4.16, 17, 18, etc.
we read that our blessed Savior being in the Synagogue at Nazareth, there was
delivered unto him the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, and when he had opened the
book, he found the place (it may not improbably imply that upon the opening of
the Book he found that excellent place of Scripture, Isa. 61.1, 2, Is. 61.1, 2
etc. wherein is contained our Saviors anointing and commission for the
sulfilling of that great Office of the Savior of the World) offered it self by
Providence first unto his view, that it might give him the occasion of that
holy discourse, that he made then unto the people, showing how that very place
was fulfilled in him that day before their eyes. Whether he looked for it, or
fell upon it by providence, is uncertain (says one of our late Commentators.)
I confess it is not very certain, but yet the words do unto me seem most
probably to imply so much, that he fell upon it by Providence; especially in
the Original, (...) etc. In the opening, or upon the opening of the Book he
found the place where it was written. I am sure enough we may safely think so:
for as all things that seem most casual even to the falling of a Sparrow, nay,
of an hair from the head, are under the care and guidance of the divine
providence, Mat. 10.29, 30.
Matthew. 10.29, 30, so we may assure our selves that that Divine Providence is
especally watchful for the ordering of all things (even the smallest matters)
that can be thought of in the world to serve that great design of the bringing
of Gods people to salvation by Christ Jesus. That Greek sentence is excellent,
which Mr. Down has, he tells us not from whence, in his Treatise about Lots
in gaming, (...), They that speak of the laying of stones, tell us that the
great stones cannot be well placed without the smaller. So (says he) also in
the Government of the world, for the better erdering of the greatest things,
God takes care of the smallest also.

Something very observable of a nature near unto our case, we may find in the
sixth of Esther, ver. 1. where we find a multiplied Providence in the ordering
of matters in esteem casual, for the diversion of that cruel design that Haman
had for the procuring of the death of Mordecai, when the Gallows was made for
poor Mordecai, and the next morning, that great Favorite that thought he had
the key and the stern too of the Kings heart in his mouth, intended to sue out
the Commission for his execution, whose life was the blast of all his comforts:
God orders the matter so by the ministry of an Angel (as one supposes) that
the King could not sleep that very night (for we may assure our selves no man
can at any time sleep, when God has any thing to do with his waking for the
good and benefit of his people; not the softest beds, not the darkest night,
nor the weariest journeys or labors in the day, nor the plentifullest cups, nor
the warmest clothes, nor the quietest heart, nor the strongest opium can
prevent or disappoint such a purpose of the Almighty.) God kept Ahasuerus
waking, because he had some business to do with him about Mordecai, to
counterplot the design of Haman; and when he found that he could not sleep, God
finds him out an employment to pass away the tediousness of a waking night.

It is the observation of Cornel. a Lapide out of Herodotus (as I remember)
that it was a laudable custom received among the Persians, That those good and
meritorious performances, whereby any man had deserved well of the King or
Kingdom, should be recorded in the public Annals or Memorials, that they might
not be forgotten in the reward: And this agrees well with our story in Esther,
such a record there was of that faithful service that Mordecai did, Esth. 2.21.
Esth. 2.21. etc. This lay asleep for a time, and was forgotten, but when the
time of need comes, then God revives it, who lays up mercies aforehand for his
Children, and brings them out when opportunity requires; and this was a now or
never; for after the next mornings work, if Haman had sped, it had been too
late. Therefore now in this very night, that he might be sure to remember it in
the morning, and that he might prevent the design and suit of Haman, the King
being deprived of his rest, must needs call for the Records of the Chronicles,
little thinking what Gods purpose was, or what a Lecture God had to read to him
in that Book.

And when this Book is brought unto him, That must be the place by Divine
Providence, that must then needs be read unto him, either in the course of the
reading, or perhaps by chance, where poor Mordecat's Neck-verse was, where it
was found written that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the
Kings Chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the King
Ahasuerus: honest Moraecai would not be an accessory no not so much as by
concealment unto Treason or Treachery against a Heathen King; and see how God
blesses Fidelity and allegiance; this faithful and honest act of his is in
bank for him against the time of his necessity, and is by this providential
disposition of the Almighty in this nick of time presented before the eyes of
the King, to the turning of Hamans wicked design for Mordecai's shame and
death, to his safety and honor; and to return at length his intended mischief
upon himself, whilst Mordecai's escape gives the time for the procuring of
Hamans condemnation, and for the defeat not only of that bloody purpose which
he had now for the ruin of Mordecai, but of that also which he had for the
destruction of the Jews; and all this great evil is prevented, and so great
good, so joyful a deliverance brought to pass, by the (perhaps) casual turning
of the leaf of a Book, or by the order or course which then fell out in the
Kings reading of the Chronicles; Natura nusquam magis quam in minimis, so says
one; and we may further say, I think, Providentia nusquam magis quam in
minimis; The Providence of God is very wonderful in turning the greatest scales
with the smallest grains; in making so small, so inconsiderable a matter as the
turning of a leaf in a Book at such a time to be the means to prevent the ruin
of a Nation. Oh learn to admire and observe the Providence of God in the
smallest matters: An holy curiosity of this kind is both pious and profitable;
who can consider it and not adore him? And consider withal, with how small a
matter God can deliver a Nation, even with the turning of a leaf, and what
great use he can make of the orderly course of reading, who can think on it,
and not fear him and trust in him? He that did this with the turning of a leaf,
can do as much with the turning of a straw.

Thirdly, Consider what great blessing the smallest matters in the world may
minister unto us, if they be guided to our good by the gracious Providence of
God; and what misery and mischief may grow up out of the smallest seeds, the
poorest and most inconsiderable occurrences, if God do not shine through them
unto us, and do not order them for our benefit, or shall appoint them to be
instrumental to our hurt or destruction.

And lastly, See here not only the truth but the reason of Gods universal
Providence in the ordering of the smallest things and motions of the world,
since we see that he makes even the smallest matters servsceable to his great
aad wonderful mercies and judgments. We cannot tell what God has to do with a
single straw that swimmeth down the water; And may not this without offense
make something to the persuading of people not to be so much out of love as
they have been with the orderly course of the Churches readings?

We have discovered, I hope, so much countenance from these examples in
Scripture that may secure us from any just charge of superstition in that
observation that we have made of that which fell out in the course of the
reading by the course of the Church, in order to the conversion of this person.

And having taken notice of this, I hope we may with the greater freedom and
confidence offer to consideration some other passages of the like nature that
have befallen others in the records of the succeeding times.

Sulpitius Severus, in the life of Martinus, Sulpit. Severus in vita Martini.
has a relation to this purpose; that when the people of Turonica were about
to choose that holy man to be Bishop of that place, and one of the Bishops that
were then present, whose name was Defensor, amongst others was a principal
opposer of his election: The Reader (whose office it was to read the Scriptures
that day) being wanting, another that was present, taking up the Book of
Psalms, fell a reading at that place which presented it self first unto his
view, which was Psalm. 8. at the second or (as it is there cited) at the third
verse of which Psalm the words in that Translation which was then used, Ps.
8.2, 3
are thus rendered, Ex ore infantium and lactantium perfecisti laudem, propter
inimicos tuos ut destruas Defensorem; Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings
thou have perfected praise because of the Enemies, and that thou may destroy
Defensor, or the Defender; which having such a reflection on his name (as it was
apprehended) the people took as a testimony from Heaven against him, and his
attempt in opposing the election of their Bishop, as if that Psalm had been
appointed by Divine Providence to be then read upon that occasion, and so the
people fell a shouting, and the contrary party was confounded.

It may be this may seem a little too light, nor do I press it to be valued any
more then the weight of it shall persuade.

These that follow will, I hope, be admitted to be considerable to our purpose.

As first, Austin. Confess. l. 8. c. 12.
That which St. Augustine relates of Antonius, that whilst he was yet hanging
off as it were from God toward the world, Mat. 19.21.
casually lighting upon that place, Matthew. 19.21. Vade and vonde omnia, etc. Go
and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure
in heaven, and come and follow me; he was thereupon presently converted.

Secondly, August. Confess. l. 8. c. 12.
that which he relates of himself in the same Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth
Book of his Confessions (which it seems had somewhat the more impression upon
him, from the consideration that he had of the former example.) The matter was
this; when he was in great perplexity of spirit in those beginnings and
preparations of the work of conversion that were upon him, he heard a voice, as
he thought, from the neighboring house, as of Boys or Girls singing in these
words, Toil lege, Toll lege; Take up and read, Take up and read; which he
taking to be an admonition from Heaven, went speedily to the place where he had
left his Book of St. Paul's Epistles, and upon the opening thereof found that
place presented it self unto his view, Romans 13.13.
Romans 13.13. Non in comessationibus, etc. Not in rioting and drunkenness, not
in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but put you on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof; Whereby the clouds of those doubtings and waverings that were upon his
soul were presently scattered, and he brought into a cheerful resolution, to
give up himself in holy Religion to God, to the joy of his pious Mother, and
the comfort of his own soul.

Thirdly, Eusebius. Eutic. Histor.
That of Origin, I conceive, is not to be omitted; He living in a time of
temptation and persecution, and having a great desire to draw people from
Idolatry, and being deluded, as it seems, with hopes that some would be
baptized upon a day wherein they were to offer incense unto the false gods, was
stirred up with zeal in his heart to do his endeavor to turn some people unto
Christ; and to that end, he makes so much haste unto the place where that
Idolatry was to be committed; Planctus Origin. Ego vero infaelix ante diluculum
de strato exiliens nec orationem quidem consuetam implere potui; sed desiderans
omnes homines salvos fieri and in cognitionem veritatis venire, meipsum in
Diaboli laqueis implicavi.
trusting (it may be too much, as St. Peter did) upon his own strength and
resolution therein, that he emitted his ordinary morning devotion (which I
desire may be observed) and coming to the place, and being left unto himself by
God (whose service he had neglected that morning, and whose direction and
assistance it may be he had not so carefully sought as he should have done)
instead of diverting others from their Idolatrous practice, he was through
weakness drawn into it himself, and so took a very dreadful and dangerous fall;
choosing rather to offer incense, then to have his Body defiled by a filthy
Blackmore, which it seems was threatened. After this being at Jerusalem,
whether he went being ashamed to continue at Alexandria, and there requested to
preach or expound the Scriptures unto the people; when he was entering upon the
business, and had opened his Book, there was first, it seems presented unto his
view that place of the Fiftieth or as it is otherwise reckoned, the Forty ninth
Psalm at the sixteenth verse, etc. Ps. 50.16
But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee, etc.

Whereat he was so smitten and startled, Planctus seu lamentum Origenis inter
opera ejus. Maceriam posuit ori meo, coactus sum a sanctis Episcopis in
doctrinae verbum prorumpere; and accepto codice Psalmorum orans aperui, and
ascendit mihi eloquium illud quod confundor dicere, eloqui compellor; Peccatori
autem dixit Deus, Quare tu enarras justitias meas; and assumis testamentum meum
per os tuum?
as if God himself had flashed with heavenly lightning into his face in the
reading of those words, that his mouth was stopped, and instead of a fluent of
words, he brake forth into a flood of tears. And when he had made a passage for
his language through that great storm and dreadful tempest that was raised in
his soul, instead of instructing the people, he fell into a grievous
lamentation and deploration of himself and of his own horrid sins, and his
wretched condition: Which we have recorded in the works of Origin, with so much
bitterness of spirit, and deep humiliation of soul, as his expressions
represent, as I think can hardly find a parallel in the Ecclesiastical Story;
and therefore we cannot I conceive without breach of charity, and without
condemning our selves who come so far short of it, doubt but it was accepted by
God: And as little reason have we to make any question but there was a
gracious, and wise, and holy work of Gods all-disposing Providence in the
matter.

I might here set down some remarkable passages of this nature, that have
fallen out in our unhappy days, at the time of a great trial and catastophe in
this Nation, when the readings of the day did very aptly answer the sad
condition of a great person in this Realm. But it may be this would more
provoke then edify.

It will be safer to tell you that it is related of Franciscus Junius, that is
joined with Tremelius in the Translation of the Old Testament, See Casaub of
Enthus. c. 4.
That he was not converted to be heartily a Christian until the first words of
St. John's Gospel were offered unto him by a strange Providence, as he conceived.

These things I hope may serve for the justification of our forementioned
Observation.

CHAP. XI. Of Divine Providence, and the excellent use thereof.
BUt it will be requisite I conceive, to say something by way of caution, least
any should abuse it, or those other things that have been produced of the like
nature to the encouragement or countenance of superstition.

There was indeed (as learned Pencerus writes in his Book de Divinatione,
Pencerus de divinatione.
and his Treatise de Sortibus) A certain superstitious kind of Sortilegy or
Lottery amongst the Heathens, which were styled Sorts Virgilianae, Cum aperto
libri codice qui primi visu occurrissent versus in oraculi omen assumebantur:
When the Book being opened at adventure for the purpose, the first verses or
lines that were presented to the eye, were taken to have the force of an
oracle. An example whereof, as Pencerus tells us, Helius.
is remembered by Helius Spartianus in the life of Adrian, which Adrian being on
a time solicitous concerning the mind of the Emperor toward him, and desiring
to be resolved by this Virgilian Sortilegy, upon the opening of the Book met
with these verses, Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis olivae
Sacra ferens? nosco crines incanaque menta
Romani regis, primus qui legibus urbem
Fundabit, curibus parvis, and paupare terra,
Missus in imperium magnum.


Now that this was, and that all such practices are superstitious and impious,
there is no question to be made, as being no better then Witchcraft, and
consulting with the Devil; and that though the Book of the holy Scripture it
self should be used in any such way, as to put any thing or event upon such a
trial thereby, the holiness of that Book would be so far from excusing or
diminishing the sin that it were so much the greater, and more abominable
iniquity; for the holier any thing is in the right use, the more wicked is the
^buse thereof. Corruption optimi pessima.

That therefore whilst we labor to justify that which is good and lawful, we
do not through unwariness encourage any unto that which is evil, which is too
often done:

I shall endeavor to set down some safe and necessary Rules and Cautions to be
observed in matters of this nature.

First, Concerning matters of Providence in general.

Secondly, Concerning the use of Lots, which are re^ucible thereunto.

Thirdly, Concerning the Observations that may be made of remarkable
Providential oc^urrences.

First, This is a safe and certain Rule, That it is not only lawful, but the
duty of all people to take special notice of the carriages and dispensations of
the holy Providence of God; and that even in those occurrences thereof, which
seem unto us through the ignorance of the dependence that is between causes and
effects, to be very casual and contingent, which is very clear not only from
those many places of the holy Scripture which present the Providential works of
God unto our consideration, and earnestly call upon us for our meditation
thereupon, and rebuke the neglect; but also from sound and clear reason, and
the many excellent uses that may and ought to be made thereof.

The Providence of God is his great treasury, abounding with excellent and
precious riches from whence we may enrich and furnish our souls with many
excellent documents and divine instructions.

It is a great and glorious Theater wherein we may behold the great and
magnificent and wonderful spectacles of the operations of the perfections and
attributes of God, and see the divine Artificer at work in the great shop or
laboratory of the world, and there making use of his several Agents and
Instruments, of Angels and Men good and bad, of the heavenly Bodies, and of all
the creatures in the variety of their motions and effects to those various and
wonderful purposes and products whereunto they are employed by the divine
wisdom, and that many times against their own purposes and designs.

Here we may see him by the art and efficacy of his divine wisdom and holiness,
exercising a strange and wonderful Chemistry (as I may so speak) making
extracts of good out of every evil, light out of darkness, holiness out of
sin, and the greatest good out of the greatest evil; as the salvation of the
world out of the treason of a Judas, and the malice and cruelty of the wicked
Jews.

Here we may see him in the Divine subtilties and wise contrivances of his
heavenly policy, countermining the designs, and blasting the counsels of the
crafty Achitophels, the greatest and wisest Politicians of the world, taking
them in the nets that themselves have woven, and making their turning of things
upside down, Is. 29.16.
to be but like the turning or treading of the clay for the Potter, out of
which, when they have done all they can, he frames what vessel it pleases him
for the advancement of his own glory, the good of his people, and the confusion
of his subtilest adversaries, making them in the midst of their joy and
triumph, to dig those pits for their own ruin, which they intended for the
destruction of others, and giving the prize from their great wisdom, unto the
simplicity of foolish and imprudent people.

There we may admire him in the might of his power, making the weak things of
the world to confound the mighty; carrying on a poor scattered and peeled
people, a poor disarmed, persecuted Church furnished with their prayers and
tears, and destitute of all outward strength, in defiance of all the power and
wisdom of the world that was against it, as in the times of the primitive
Church, wherein the Church and Gospel being born upon the wings of the divine
Power and Providence, without the help of outward force or wisdom by the
ministry of weak and disarmed people, as to outward weapons, pressed through
the terrors and strength of the greatest Potentates, and their Armies, through
the Schools and reasonings of the great Philosophers, through fire and faggot,
through most exquisite torments and disgraces, through all that Earth and Hell
could do against them; and ran through Europe, Asia, and Africa in a small
time, and subdued the world to the acknowledgment and worship of a crucified
Savior, and (which increases the wonder) suffering the same Church when once
grown proud, hrough a luxurious diet she had put out like a wen, the monstrons
exuberancy of a fleshly arm, to lose by strength what she got in weakness,
which after so many sad experiments of the ill success of the adventure of
warlike Christians, with any other weapons then their own before mentioned, may
well make us wish as one of elder times. That Christians would lay down their
swords and spears and return to their prayers and tears; The loss of so great a
part of the world, as the Mahometans of several sorts, and others can boast of,
being the sad consequent of the change of their armory.

There we may see the justice of God retriving sinners from the mark where a
long flight from pursuing vengeance had lighted them down, (they have thought)
in-a sure shelter, and fetching them up again out of their darkest Corners, and
meting unto wickedness in its own very measure, and making impiety its own
judge and executioner, Note that blood has a hot scent and such as will not
easily be gone.
and causing evil and destruction like a well-nosed Blood-hound, to hunt the
violent man to overthrow him, to hunt him out of all his windings, and
doublings, his traverses, and bushes, to bring him unto ruin.

There we may solace our drooping souls with the ravishing beauties of his
transcendentholiness, of his unchangeable truth, and of his magnificent bounty
overflowing the whole world, and all the creatures thereof, opening, extending,
and enlarging his, arms and breasts both to the just and to the unjust; from
the highest and greatest Angel to the smallest worm, or fly, or mite in the
whole world, feeding the hands that fight against him, nourishing those mouths
that blaspheme and reproach him, pursuing those with blessings that run away
from him in their sins: Courting those with the kind tokens and large presents
of his love, that continue in a perverse resolution of war and enmity against
him; begging at the doors of poor and indigent people with great importunity,
that they may receive the free alms of his riches; bearing many and many
repulses and affronts offered unto his kindness by proud and wilful dust and
ashes, and after much long-suffering vindicating the honor of his despised
goodness, by turning all his contemned clemency into rage and fury against them
that reject it.

And there we may solace our souls with the sweet operations of his most dear
and melting mercies and compassions (as in the present case) unto poor lost
sinners, fetching them home from their errors and wickedness upon the Shoulders
of his strength, and in the Bosom of his love, carrying his Lambs in his arms,
and gently (...) Tremelius in the Translation of the Old Testament, That he was
not converted to be heartily a Christian until the first words of St. John's
Gospel were offered unto him by a strange Providence, as he conceived.

These things I hope may serve for the justification of our forementioned
Observation.

CHAP. XI. Of some succeeding Passages after this forementioned work of
Providence, in order to the Turks Conversion, and of his consenting and earnest
desire to be Baptized.
GOd having put the Dream, and that work of his Providence which have
occasioned so large a Discourse, as two wheels as it were, unto the Chariot of
our motions and endeavors, after some little pause caused by the business of
the Lords Day, wherein I was employed, as I have been sundry times by the
favorable admission of reverend Dr. Bernard in the honorable Society of
Grayes-Inn in London; which gave a seasonable opportunity to Mr. Dandulo to
ruminate upon the former passages, and to digest those admonitions and
instructions which he had received: Upon the Monday following I thought good to
endeavor some farther promotion of the Work, that we might not suffer those
heats which God had raised to cool in his heart, nor those impressions which
our Convert had received, to languish or grow dull in his Soul, but that we
might make a seasonable advantage of those encouragments which God had given
unto the business, and strike, as they say, which the iron was hot; and press
in upon his Spirit at that door which God had now begun thus far to open unto
us; and that not only because constancy and prudent speed, that allows as
little delay or intermission as may stand with convenience, are a great means
to secure the success of a good enterprise, operations being then most strong
and vigorous, when they are carried on in a sort together, so that they
communicate mutual strength unto one another, and those that succed become
powerful, whilst they make advantage not only of their own strength but of the
force and impression of the former that have gone immediately before them: Upon
which account it comes to pass that so many great and good undertakings in the
World and in the Church have been lost by interruptions and procrastinations;
opportunities once lost, being usually with much difficulty or not at all to be
recovered; but besides these considerations we had reason enough to believe
that the Devil who is very watchful to take all advantages for the blasting of
those purposes that are good and holy, would be ready and diligent to make an
evil use of all the time that should be given him for spoiling and
disappointment of that business we had in hand, whereby God was like to be so
eminently glorified, if it should obtain our happy and desired success. And
that which was indeed very urgent in the requiring a speedy and vigorous
prosecution of the work, was the danger that seemed to threaten an entire
overthrow both unto our endeavors and hopes if not speedily encountered, by
reason of those inclinations that appeared in him of a sudden departure, not
only from the place where the work was now begun upon him, but out of this
Nation, by a return into his own Country, to which purpose (as it has been
since suggested with some apprehension, as it seemed to me, of disparagement to
him and his Conversion; though I cannot see upon what reason or ground, and as
he himself has confessed, being put unto the question upon occasion of the
aforesaid suggestion unto me) he had attempted an address by way of petition
unto the Protector for a Pass, and some provision to convey him over into his
own Country again.

And give me leave to take notice of it by the way, because (as I formerly, in
some discourse that I had with a worthy person concerning the care that ought
to be taken of this new Convert, upon the assurance of the great malice that
Satan bears unto such performances, against which he rages in himself and his
instruments, as a Bear robbed of her Whelps, did take upon me to conjecture and
aver that it would fall out) there have been various endeavors both to corrupt
and to blast the credit of the Work that has been by Gods mercy wrought upon
this our Convert. One having reported, and he a Minister of these times, as I
am informed, most falsely and uncharitably, that he was hired to become a
Christian: Another, that he staieth here and becomes a Christian, because he
dares not return home for fear of being put to death, for violating the Laws of
Mahomet in drinking wine before his conversion, for which he was reproved and
threatened by the Agent with whom he came hither from Algeir: Another that he
was baptized heretofore elsewhere. But I would advise all men to take heed how
they go about to disparage the gracious works of the Almighty, through the envy
that they bear toward the instruments which God is pleased to use and own in
such matters, or to discourage young Converts that are brought home into
Christ's Bosom; lest they prove themselves thereby to be worse Christians then
he, and render themselves liable to that condemnation of our Savior, Matthew.
18.6. Who so shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me (which
may be understood of those that are children in grace, as of those that are
children in years also) it were better for him that a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.

But indeed this intention of his return which he manifested so clearly by his
attempt of petitioning the Protector for the purpose, as is before declared,
which has been also urged against him as a disparagement, does confute the
most of these suggestions, and does render it improbable that he was either
afraid to return, or that he was baptized before at any other place; which if
it had been true, he could not have returned without an eminent danger of being
put to death. And indeed this intention and inclination of his to a sudden
return home, as it has by Gods Providence proved useful for the clearing of
him from those false accusations and disparagements, so was it also for the
hastening us on in the prosecution of the work of his Conversion we had in
hand, in order whereunto, I made speed unto the pursuance thereof, the day
beforementioned: And whereas many good undertakings it may be feared come
short of an happy issue, through that evil selfishness which is in too many,
whereby they seek to get the glory of the work unto themselves, together with
that evil confidence and self-conceit which some men have of their own
abilities which render them averse from either desiring or admitting that help
that they might have from the Association of others, which the holy Apostles
themselves disdained not to make use of: That therefore this work might not
want either countenance or assistance, nor fail through the weakness or
miscarriage of my endeanors, of which indeed I was very fearful, whereby I
might have become answerable for the loss of his Soul, and for the
disappointment of that glory which has since by his conversion accrued unto
God, I prevailed with reverend Dr. Bernard, and Dr. Gauden, to accompany me
that day unto Chelsey, who willingly complied with my desires therein; and sent
withal to desire Mr. Gunning, and Mr. Samois the Interpreter to meet us there.
When I with those two reverend Divines first mentioned had arrived at the
place, Signior Dandulo was prevailed with to give us a meeting at my house; but
Mr. Gunning and the Interpreter being not yet come, and the reverend persons
that were with me being unwilling to stay long by reason of some occasions
which it seems called them back unto London: We as well as we could, without
the Interpreter entered upon some discourse with him, which although it was but
short, and much disadvantaged for want of Language; yet we prevailed so far,
that it obtained some kind of consent unto the truth of those things which
were offered unto him in order to his imbracement of the Christian Religion.
(An account of the Arguments and discourses that passed in this business from
the beginning to the end, I have thought good to make the business of a Chapter
by it self, to avoid the trouble of repeating over and over the same things
again both unto my self and to the Reader.) And although we could not as yet
obtain of him a declaration of his full resolution to be baptized, which as he
had manifested in former communications, he desired not to be over-hastily
pressed unto, but that he might be allowed good time to deliberate and consider
of so weighty a business as that was, and that was to be resolved on no other
terms but the deserting and forsaking of so many earthly comforts, as of
Parents, Country, Inheritance, and Marriage intended, which were all to be
drowned unto him in the water of his Baptism; yet we obtained this expression
of approbation and consent, at least unto the main of our discourse, E Buono,
that is to say, This is good or true. But after our departure back to London,
the same day it pleased God to send reverend Mr. Gunning and the Interpreter
unto him, who in my absence accosted him with some fresh discourses at the Lady
Lawrences, where was his usual abode in Chelsey, and after some strugglings,
obtained from him at length (as if some violent beam of light and grace had
broken in upon his Soul, and had upon the sudden captivated all his contrary
imaginatious, and scattered the mist of all his waverings and doubtings) not
only a consent to be baptized into Christianity, but also so earnest a desire
and inclination thereunto, that overpowered all his former thoughts of
deliberation; and was so impatient of delay, that he cried out upon the sudden
De main, that is to say, Let it be done to morrow; and when for the solemnity
of the performance, and for the obtaining of some convenient space and
opportunity for his further instruction and preparation to that great work, it
was made known unto him that it was not thought convenient to perform the
celebration until the Lords Day; he seemed to be something troubled at the
delay. The happy and joyful news of this blessed success was carefully and very
respectfully sent by Mr. Gunning unto me at Westminster, which drew me from
thence unto Chelsey very late at night, that I might be a joyful witness of so
happy an issue which God had given unto that gracious work he had begun by so
weak and inconsiderable an instrument as I acknowledge my self to be: And that
I might be serviceable by such advice, and further assistance as God should
enable me to give in order to the accomplishment of this so comfortable a
product of the admirable and excellent mercy of the Lord, to whom be all the
glory of this, and all the works of his gracious goodness: And if we glory in
any thing, let it be in this, that God is pleased to be glorified by us or in
us, that so if we glory we may glory in the Lord.

CHAP. XII. Of the Advantages found even in the Religion of the Mahometans, and
in the Turks own acknowledgements, for the carrying on of his Conversion.
ALthough we have obtained one great end of our Narrative in that declaration
which has been already made of that blessed success which God gave unto our
endeavors, in that ready consent and earnest desire which was wrought in the
Soul of our Convert, in so little a time as was that of very few weeks, to
renounce that great Impostor Mahomet with his delusions, and to devote and
marry his Soul unto Christ Jesus the great and true Prophet of the Church and
only Savior of the World, which is a matter that chalengeth the joy both of
Angels in Heaven, and all good men upon Earth; yet forasmuch as there is an
holy, and not only harmless but profitable curiosity, that does usually
possess the hearts of Gods people to search (as God is pleased to allow them)
into the great and gracious works of the Almighty; and not only to put that
question, Number. 23.23. What has God wrought? That they may solace themselves
with the spectacle of the sweetness of his mercy, but to look also into the
ways and means, the manner and method whereby the Lord carries on his
performances, that they may delight and edify their Souls, by the
contemplation of his divine wisdom and power shining forth through the weakness
and simplicity of the instruments that he is pleased to make use of; The holy
study of Gods works being the great Philosophy of Gods people; and their great
learning to understand the loving kindness of the Lord: That this knowledge may
be the fuel and furniture of their praise and devotion, which is the great end
of their Creation and Redemption, which is the study that they are invited unto
in this Treatise; the design whereof is to present unto them a great and new
work, and fresh frame and platform of divine, and those very remarkable
dispensations which the Lord was pleased to produce and put together in this
subject we have in hand. For this reason, and yet moreover, because it may
perhaps give some light not unuseful for the discovery of the great difference
there is between the beautiful truths of the Gospel, and the deformed errors of
the Alcoran, and may afford some help and encouragement unto others for, and in
the undertaking of the like endeavors of conversion: I shall therefore for the
better clearing of the matter, and that men may see by what advantages this
was, and other such like conversions may be attempted, and know in some measure
from what desperate errors and mischief this conversion has brought the Soul
of him that has embraced it, to the enlargement of our comfort, and
advancement of the glory of Gods grace, I shall endeavor to set down some
principal matters or tenets wherein the Mahometans and we do agree; and subjoyn
some of those most remakable errors wherein they differ from Christianity; that
by this we may be enabled to discover the disease of those that are misled in
that way of error, and by that we may be the better instructed for their
conversion; for since every conviction does proceed a concessis, and must fetch
its strength from some Truths that are granted and agreed upon; if it be
rightly managed it is of great concernment for us to know both wherein they
agree with us, and wherein they differ from us, that we may gain strength and
advantage from the one, for confutation and remedy of the other. Take therefore
these Observations out of Levinus Warnerus in his Compendium Historicum printed
at Leyden, 1643. and others.

First, Quod illi (Adam and Eva) cum essent origo hominum eorumque stirps,
reputati sint ac si homines ^ universi essent.
They do acknowledge the fall of all Mankind in Adam and Eve their first
Parents, in a greater degree I fear then some Christians in our days; for they
declare concerning the casting out of Adam and Eve out of Paradise that it may
also be fitly understood of their posterity; for that seeing they were the
orignal and root or stock of men, they were reputed as if they had been all men
in general. In which words says Warnerus, the same seems to be intimated
that the Apostle of the Gentiles says, Romans 5.
(...): By one man sin came into the world -- for that or in whom all have
sinned: So that they seem to embrace that of the same Apostle, that by the
disobedience of one man many were made sinners, but then though they
acknowledge the disease so far; yet as evil and unkind Physicians to
themselves and others, they reject the remedy, and will not embrace that which
the Apostle adds, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous;
but instead of this they believe that Adam without any satisfaction presently
obtained pardon, when being led by repentance he made this Prayer to God, which
the Alcoran recites, Domine noster, injurii fuimus animabus nostris, and si
non condonaveris nobis ac misertus fueris, damnum feremus. O Lord, we have been
injurious to our souls, and if thou pardon us not we must bear the damage or
punishment.

And they say, that this sin of our first Parents was but asmal sin, that the
punishment thereof might be the more exemplary, that men might thereby know
that great and careful caution is to be used that they let not loose the bridle
unto sin. Cum ille Adam ejectus sit de Paradiso ob unicum peccatum, quomodo
ingrediatur eam plurimis obnoxious peccatis? Since Adam was cast out of Paradise
for one sin, how shall he enter thereinto that is guilty of many sins? But they
think that there is no need of a Mediator who should expiate this sin, or that
should suffer death, that man under his conduct might triumph over death, being
subdued and chained up.

They allow Christ to be the Son of Mary, and because Children are denominated
from their Fathers not from their Mothers, they say we may learn from that
denomination of him from his Mother, that he was born without a Father,
according to that expression of the Evangelist, (...), She brought forth her
Son. And to those eminent Prophesies, Genesis 3.15. where he is called the Seed of
the woman, not of the man. And Isa. 7.14. where he is promised to be the Son of
a Virgin: And such a wonderful conception and birth they acknowledge this to be
as never was granted unto any other Mother or Child; and therefore in their
Exposition of the words which they say the Angel spoke unto the Virgin, O
Maria, Dius elegit te and purificavit te, elegit te supra mulieres omnis aevi,
etc. O Mary, God has chosen thee and purified thee, he has chosen thee above
the women of all Ages. They interpret it thus, He has purified thee from
impure works, and from that of which the Jews accused thee, he has chosen thee
above women of all ages, in that he gave thee Jesus without a Father, which
happened not unto any other amongst women; contrary to that wicked lie of the
Jews in their Sepher Juchafin, (...)
when they say that in the reign of the Grecians, and the time of the Tribes,
there was a famous wise man at Rome, called Prometheuss who decreed that the
Ring should be worn upon the fourth finger, because the vain of the heart was
in it and that he had a Son called Antaros, who also was a man of excellent
wisdom, and that he had seven daughters, whereof one was named Eschtoniphos,
who as the Gentiles report brought forth two sons, Ephun and Schaltsebin, and
that she was a Virgin before and after her delivery, (...) and that was heard
says the Author. Whereunto was added by the handwriting of a certain Jew in
the copy that was in Warnerus his hands, (...)
as he relates; it is hard to the Christians, being against their Religion,
who say this was a miracle in Mary, the Mother of Jesus. The Turks also say
some of them that Mary conceived at the thirteenth year of her age, others at
the tenth; and some say that she was delivered in the sixth month, others in
the seventh month, others in the eighth month, nec supervixit partus octavo
mense editus praeterquam beatus Jesus; and that never any birth brought forth
in the eighth month lived, but only the blessed Jesus. They say also that he
was brought forth under a Palm Tree; and they further say, That God created one
without Father or Mother, as Adam, and brought forth one of a Mother without a
Father, as Jesus; and that Joseph having a suspicion of her thought to have
killed her; that the Angel Gabriel interposed, saying That she was with child
by the Holy Ghost, and so hindered him

They say also that Mary was the Daughter of Amran, the Son of Matan, the Son
of Suliman, the Son of David, the Son of Jesse; and that between this Amran and
that Amran which was the Father of Moses and Aaron, there passed a thousand and
eighty years; and that she was brought up by Zacharias, and that her food was
sent down unto her from Paradise; so that she never sucked any Breast, but that
she had sent her from Heaven winter fruits in Summer, and summer fruits in
Winter; and that as often as Zacharias went unto her in the Temple, he found
meat by her: and when he asked her whence she had it; she said that it was from
God, for God feeds whom he will without measure; and that many were found
perfect amongst men, but none amongst women, but only Four, Asia the Daughter
of Meraham, Mary the Daughter of Amran, Chadiga the Daughter of Hubald, and
Fatima the Daughter of Mahomet; and that Mary was consecrated unto God, whilst
she was yet in the womb.

But though they acknowledge Christ to be the Son of the Virgin, yet they
wickedly deny his Divinity; they say that Christ was born a Servant as other
Servants; they also deny him to be the Son of God. The Christians, say they,
made him the Son of God. But Jesus is only a Servant, say they, as other
Servants, and they seem to bring in God speaking thus; We have dealt graciously
with him, (that is with Jesus) in that we have appointed him to be a wonder, in
that we have created him without an intermediate or second cause, as we created
Adam, and rendered him famous by prophecy; but they conclude against his
Divinity, because he knows not all that God knows, through ignorance of the
divine mystery of his Incarnation, and of the unconfounded propriety of the two
Natures in Christ. And though they confess that Christ did miracles, as that he
cleansed the Lepers, and raised the dead, yet they say he did them not by his
own power, but by the power of God; and so they say he restored Sem the Son of
Noab to life. The ground upon which they deny Christ to be God, is, because
they ignorantly suppose the Unity of the Divine Nature cannot be preserved if
Christ should be acknowledged to be God: Therefore they have that so often in
their Alcoran, and other Writings, says Warnerus (...) Non est Deus nisi ille,
There is no God but he; And amongst diverse things that are required unto their
Faith, the first is this confession that there is not any God but one, which is
indeed a great truth acknowledged by the Christian Church; but they ignorantly
oppose it to the Trinity of persons, being bound up in the dark Dungeon of
their carnal and weak reason; and therein they agree with the Socinians and
Photinians, which are indeed rather Turks then Christians: The Turks themselves
having as high an opinion of Christ as they, and they as low an opinion of him
as the Turks.

They say moreover that Christ does not arrogate this honor to himself, to be
called the Son of God; but in the day of the Resurrection he will testify
against the Jews for that they charged him with falsehood, and against the
Christians for calling him the Son of God.

They confess indeed, That the Christians teach but One Essence but Three
persons; and they say that by the person of the Father, the Christians
understand Essence; by that of the Son, Science; by that of the Holy Ghost,
Life: which the Alcoran understands, according to their Commentary, as if
God, Christ, and Mary were Three Gods; and Christ the Son of God by Mary;
observe how they are held in their errors and opposition to Christianity, by
their gross mistakes of the Christian Doctrine.

The grounds of this their denial of the divine generation or Sonship of
Christ, whereby he is the Son of God, are these:

1. A carnal conceit that nothing can generate but a Body; for generation, say
they, is the property of Bodies.

2. That Generation is not but between equals of the same kind; but God, say
they, in regard of his great Excellency has no Equal or Consort, nor can have;
because if he had any Consort, that Consort must be from the same kind, but
God acknowledges no kind.

3. Because there is nothing that he has not created, and which he has not
known; and therefore he wanted no Son. Thus they dote that value God a
according to the Creature.

Yet they give unto Christ the name of Messiah, which they say is one of the
most noble titles, derived from the Hebrew (...), which they interpret
Benedictus, or the Blessed; whereas indeed it signifies the Anointed, the same
which (...), Christ, signifies in the Greek Tongue, implying the three
anointed Offices of Christ; the great High Priest; the great Prophet, and the
great King of the Church.

They acknowledge him also by the name Jesus, which they say is a barbarous name
or word that cannot be expounded or interpreted, which in the Syriack Tongue is
Jeschua, but they are ignorant that this name given him from Heaven signifies
the Savior, from the root (...) which signifies to save in the Hebrew Tongue,
as (...) in the Greek also signifies an Healer, or Physician, from (...) to
heal, which in the Saxon accordingly is usually translated Haeleno, in the
Saxon Gospels, as I remember; wherein is implied that great mystery which those
blinded people acknowledge not, that is, that this Jesus is the great Savior
and spiritual Physician both of Jews, and Greeks, or Gentiles; having that name
given him by the wonderful providence of God, that signifies a Savior and a
Healer in both Languages; an importance, the like whereof I am persuaded will
hardly be found in such a wonderful compliance of Languages in any other name
in the world, where the roots from whence it is derived have no derivation from
one another.

They confess that he was sent from God, that he might be the proclaimer of his
Majesty, and the Corrector or Reformer of humane pravity, or the wickedness of
man, a Teacher of righteousness and a Publisher of the Gospel, and they do
maintain that he executed his Office faithfully, in that he preached but one
God, and converted men from their impious and vain worships, to know and
worship the true God.

They do unanimously declare that he wrought many miracles, restoring strength
to the weak, health to the sick, opening the eyes of the blind, purging away
the blemishes of defiled bodies, raising the dead unto life again, as if they
had been awaked out of sleep, though they acknowledge not that immortal power
in him whereby he performed these things, as an argument of his Divinity.

They allow him the Title of the Word of God; so the Alcoran brings in the
Angels thus speaking unto the Virgin, O Mary, God does declare unto thee his
WORD, his name is Christ: And they say that Christ was styled by that name,
because he was not born but of the only Word of God; the manner thereof they
thus express, God said, be thou without the help of Father. In the ascribing
this name unto Christ, they agree so far with that of Joh. 1.1. In the
beginning was the Word, though they reject the true sense and meaning of that
title, implying the divine person of Christ: they say also that he is sermo
verus Dei, The true Word of God. So the Alcoran, This Jesus is the true Word or
Speech, whom the Jews call an Imposter and a Liar, the Christians the Son of
God; he is called also by them (...) The Spirit of God; because as they
interpret, he has the Spirit that flows like seed from the living Father,
because he is indeed brought forth of God, and by his absolute power; though
they give that title also unto the Angel Gabriel, as the Commentary intepreteth
that place of the Alcoran, We sent to her, that is to Mary, our Spirit, that is
Gabriel.

They say also that Christ is the Apostle of God, which is indeed a great
Office of Christ, that seems specially to be foretold in that name Shiloh,
Missas, or Sent, as it may be interpreted, and is intimated by our Savior in
several places of Scripture, where he is said to be sent of the Father; for
Apostolus, or Apostle, is derived from (...), to send; which I mention for the
sake of those that are ignorant of so ordinary a matter, so that it signifies
one specially sent, and in sacred use, one sent to teach and govern the people
of God, in order to Gospel Truth, Grace, and Salvation. This Office of Christ
we have expressly and eminently mentioned, Heb. 3.

And this is it which he has derived from himself unto the Apostles and their
Successors in the Church; As my Father has sent me, so send I you: This Office
is at least in the name acknowledged by the Turks, and yet as it is thought is
too too much slighted in the succession thereof by too many Christians, that
have rejected the Apostles Successors, and the ancient Government of the
Church; I wish they that have power in this Nation would consider of this
matter, and remember it in their public consultations.

The Turks acknowledge Christ the Apostle of God, but they do not honor him nor
advance him in the acknowledgement of this Office as they should, since they
rank him in a fort with other Legates or Prophets, Christus filius Mariae, say
they, non est nisi Legatus ante quem jam alii venerunt Legati; Christ the Son
of Mary is but an Ambassador before whom other Ambassadors have already come.
And his condition in revelation, say they, is like the condition of the rest of
the Prophets that have gone before. Revelation say they is, Sermo occultus qui
cito fit: An hidden speech coming suddenly; and this they say is of three
sorts: 1. By Inspiration, unto which Dreams are referred. 2. By a Voice or
Call. 3. Or by a Legate or Angel. In the first manner God, they say. spoke to
Abraham. In the second to Moses, and so unto the Angels themselves, which kind
the Alcorn calls (...), post velum, behind the Hanging or Curtain, where a
voice is heard, but the speaker not seen; for none, say they, has seen God,
and therefore they say that neither Moses nor Mahomet saw God.

3. By the sending of an Angel: As God spoke unto the other Prophets beside
Moses, unto whom, they say, he spoke immediately, as to an Angel. To Christ,
they say, he spoke as unto the rest of the Prophets by an Angel. And they say
the Gospel was sent him from Heaven with the testimony of Miracles, and amongst
the rest they say he made a Bird of clay, and inspired it with life. And they
say Jesus was famous in this life by Prophecy, and in the other life by
intercession, and exaltation of degree ia Paradise, that he might be amongst
those that stand before the Throne, and a companion of Angels. So they hold
Christ to be an Intercessor for the godly. Whosoever reads Surat. (...) for
him Jesus has prayed for the forgiveness of his sins; as long as he lives in
this world, and at the last day he is his companion

They acknowledge the day of Resurrection, which they call the day of
Congregation.

But though they thus exalt Christ in Paradise, yet they say Mahomet is much
more exalted in the other life, being honored or celebrated by the Angels,
together with God, and that four of them say, Praise be to thee, O God, and to
thy Mahomet; Praise be to thee for thy Clemency after thy Power. And four say,
Praise be to thee, O God, and to thy Madomet. for thy Gentleness after thy
Wisdom. Thus they dote and rave.

They say that Christ was taken up to Heaven, but Mahomet is more excellent,
who was sent unto men in general, and to whom sins were forgiven, both which he
committed before, and which he afterward committed; as if God had given
Mahomet a dispensation to commit sin: Mark the the Impiety and Blasphemy of
this saying. And they say that Mahomet concluded the number of the Prophets.

They say that Christ was presently heard as often as he called upon God. And
they have a strange story of a Table, and a Fish broiled that was sent down
from Heaven to him and his Apostles at his prayer, and that he revived the
fish, and turned it presently again into a broiled fish, and that the Table
afterward vanished; And that the Apostles when they afterward rebelled, were
turned into Apes and Swine.

They say as the Law was given to Moses, the Psalms to David, so the Gospel to
Christ, and that it was sent from Heaven the Thirteenth day of Ramdan, as the
Alcoran was sent down the Twenty fourth day of that month. They say that God
exalted Ramdan amongst the Months, and Friday amongst the Days, because the
Sun rose upon that day; and Adam was created and cast out into the Earth upon
that day, and that the Day of Judgment shall be upon that day.

They say, which is very observable for the conversion of Turks, that Mahomet
confirmed the Law and the Gospel, and commanded to believe the truth of the
Prophets and Apostles, and whatever (of Books) was sent down unto them; and
that in the Gospel there is the right way, light, and instruction for the
godly; and they profess to believe whatsoever is written in the Law and Gospel.
Thus we believe in God, and that that was sent down to Abraham, Ismael, Isaac,
Jacob, and the Tribes; and that was delivered to Moses, to Jesus, and to the
Prophets from God; and we make no difference between any of them, so as less to
believe them.

But they say falsely that the Gospel has been changed, for they say that the
name of Mahomet was in the Law and in the Gospel. And in their Histories they
say, that his name was also in the Psalms, and this they say a certain Monk
confessed; and that Jesus foretold the coming of Mahomet and his people.

They say that Abraham professed their Religion under the name of Islamism long
before the Law and the Gospel, and that he was neither Jew nor Christian.

They deny that Christ truly died, but they say that he was without death
translated into Heaven. See their impudence against so manifest a truth. They
say indeed that the Jews were deceived, and thought they had slain Christ, but
they slew him not; but that God took him up unto himself. And that when the
Jews were about to kill Christ, he asked his Companions, Which of you will be
content to have my likeness put upon him, that so he may go into Paradise? and
that one of them said, I will, and that God presently put the Image of Christ
upon him, and that he was slain and crucified instead of Christ; and that after
this the Associates of Christ fell at dissension about this; and that some said
Christ was God and could not die, others that he was killed and crucified,
others, if Jesus were crucified where is our Companion? if our Companion was
crucified, where is then Jesus? Others said, he was taken up into Heaven.

They hold that Jesus shall descend from Heaven in the last days, and that
there shall be no people to whom the Book comes ( i.e. I conceive the Alcoran,
which they call (...), as we the Scriptures, the Bible) but they shall believe
in it: So that there shall be but one Religion, to wit, Islamism, and God at
that time shall slay the false Messiah, and there shall be safety, so that the
Lions shall eat with the Camels, the Leopards with the Oxen, Wolves with the
Sheep, and Children shall play with Serpents

And they say Christ shall stay and dwell upon earth Forty years; and that then
the Muslins or Mussel-men, i.e. the Mahometans shall pray over him. They say
moreover that when Christ shall descend, he shall frame himself according to
the order of Mahomet, and shall pour out prayers turning toward him, as he
were one of his followers. Nor shall the last day appear say they, until the
descending of Jesus go before. They hold also that other dreadful signs shall
go before the last day, The false Christ or Messiah, Gog and Magog, and the
rising of the Sun in the West. Hence that irreligious or profane Jest, whereby
the witty Persian deciphereth the manners of a libidinous Judge, bringing in
the King thus bespeaking the Judge, and the Judge replying to the King: The
King said to the Judge, Rise I pray you, for the Sun is now risen; the Judge
said, In what part of the world did he rise? The King answered, in the East, as
he is wont. Then said the Judge, Blessed be God, for the door is yet open to
repentance. I wish there were no such presumptuous scoffers amongst Christians.

CHAP. XIII. An account of the Arguments used for the conversion of the Turk,
with some illnstration and enlargement, and of his Baptism.
WHosoever shall take but a view of those things that have been discovered
concerning the madness and vanity of the Mohammedan Religion, they would have
cause enough to wonder that a meteor made up of such earthy and corrupt
exhalations should last so long, and have such a powerful influence upon the
minds of such multitudes of those creatures that have principles of Reason and
Religion in them, but that the terrors of the World, and carnal apprehensions
and interests have so embased the hearts, and dazzled the eyes of poor mortals,
that most men worship a flaming Sword, especially when the Hilts of it are
enchased with transitory delights and advantages. And the greatest part of the
world may seem to have their Religion cut out unto them by the weapons of their
conquering Subduers, rather then commended unto them by the force of convincing
Arguments.

And indeed were not the souls of those that profess the Mohammedan religion
wrapped up in a dark vail of ignorance, under the cloud whereof they are
purposely kept, it might seem almost incredible that they should not easily
disclaim such impious errors, the falsehood and impiety whereof are abundantly
convinced by the very display and discovery of the very tenets and practices
themselves; and yet a very rare thing has it bin to hear of one bred up in
that imposture of Turcism, converted to the glorious light of the Gospel.

It may easily be perceived by what has been delivered, what great advantages
there lie before us, even in the great absurdity of their opinions where they
are at opposition unto us, and in those approaches that they make toward
Christianity in some other things that they hold, as has been showed, for the
undertaking and promoting their conversion, which will render it the more
unanswerable and unexcusable, that there have been no more adventurers to that
purpose: Since the Church which is the illuminated part of the world, as it
has a charge of the great work of the conversion of the rest thereof unto that
truth which God has revealed unto her, not only for her own salvation, but
also for the guidance and direction of others, according to that Commission
which is yet in force, and has in it the power of a command or heavenly
injunction from Christ, Go and teach, or make Disciples of all Nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
and if there had been but the tenth part of those lives ventured upon a
suffering account for the propagating of Gods truth, that have been hazarded
and lost in the bloody quarrels of Ambition, Covetousness and Revenge, and for
the propagating of Dominion by invading of the rights of other Princes and
people, in the way of bloody and active violence, in all probability the world
ere this time might have been reduced unto the holy Gospel of Christ Jesus, and
that Prophecy fulfilled which we yet hope for, (and God may promote it even
from such a beginning as this) that in the last days the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, Isa 2.2.
and set above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it.

But this is like to be the work rather of the cross then of the Sword. In hoc
signo vinces, is still the Christians Motto. Our Victories are to be obtained
under the Banner of the cross.

But that I may draw to a Conclusion; The more then ordinary knowledge that our
Convert seemed to have obtained not only of the Turkish Religion, but also in
some measure of the Christian, by means (as it may be conceived) of his
Christian Mother, gave some good advantage to our work.

The first attempt whereof was an endeavor to bring him into some good sense of
the great concernment of his Soul in the embracement or rejection of the truth,
no less then in his eternal greatest good or evil, and to bring him into
dislike, or at least into a doubt of that erroneous and impious way that he
embraced, as being uncorrespondent and unsatisfactory to that which is, and
needs must be the aim of every wise and serious man, in the choice or
embracement of any Religion, which is a well grounded hope and succeeding
attainment of the salvation of his Soul in another world, and here in this life
the peace of a good Conscience next to the glory and honor of God, which as it
was showed him, could not be found without a remedy for sin, which exposed unto
Gods wrath and to eternal death and condemnation: And that there could be no
remedy for this deadly disease but by a satisfaction to Gods Justice, That
Mercy and Truth might meet together, and Righteousness and Peace might kiss
each other; which remedy or satisfaction was not at all offered in that
Religion that he embraced.

He said that God gave pardon upon repentance; but it was showed him that his
repentance, and the repentance of all others was imperfect; and no man was so
cleared thereby from sin, but that there would still need a satisfaction for
the failings even of repentance and of the best ordered life that is to be
found amongst men in this life. That this satisfaction is clearly and fully
offered in the Christian Religion, in the blood, and sufferings, and
righteousness of Christ Jesus, who being God and Man, and the eternal Son of
God, became a fit Mediator between God and Man, and offered himself a
sufficient Sacrifice unto the Divine Justice for the sins of the whole World:
The benefit whereof, as it is proposed in the Gospel unto repentance, and to
all true penitent sinners, so it is to be received only from and in Christ
Jesus, and by the true faith of the Gospel.

Upon this discourse, or to this purpose, with some other, which I cannot well
now remember, he seemed to be something startled, and to doubt whether the
ground whereon he stood was sound or no: And as I remember expressed some
desire that God would direct him to the Truth.

Some further Argumenrs were used to discover yet further unto him, not only
the insufficiency, but the impiety and vanity and great uncertainty of that
Religion he had embraced; as that which countenanced cruelty and oppression,
was carried on by violence and carnal ways, and proposed low and carnal
delights for the reward, below the excellency of the spiritual Soul of Man;
Countenanced wickedness, as Impurity and Revenge; and proceeded from a person
of a carnal and lascivious temper and conversation, who pretended a more then
ordinary Commission and allowance for lust, as a privilege belonging to him as
the great Prophet. That pretended indeed revelation from Heaven, but had no
testimony from God to commend it to the Souls of men; but depended upon the
bare assertion of Mahomet, which if he be considered in the singleness of his
person, being a man subject to error as well as others; especially if he be
considered in his lascivious and wicked quality and condition, is too sandy a
foundation, and of more then much too weak a credit, that the venture of the
eternal good and safety of one single Soul should be committed thereto, much
less of many millions, or of the whole world: That it was a Religion stuffed
with monstrous lies and legends, as may be seen by those things that have been
set down

Whereas on the other side the Christian Religion has upon it the very stamp
of Gods image, which is his seal, in the high, excellent, mysterious and
spiritual wisdom, too high for humane Imposture in any likelihood to invent;
since it is so far too high for humane Wisdom or Understanding, even since it
is revealed, to conceive, which is exactly answerable and uniform and
correspondent to it self in all the members and parts thereof, which all make
up a sweet and excellent tune and harmony amongst themselves, without any jar
or discord between them; and all the Writers thereof, though being many, and
living in many and several Ages and places, were forbidden thereby to conspire
in falsehood with one another; wherein there must needs have been much boggling
in matters so high above humane reason and comprehension, if there had not been
an infallible rule of divine Light and Truth to guide and unite them together
at so great a distance.

Besides the wonderful and excellent consent that is between the Types and
Prophesies, and the fulfilled events thereof: The former whereof are for the
most part consigned over unto us by the Jews, professed enemies unto the
Christian Truth, who maintain themselves, and have delivered over unto us the
predictions, the completions whereof yet themselves now deny: And so it is
fulfilled of that blinded Nation of the Jews, that is said by one, I know not
whom, of them, that it is Asinus portanus vinum and bibens aquam, An Ass that
carries wine, and drinks water: They carry the wine of the holy Prophesies,
and drink the water of their own foolish and malicious mis-interpretations and
traditions.

It has the stamp of the Divine wisdom and goodness upon it, in that holy
policy established in the bond of Divine and Christian Love, whereby it unites
all in the love of God, and in a mutual love unto, and a mutual charge of one
another, and of all men, even greatest Enemies, in all their concernments, and
in holy peace providing for all, and carrying on all things with a heavenly and
public spirit; so that if it were but generally embraced, it would make the
world happy, and establish a kind of Heaven upon Earth; when every man should
have a care of another as of himself in soul and spiritual good, in matter of
Life, Estate, Health. Reputation, and all other matters wherein their good is
concerned, whereby that wicked voice of Cain, which cries so loud in the
hearts and practices of the world, would be silenced and excluded out of the
society of mankind, Am I my Brothes keeper? since it makes all men keepers of
one another, and teaches all to take care of the public good of all, and
thereby enlarges the riches and content of all particulars, teaching them to
joy and delight in the good and blessing of others, as well as their own.

It has the stamp of Gods Holiness and Righteousness upon it, in the utter
opposition that it has unto all sin, in the admirable and perfect rules of
Justice and Piety, and purity which it establishes, both in regard of inward
motions, thoughts, and affections, and in outward carriage and conversation of
life, setting up the right mark before us, which is Gods glory, and eternal
happiness in him to be pursued by all, in all thoughts, words, and actions, in
all their Offices, Trades and Vocations; so bringing in the whole life of man
to be an holy sacrifice to God. And directing us unto this glorious Goal or
prize in the holy road, or way of the holy commands of God, encouraging and
facilitating our obedience thereunto by gracious promises, outbidding all that
the World or the Flesh, or the Devil can offer to hire us or move us to sin or
wickedness, and so by another great and holy policy, engrafting our interest
into all our duty; so that we cannot sin against God, but we must sin against
our own felicity, nor advance in holiness but we must also advance in
happiness, making holiness and happiness upon the matter one and the same
thing, though they seem two unto us by the weakness of our sight, as one Candle
seems two unto a distempered or weak eye.

It has the stamp of Gods Meekness and Mercy upon it, not only in revealing
it unto us, and pouring it out upon us in the wonderful works of Redemption and
Salvation by Christ Jesus, at which the Angels and host of Heaven stand amazed,
whilst wicked and unthankful mortals despise and contemn it; but in the holy
conformity which it enjoineth unto all, and works in the hearts and practices
of true Christians thereunto, forbidding all manner, and every degree of
cruelty and violence, of hatred, malice, envy, and revenge both in the root and
the fruit thereof, and enjoining all acts of Mercy and compassion toward
others, even our greatest adversaries and strangers, however different from us
in judgment or affection, allowing no hatred unto any thing but sin, thereby
opening a door of love unto the whole world for their edification, and bringing
in unto Christ Jesus, and to the Truth, Grace and Salvation of the Gospel,
which is too little thought on and less practiced by the new and strange
Christians of our days, whom God will convince either to condemnation or to
conversion, as may be hoped by such as this our Convert and others whom he
shall bring home unto his truth and love, making even them to provoke us to
jealousy, and to be not only Professors with us, but Reformers of us.

And these Rules of Love, Compassion, and Mercy are established in an excellent
and most exact and perfect order and method both in regard of the objects and
operations thereof, they being first to be regarded that are nearest and
dearest to God and us, or whose preservation and good is of greatest or most
general concernment. And the operations to be exercised as in none but just,
and pure, and holy, so chiefly and specially in spiritual ways. And this mark
of love and tender compassion amongst Christians was that that made them
anciently as glorious in the eyes of God and Man, as the contrary cruelty and
unmercifulness has rendered inglorious and ignominious the degenerate and false
Christians of our days. So that the very Heathens are said to have fallen into
an admiration of their mutual mercy, with an Ecce quam se invicem diligunt,
ecce quam pro se invicem mori parati sunt; Behold how these Christians love one
another, Behold how these Christians are ready to die for one another! As now
Turks and Heathens may cry out with abomination against the Christians and self
Canonizing Saints of our days, Ecce quam se invicem oderint, ecce quam se
invicem interficere parati sunt! it is translated in letters and language of
blood, and written all over our age and Nations; Behold how these Christians
hate one another, behold how these Christians are ready to kill and destroy one
another!

This and other wicked practices of those that walk under the names of
Christians, so diametrally opposite unto the holy and merciful rule and
constitution of Christ Jesus, are those that have cast reproach upon the name
of Christ, and have clouded up the beauty and splendour of the Gospel and the
Christian Religion, and do continually blast and hinder the conversion of Jews,
Turks, Heathens and others thereunto, who are thereby confirmed and encouraged
in their evil ways. For the love of God and our own souls let us think upon
it. The wicked lives of Christians will answer for, and be charged with the
destruction of the rest of the world as well as for their own, and theirs
amongst whom they live. But God is true, though every man be a liar.

Christian Religion has upon it the stamp and testimony of the great and
unblemished innocence and piety of Christ Jesus, in the holiness of his Life
and Doctrine acknowledged by the Turks themselves.

Of the great power of God in his wondrous Incarnation, and miraculous
conception and birth; whereby he was a miracle himself above all other miracles
whatsoever. The latter whereof, to wit, his wonderful conception and birth is
acknowledged by the Mahometans themselves.

In the many and great wonders that he wrought, which they themselves also
confess it is testified unto: As also by his Resurrection from the dead, and
his Ascension ineo Heaven, which, to wit his Ascension, they aver, though they
deny his Death and Resurrection By the voice from Heaven at his Baptism and
transfiguration. By the descending of the Holy Ghost both upon himself in the
form of a Dove, and upon his Disciples in the form of fiery cloven tongues
after his ascension upon the day of Pentecost, to the enduing of them with
those wonderful gifts of all Languages which they exercised in the presence of
many witnesses of several parts and Nations, who by Gods providence were then
at Jerusalem, which was then made, as it were, the Representative of the World,
that it might be the Theater of so glorious a spectacle.

To this may be added the great efficacy and power of the Gospel grace, shining
in the lives of true Christians, and in the glorious sufferings of the Martyrs.

The spiritual and heavenly proposals of the Gospel.

And the spiritual ways contrary to humane wisdom and carnal interest without
humane force, whereby it has been carried on.

And the standing testimony that is unto this day, in the dissipation, and
afflicted, and wretched, and hateful condition of the banished Jewish Nation,
scattered over the world, having been under that judgment for the space of One
thousand six hundred years and upwards, as was foretold by Daniel, and our
Blessed Savior himself, that they may be witnesses to the world in the several
Nations where they are scattered, and against themselves, of the truth of the
Gospel and the glory of Christ, whose blood is upon them to this day, according
to that dreadful curse that they laid upon themselves.

I have been bold to enlarge something more upon this then I did in the
pressing of it upon the Turk; I hope it may be for the good of him and others:
Now because we found that he acknowledged the Law, and Prophets, and the holy
Evangelists; we had recourse unto them for the conviction of him in the Three
great points of Christianity, which he opposed, viz. The Godhead of Christ,
and that he is the Son of God, and that he died and satisfied for the sins of
the World, and so became the Savior and Redeemer of Mankind. He was
acquainted therefore by me with some passages of the Fifty third of Isay, and
as I remember with that wonderful Prophecy of the Ninth of Daniel, where the
death and satisfaction of the Messiah or Christ, are so clearly and
evangelically expressed.

Mr. Gunning pursued the work that was begun with great industry, ability, and
diligence; showing him that his Religion had no warrant of truth in it, having
neither the testimony from reason, not from heavenly revelation, made known by
miracles, or any such heavenly evidence, which give abundant witness to the
truth of Christianity; and when he vainly pretended, as it seems he had been
informed, that there was a Prophecy in the Scripture, that another people
should come to inform the World after the Christians, which it seems, was a
misprision of that place in Daniel 9.26. The people of the Prince that shall
come shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary, etc. we showed him as I
remember, the true interpretation of the place, that it was a Prophecy of the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, and the Roman people. And having
obtained of him that Christ was a true Prophet, and that all that he spoke was
truth, and that the Gospel of the Evangelists was true; The Divinity of Christ,
and his being the Son of God was proved unto him out of the first of John the
first verse. etc. if my memory fail not, and out of the words of our Savior,
who declared himself to be the Son of God. But that that especially prevailed
with him was drawn from that acknowledgement that the Mahometans have of
Christ, that he was the Spirit of God, from whence it was showed him that since
the Spirit of God could be none other then God himself, that Christ then must
needs be God, as the spirit of man is principally the man himself; which
although it is to be warily understood, and so as not to make any confusion
between the persons of Christ and the Holy Ghost; yet it was Argumentum ad
hominem, ex concesso, and he seemed thereby to be convinced of the truth of his
Divinity, and of the falsehood and contradiction of the Mohammedan Religon, that
acknowledged Christ to be the Spirit of God, and yet denied him to be God. And
two persons being granted, it was now easy to prove the third, which Mr.
Gunning labored in by setting forth the divine reason of the Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Essence.

After these things he seemed to be left without reply or contradiction in a
sort, and therefore was earnestly solicited to be baptized, by urging the
command of Christ for that purpose, which he seemed not to deny, but was held
off by delays, and some reluctancies of spirit, which we endeavored to remove
by showing him the great danger that hung over him, if he should refuse to
yield to those convictions that were upon him, and urged the examples of diverse
in the Scriptures that were speedily baptized upon their conversion. At last he
was persuaded, so as with great earnestness to desire it, as has been before
declared. And now nothing remained but to prepare him for the blessed work of
his solemn admission into the Christian Church. To which purpose he was
committed to me at Chelsey for his instruction, and that he might be commended
to God in prayer, with the help of Mr. Samois, who did the Office of an
Interpreter; amongst other discourses I had with him, I pressed him hard to
look to his sincerity, and showed him that if he should deal falsely with God,
he might provoke him to great judgments. And I drew up an Exposition of the
Apostles Creed for him, which I intend, if it shall be thought fit, to publish
for the good of him and others.

Upon the Friday before the Lords Day, on which he was to be baptized, I
brought him into Mr. Gunnings Congregation at Excester-house, and after that
delivered him unto him for some further preparation of him. When the day came,
and the holy and solemn business of his Baptism was to be performed in Excester
house Chapel, (I having been before this work of conversion turned out of my
interest in the Parish Church of Westminster, upon the occasion of my being so
bold as to give the Congregation and the Parliament Men a Sermon in the Abbey,
where after two Psalms sung out in the expectation of a Minister, none came to
supply the place that I saw or knew of) a full and cheerful Congregation being
there assembled, Mr. Gunning officiated; and after the first part of the
Service ended, the Convert came in in his Turkish Habit; and at his entrance
into the Congregation desired several times that he might be admitted to the
Baptism of the Christian Church, which being granted him, and these honorable
and worthy persons, the young Countess of Dorset, the Lord Gorge, and Mr.
Philip Warwick, being Witnesses at his Baptism.

He having made confession of the Christian faith in the Apostles Creed; and
having answered the questions concerning the Christian Covenant and Profession
for himself, which have been usually answered by the Godfathers and Godmothers
at the Baptism of Children, and being commended to Gods Grace and Mercy in the
prayers of the Congregation, with such alterations as were necessary for the
extraordinary case, he being stripped of his Garment to his Waste, received his
Baptism upon his knees with great humility, and was named Philip.

The Baptism being performed, by Mr. Gunnings permission, I preached upon the
occasion, and took my Text out of the Fifteenth Chapter of St. Luke, at the
Seventh Verse, being the words of our Savior, I say unto you, that likewise
joy shall be in Heaven for one sinner that repents, more then for ninety and
nine just persons that need no repentance. Of which Sermon it may be there
shall be a further account given hereafter. And if God and Angels rejoice,
surely it is the duty of all good Christians to keep consort with them, and by
the loving and charitable entertainment of this our Convert, to give
enconragement to others to come in unto Christ's fold.

In the afternoon of the same day he came in another Habit, after the English
fashion (which was charitably provided for him by reverend Doctor Bernard of
Grayes-Inn) and then Mr. Gunning preached a learned Sermon upon Psalm. 68. Verse.
31. as it is in the Liturgy translation; The Morians land shall soon stretch
ont her hands unto God. And so the comfortable solemnity of that happy day was
ended. Our new Convert having since declared that he found extraordinary joy
and solace in his soul at the time of his Baptism.

He for the present lives in Holborn, at the house of the honorable and
virtuous Lady Hatter, and is I conceive much improved in the Christian
knowledge, as appeared by a discourse he had lately at Chelsey, and I hope will
prove an eminent Christian.

Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men.
Psalm 45.4, 5, 6. And gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most
mighty: according to thy worship and renown.

Good luck have thou with thine honor: ride on because of the word of truth, of
meekness and righteousness, and let thy right hand teach thee terrible things.

Thine arrows are very sharp, and the people sholl be subdued unto thee: even
in the midst among the Kings enemies.

Psalm 67. verse. 1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light
of his countenance, and be merciful unto us.

2. That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

3. Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

4. O let the nations rejoice and be glad, for thou shall judge the folks
righteously: and govern the nations upon earth.

5. Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee.

6. Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God even our own God,
shall give us his blessing.

7. God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Ecclesiasticus 36. ver. 1. Have mercy upon us, O Lord God of all things, and
behold us, and [shew us the light of thy morcies.]

2. And send thy fear among the Nations, which seek not after thee, [that they
may know that there is no God but thou, and that they may show thy wondrous
works.]

3. Lift up thine hand upon the strange nations, that they may see thy power.

4. As thou art sanctified in us before them, so be thou magnified among them
before us.

5. That they may know thee, as we know thee: for there is none other God but
only thou, O Lord.

6. Renew the signs, and change the wonders: show the glory of thine hand, and
thy right arm, that they may show forth thy wondrous acts.

8. Make the time short: remember thine oath, that thy wondrous works may be
praised.

10. Smite in sunder the head of the princes that be our enemies, and say,
There is none other but we.

11. Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, [that they may know that there is
none other God but only thou, and that they may show thy wondrous works] and
inherit thou them as from the beginning.

12. O Lord, have mercy upon the people that is called by thy name, and upon
Israel, whom thou have likened to a first born son.

13. Oh, be merciful unto Jerusalem the city of thy sanctuary, the city of thy
rest.

14. Fill Sion, that it may magnify thine oracles, and fill thy people with
thy glory.

15. Give witness unto those that thou have possessed from the beginning, and
raise up the prophecies that have been showed in thy name.

16. Reward them that wait for thee, that thy Prophets may be found faithful.

17. O Lord, hear the prayers of thy servants according to the blessings of
Aaron over thy people, [and guide thou us in the way of righteousness,] that
all they which dwell upon the earth, may know that thou art the Lord, the
eternal God.


The Paradise of Mahomet, which he promifeth unto his Follewers.
THey shall be, says he, in a Paradise watered with fair and delicate
Fountains, which shall run so clear as if they were melted Crystal.

They shall rest in the shade, or refreshing coolness of beautiful trees, full
of leaves and branches, which by their motion shall cause a pleasant tune.

They shall eat of all manner of sweet and pleasant fruits in all seasons, and
shall be solaced with the chanting of Ten thousand little Birds, which shall
warble amongst their branches; and this shall bemingled with the consort of
most harmonious instruments, and of most melodious voices.

Their Robes shall be most magnificent, and triumphant, as of silk wrought with
gold, and chased with the richest stones and pearls.

They shall lie in Beds embroidered with gold, and hung the corners and Pillows
with great Pearls, and the Curtains adorned with inestimable and innumerable
precious stones.

That every one shall have his mavelous beautiful women, with their Breasts
wantonly swelling, and Eyes like jet enchased in silver, whiter then snow, as
big as good big eggs.

That with these they shall feast every day, and use all manner of sports and
recreations possible, and shall be served in their Feasts with fair and great
vessels of gold and crystal, which shall be set with most precious Jewels, and
shall be ministered unto by the hands of fair Boys, more polished then the
pearls themselves, and more sweet then Ambergris, or the most oderiferous
Perfumes of Arabia, etc.

Two Books of great esteem amongst the Turks, besides the Alcoran.
THe first has the description of the Voyage of Mahomet in Paradise by the
guidance of the Angel Gabriel.

He went, say they, into the first heaven, mounted upon Alborach, a Beast a
little bigger then an Ass, having the face of a man; and found that first
Sphere was of fine Silver, and so thick as the space that a Footman can run in
Five hundred years. There he found an Angel as tall as the space of the
journey of a Thousand years, with Seventy thousand other Angels, every one of
which had Seventy thousand Heads, and every Head seventy thousand Horns, every
Horn seventy thousand Knots; and from one Knot to another the space of the
jouruey of forty years: And every Head seventy thousand Faces, and every Face
seventy thousand Mouths, and every Mouth seventy thousand Tongues, and every
Tongue spoke a thousand Languages, with which they praised God every day
seventy thousand times.

The second Heaven was made all of burnisht Gold, where he saw a great
multitude of others greater then these, and amongst them one that had his feet
on the earth, and his head in the third Heaven.

But all these were Pigmies to one that he found in the third Heaven, which was
so monstrously great that he held the world in the palm of his hand, and yet it
hindered him not from shutting it.

In the fourth Heaven, every one had seventy pair of Wings, in every Wing
seventy thousand feathers to fly with, and every feather seventy thousand
cubits long.

In the fifth Heaven the Angel that opened the Gate to them had seven thousand
Arms, and every Arm seven thousand Hands.

In the other Heavens they found not any Angels of such an unmeasurable
stature; but in the eighth Sphere, they tossed the Globe of the Earth and Sea
as easily as a little Ball.

In the other Book is recited the History of a discourse between a Turk and a
Jew, who asked him concerning the principal points of his Doctrine; he said
that God created a Paper, and a Pen of so fair a Fabric, that the Pen was Five
hundred days journey long, and Fourscore thick; and that with this Pen that
has Fourscore points or nebs is written perpetually all that has been is or
shall be in the world.

That the Sun and Moon had equal light in the beginning, so that the day and
night could not well be destinguished; but that the Angel Gabriel flying put
the end of his wing into the Moon, and made her lose half her light.

There is mention made of a Cow that had forty horns, and between two of her
horns the space of a thousand years journey, and yet that this Cow was under
the earth.

Of a Fish that had his Head in the East, and the Tail in the West, that
bears upon his back the Earth, the Sea, and the Mountains.

That Rats were begotten in the Ark, of the sneezing of a Sow or Boar; and Cats
of the sneezing of a Lion.

That Seraphiel in the day of the resurrection shall sound a Trumpet Five
hundred years journey long, and that then all the souls of the dead shall seek
out their bodies.

That the Mohammedan Religion cannot be a true Religion.
1. NO new Religion can be a true Religion. 2. No cruel and bloody Religion can
be a true Religion. 3. That Religion that has no testimony from heaven, but is
grounded merely upon the invention and authority of man, cannot be a true
Religion. 4. That Religion that contradicts it self, and those authorities
which it approveeth and allows, cannot be a true Religion. 5. That Religion
that affords no remedy for sin, no satisfaction to the Conscience, nor any
certain way to salvation, cannot be a true Religion. 6. That Religion that
sets not down a perfect Rule of holiness and righteousness, cannot be a true
Religion. 7. That Religion that countenanceth and allows impurity, cannot be
a true Religion. 8. That Religion that is carried on not by spiritual but
worldly and carnal ways, cannot be a true Religion. 9. That Religion that
proposes a felicity consisting in carnal and impure delights, cannot be a true
Religion. 10. That Religion that confounds the difference between
righteousness and unrighteousness, cannot be a true Religion. 11 That Religion
that discharges from the prudent use of the means of safety and blessing, and
teaches people to tempt the Lord, cannot be a true Religion. 12. That Religion
that proposes rewards to violence and unrighteousness, cannot be a true
Religion.
FINIS.

