A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Two great Victories, Lately Obtained before
Lymerick, BY K. William's Forces, Over the French and Irish Rebels. Which were
commanded by D. Tyrconnel, and General Lauson. WITH A Particular Relation of
the Killing Seven Hundred of the Enemy, and the Number of the Prisoners taken:
The Flight of the Rebels into the County of Clare. Their Horrid Burnings, and
other Cruelties. And the Number of the Rebels Hanged for the same, by the
command of Lieutenant General Douglas.
In a Letter from a Gentleman, who was particularly concerned in the aforesaid
Action.
DVBLIN, SIR,
THE Fatigue of my Voyage, and the great hurry occasioned hereby; the daily
returns of our Countrymen, in these parts, might very well Apologize for any
neglect of Writing, at this present Juncture; but that your many Obligations to
me, and my Family, and the Personal Knowledge I have of the longing Desires of
every one in England, to hear an Account of the Daily Progress of our Heroical
Prince's Arms here, makes me with Willingness forget my own Troubles, to give
you what Joy I can; and our Affairs here do administer for the daily Success in
his Glorious Undertakings: You have at least two Posts agone the certain News
of those places that have Surrendered, and are actually in our Possession; the
King having now little more than the Reduction of Lymerick; the Consequence of
which, is the entire Conquest of the Country; I shall consine my self to a
true Relation of what has happened (near that place) since the joining of
Douglas to the Royal Army.

The Irish that lay encamped about that place, and as it were under the Walls,
were for Number between Twenty and Thirty Thousand, and by their many Barbarous
Cruelties to all the Protestants they could lay hands on, seemed to defy the
Resolution and power of so formidable, and wear approaching Army, as our's are,
but like true Cowards, when they were thoroughly convinced of our Strength, by
the Courage of a detached party of five Hundred of our Troops, who advanced so
resolutely, as to attack their Van Guard, consisting of near Two Thousand Five
Hundred, and killed near Six Hundred of them upon the Spot, and taking near Two
Hundred prisoners, by which we may give a shrewd Guess, that they are not in
any Measure improved, except in the Art of Running, since their Signal defeat
at the Boyne, for upon the retiring of their broken Troops to their main Body,
the whole Army was in such Consternation, that if our Army had been a little
nearer Advanced, we had put them out of condition of ever appearing together
again; 'twas a pleasant Sight to see the way scattered with Cloaks, Pistols,
Swords, Bagonets and Skeens, for some of them have no other Arms; and their
Tents, such as they had, and Baggage left behind, they getting into the County
of Clare, on the other side of Limerick; so that we have nothing more now to
do, than to lay a close Siege, or to Bomb and Storm that place; which it is
reasonably thought, will not hold out long; for the Lord Tyrcetinel they say
here, has sent Proposals of Submission, but being very high, the King sent him
Word plainly to deliver up the Place, telling him he would give him a Pention,
and use him like a Gentleman, which he is to consider off: The Rebels that were
upon their Departure of Lieut. General Douglass from Athrone, very Insolent and
Cruel to the Protestants of that Country are pretty well quashed by Colonel
Wosely, and Lieut. Colonel Purefoy of the Kings Councils, Four of which were
hanged up without further Trial, having lately received the Kings Protection:
The Army in general, but some Persons of Quality more particularly are
desperately engaged against the Irish for their inhumane and Barbarous French
way of Burning, War^ing, Pulling-down, and Destroying several sine Seats in the
County of Limmerick, viz. Kilpecken, Bruffe, Ballyvorneene, and the Castle of
Cappyneene, in the County of Waterford, in which Place they Burnt all the
Goods, not suffering the Lady of, the place, to save so much as her wearing
Apparel; for which Barbarities our Army threatens very severe punishments, and
nothing but the exhaustible M^rcy of the King will be able to protect them from
their just Fury: I hope by the next to give you a comfortable Account of
Limmerick; till then, I Subscribe my Self.

Yours to Command, P. W.

Advertisement.
CAtastrophe Galliae, and Hiberniae Restitutio. An Impartial Judgment, Denoting
the Reduction of Ireland this Revolution 90. (end-ing March the 10th. 1691.)
Also, The Conquering of Lewis the XIV. present King of France, by His Sacred
Majesty K. WILLIAM the III. in a few Years. Prophetically deduced from the
Characters of Heaven. Printed for Tho. Howkins in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin in the Old-Bayly, 1690.

Printed for G. Smith in Cornhil, 1690.


