A Warning-piece TO ALL DRUNKARDS AND Health-Drinkers: Faithfully Collected
From the Works of English and Foreign Learned Authors of good Esteem, Mr.
Samuel Ward and Mr. Samuel Clark, and others. WITH Above one Hundred and twenty
sad and dreadful Examples of Gods severe Judgments upon notorious Drunkards:
Twelve of the Chiefest are Graved in Copper Plates, to Deterr others from the
like provoking sins, and Healths with a Huzza. TO WHICH IS ADDED His Majesty's
Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched, Profane Persons, and Drinkers of his
Health. ALSO Some Cautions of a Learned Doctor of Physic, declaring how
Intemperate Drinking destroys our bodily Health and Strength.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. London, Printed for the Author, and
are to be sold by Langley Curtis at the Sign of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey near
Fleet-bridge, 1682.

THE PREFACE.
IT was once the distressed Case of those Mariners in Jonah, that by no means
could save themselves from Shipwreck, they rowed and they prayed, and they did
what men could do, and yet the Sea wrought, and the angry waves beat upon
them, till that sleepy Jonah, for whose sake it was this Evil came upon them,
was thrown overboard into the Sea. It were worth the while to sit down and
think in this perilous season of delusion and division, whereby men are all in
a Tempest, the great God influencing the storms in his just Indignation; and
though there are those that row hard and pray hard, no abatement of the
danger, but the Heavens are darker and darker over our heads: I say it were
worth the while to enquire into the Provocation, what the Cause is of these
swellings of Jordan, and Innundations of such Seas that we never saw worse, nor
more dangerous to destroy us all: like that Tempest upon the Adriatic Sea, of
which the Apostle gave his Opinion, That this Voyage would be with hurt and
much damage, not only of the Lading and Ship, but also of their Lives, Act. 27.
It is readily confessed of all hands amongst those that pretend to the least
degree of Wisdom, That sin in general is the Cause of all this. They must
assemble themselves amongst those that sit in the Seat of Scorners, and declare
themselves to have taken the highest degree in Atheism and defiance of a God,
that will not yield us this point: They must arest the Reins of Providential
Government out of Gods hands, and put them into the hands of blind Chance and
Fortune, and then the World is like to be well governed; and those of this
Belief may chance to get to Heaven, if blind Fortune do but know the way. But
now the question will rise, For whose sins? and for what sins? For the first of
these, it must necessarily be granted, that the sins of great men have more of
the spirit of Provocation in them, than the sins of men of low degree: and the
sins of the Priests are more full of bloody Circumstances than the sins of the
Laity, and the Epidemicalness of sin cries for Extirpation with a louder voice,
than the sins of some few diseased persons that through Incogitancy have made
themselves out of frame. And further, the more Mercies and Deliverances men sin
against, and the greater Gospellight, and the more sacred Vows and Resolutions
they sin against, the more is their sin like to bring down such kind of
Judgments as shall not be prayed away: And these Reflections will justify God
in the Equality of his proceedings, if we all perish from off this good Land.
But if you ask me for what particular sin, or way of sinning it is that the
Lord is angry with us; I would as soon lay the blame upon the Drunkenness of
the Nation, as upon any one branch of that Profaneness that is gone abroad.
And the reasons are these.

1. The bewitching, besotting nature of Drunkenness: It does not turn men into
Beasts, as some think, for a Beast scorns it: I do n't know that ever I saw a
Beast drunk (unless it were a Swine) in my life. But it turns them into Fools
and Sots, dehominates them, turns them out of their own Essences for the time,
and so disfigures them, that God says, Non est haec Imago mea, This is not my
Image; and so cares not what Judgments he lets fall upon their heads: And this
Insatuation is more eminently seen in the Poorer sort, that earn their Money
hardest, and pay most for their Drink: For when others pay their Money, these
pay their Time also, which is more than their Money, besides the loss of Trade
and other possible advantages: That others drink Sack cheaper than* they pay
for their Beer and Ale, all things considered; and their poor Wives and
Children by this Means are in want of Bread for their Mouths* And will not God
be avenged upon such a sin as This? Their Money burns in their Pockets, but it
will burn worse in their Conscieces, if ever God show them Mercy.

2. Drunkenness is the general Rendezvouze of all sin, the common Parent of the
greatest Provocations. Even the worst of men when they are drunk, do that which
if they were sober they would blush to be found guilty of. Men naturally quiet,
good humor'd, moderate in sinning, as one may say, when they are themselves;
are by Drunkenness metamorphos'd into such Extravagancies, you would not think
them to be the same men: Thus having their natural tempers well soaked in
strong Liquors, they are framable into any shape. Satan calls for: Would he
have a Swearer? give him a Provocation, and there he is: An Adulterer? bring
him a Temptation, and there he is: A Persecutor, he swears by all that is
Sacred, he will root all the Professors out of the Country. Satan can mould
him into any shape, and raise a Devil out of a Samuel by this Artifice. And how
can the Sea but boil, when all the foul Spirits are blowing up a flame
underneath? Nations must needs reel, when the Inhabitants cannot stand upon
their feet; and God must needs strike, when he has an advantage given him to
cut off all sorts of sins at one blow.

3. And as to Health-drinking, it is an Engine invented by the Devil, to carry
on the Sin of Drunkenness with the greater ease and Infallibility, by which men
must either be suspected of their Loyalty to their Sovereign, or Respect to
their Friends (neither of which any sober man can be defective in) if they
refuse it, though upon conscientious Principles: and so it becomes a great
snare to those that would be temperte: Every man at all times has not
consideration enough to give him a convincing Evidence, that Loyalty and
Respect to others, is not proper to be shown in so absurd a Method; and so this
poisoned Health goes down (right or wrong) the Throats of those that do n't
think what they do. Here the sin lies chiefly, though not only, upon the
Imposer; as our Savior said, Woe to the World because of Offenses, but woe be to
him by whom the Offense comes: Woe to the Imposers of Healths, which commonly
happens to be some ordinary Fellow in the Company, that has nothing but that
single Ceremony to commend his Love or Loyalty to the World, who also having a
tumor of Pride in him, has no way to overtop and command his Superiors, but
upon the advantage of the Laws of Drunkenness.

Moreover, it is a Custom of Sinning only proper for those that are upon the
design of Mortgaging their Senses: for there is no sense in it or reason for
it? How can any man drink another Health? Or by what new kind of
Transubstantiation can his Health be converted into a glass of Liquor? or if
so! what is the man the better, to have his health drank into my Body, and then
pissed out again against the walls? And why not Eat his Health, rather than
Drink it? and so bring up a new fashion of Eating of Healths, to subserve the
Intemperances of the sin of Gluttony.

Sometimes it is expressed by drinking a health to the Confusion of, etc. and
here is Nonsense upon the neck of Nonsense, which is perfect Foolery, as patch
upon patch is plain Beggary: A health to the Confusion -- If they mean a
Confusion to the health, as I think they do, why is it expressed quite contrary
to what they mean? unless it be to give us to understand, that men that will
begin a health are entered upon speaking of Nonsense, and may be looked on as
half drunk already.

But laying all this aside, they say all these are Modes and Ceremonies in
drinking; and their meaning is no more, but only to pray for the Health and
Prosperity of such and such* Which is the reason they are at it in a posture of
Prayer, standing up, standing bare, sometimes kneeling upon their knees, as
Supplicants do to God Almighty: But will any rational man think these men at
Prayers? Are these praying postures? Did God ever command, or his People ever
apply to the Throne in this manner of Address? Have men lived to this age, and
cannot yet distinguish between drinking intemperately and praying fervently? as
if to Pray were to Drink, and to Drink were to Pray! Worse than Pagan Idolatry,
to offer at the Throne of the Great God, with a glass of Wine in our hand! It
may be praying to Bacchus, but not to God. Heaven must needs be shut against
these Prayings: And to what purpose is any man's health prayed for, by such kind
of Prayers, so circumstanced, as we are very sure that God will throw them back
as dung in the faces of those that thus disorderly put them up? What have thou
to do to take his Name in thy Mouth, when thou hate to be reformed? To see
the Postures of Health-drinkers, singing, and roaring, hollowing and carousing,
and Huzzaing after a new fashion, sometimes quarrelling, and challenging, and
duelling; can any man that has not his Wits in his Pocket, think these men at
Prayers?

Now because we find by Experience; and from the Nature of the thing, that
these prodigious kind of Offenders we now speak of, are under no likelihood to
be persuaded out of their cursed way by Arguments drawn from the Love of
Christ, or Hope of Glory, which are things they do n't trouble their heads
about; or fear of Hell, (let them alone till that day;) The Author of these
Collections has very well and to good purpose gathered up together out of
several Authors, several Instances of the Judgments of God taking these Sinners
in the very fact, and tacking them up as dreadful Instances and Examples of his
great Abomination of, and declared Vengeance against this sort of Sinners more
specially; that reading these Histories we may prevent being made a History our
selves: And though they are but Collections, I do n't know why a good dish may
not be twice set upon the Table. There are several late Instances of Gods
Vengeance upon Drunkards, thundered down upon the heads of many of them in our
Age; the publication of which is forborne, out of a tender respect to their
Relations yet surviving: The next Generation will be able to set forth
remarkable Strokes from Heaven upon some, (and no mean ones neither.) But least
I transgress the bounds of a Preface, no more, kind Reader, but my love to thy
Soul remembered, with my earnest Prayer to God for the Health of Sion, and all
that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.

Farewell.
A COLLECTION Of Some part of A SERMON Long since Preached by Mr. SAMUEL WARD
of IPSWICH, Entitled, A Woe to Drunkards: He lived in the days of Famous King
JAMES, and was like Righteous Lot, whose Soul was vexed with the wicked
Conversation of the Sodomites: He published diverse other good Sermons. His Text
was in
PROVE. XXIII. Verse. 29, 32. To whom is Woe? to whom is Sorrow? to whom is
Strife, etc? In the end it will bite like a Serpent, and sting like a
Cockatrice
He begins thus:
SEer, art thou also blind? Watchman, art thou also drunk, or asleep? Or has a
Spirit of slumber put out thine Eyes? Up to thy Watchtower, what descriest
thou? Ah Lord! what end or number is there of the Vanities which mine Eyes are
weary of beholding? But what see thou? I see men walking like the tops of
trees shaken with the wind, like Masts of Ships reeling on the tempestuous
Seas: Drunkenness I mean, that hateful Night-bird; which was wont to wait for
the Twilight, to seek Nooks and Corners, to avoid the howling and wonderment of
Boys and Girls; Now as if it were some Eaglet, to dare the Sun-light, to fly
abroad at high Noon in every Street, in open Markets and Fairs, without fear or
shame, without control or punishment, to the disgrace of the Nation, the
out-facing of Magistracy and Ministry, the utter undoing (without timely
prevention) of Health and Wealth, Piety and Virtue, Town and Country, Church
and Commonwealth. And do thou like a dumb Dog hold thy peace at these
things? do thou with Solomon's Sluggard fold thine hands in thy Bosom, and
give thy self to ease and drowsiness, while the envious man causes the
noisomest and basest of Weeds to overrun the choicest Eden of God? Up and
Arise, lift up thy Voice, spare not, and cry aloud? What shall I cry? Cry, Woe
and Woe again unto the Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim. Take up a
Parable, and tell them how it stingeth like the Cockatrice; declare unto them
the deadly poison of this odious Sin. Show them also the Sovereign Antidote and
Cure of it, in the Cup that was drunk off by Him that was able to overcome it:
Cause them to behold the brazen Serpent, and be healed. And what though some of
these deaf Adders will not be charmed nor cured; yea though few or none of this
swinish Herd of habitual Drunkards, accustomed to wallow in their mire; yea,
deeply and irrecoverably plunged by legions of Devils into the dead Sea of
their filthiness? what if not one of them will be washed and made clean, but
turn again to their Vomit, and trample the Pearls of all Admonition under feet;
yea, turn again and rend their Reprovers with scoffs and scorns, making Jests
and Songs on their Ale-bench? Yet may some young ones be deterred, and some
Novices reclaimed, some Parents and Magistrates awakened to prevent and
suppress the spreading of this Gangrene: And God have his work in such as
belong to his Grace. And what is impossible to the work of his Grace?

Go to then now ye Drunkards, listen, not what I or any ordinary Hedge-Priest
(as you style us) but that most wise and experienced Royal Preacher has to say
unto you. And because you are a dull and thick eared Generation, he first deals
with you by way of Question, a figure of force and impression: To whom is woe,
etc? You use to say, Woe be to Hypocrites; It Is true, woe be to such and all
other witting and willing Sinners; but there are no kind of Offenders on whom
Woe does so palpably, inevitably attend, as to you Drunkards. You promise your
selves Mirth, Pleasure, and Jollity in your Cups; but for one drop of your mad
Mirth, be sure of Gallons and Tons of Woe, Gall, Wormwood, and bitterness here
and hereafter. Other Sinners shall taste of the Cup, but you shall drink off
the dregs of God's Wrath and Displeasure. To whom is Strife? You talk of good
fellowship and friendship, but Wine is a rager and tumultuous, a mocker, a
makebate, and sets you a quarrelling, and meddling. When wit's out of the Head,
and strength out of the Body, it thrusts even Cowards and Dastards, unfenced
and unarmed, into needless Frayes and Combats: And then to whom are Wounds,
broken Heads, blew Eyes, maimed Limbs? You have a drunken byword, Drunkards
take no harm; but how many are the mishaps and untimely misfortunes that betide
such, which though they feel not in drink, they carry as marks and brands unto
their Grave. You pretend you drink Healths, and for Health; but to whom are all
kind of Diseases, Infirmities, Deformities, pearled Faces, Palsies, Dropsies,
Headaches, if not to Drunkards?

All Interpreters agree, that he means some most virulent Serpent, whose Poison
is pleasant and deadly. All the woes he has mentioned before, were but as the
sting of some Emmet, Wasp or Nettle, in comparison of this Cockatrice, which is
even unto death; death speedy, death painful, and woeful death, and that as
naturally and inevitably as Opium procures Sleep, as Hellebore Purges, or any
Poison kills.

Three forked is the Sting, and threefold is the Death it procures to all that
are stung therewith. The first is, the Death of Grace; the second is, of the
Body; the third is, of Soul and Body eternal. All sin is the Poison
wherewithal the old Serpent and red Dragon envenomes the Soul of Man, but no
sin (except it be that which is unto Death) so mortal as this, which though not
ever unpardonably, yet for the most part is also irrecoverably and inevitably
unto death. See thou one bitten with any other Snake, there is hope and help;
as the Father said of his Son, when he had information of his Gaming, of his
Prodigality, yea, of his Whoring; but when he heard that he was Poisoned with
Drunkenness, he gave him for dead, his case for desperate and forlorn.

The Adulterer and Usurer desire to enjoy their Sin alone, but the chiefest
pastime of a Drunkard is to heat and overcome others with Wine, that he may
discover their nakedness, and glory in their Foyl and folly. In a word, excess
of Wine, and the spirit of Grace are opposites; the former expells the latter
out of the Heart, as Smoke does Bees out of the Hive; and makes the man a mere
Slave and Prey to Satan and his snares; when, by this Poison he has put out
his Eyes, and spoiled him of his strength, he uses him as the Philistines did
Sampson, leads him in a string whither he pleases, like a very drudge, scorn
and make-sport to himself and his Imps; makes him grind in the Mill of all kind
of Sins and Vices. And that I take to be the reason why Drunkenness is not
specially prohibited in any one of the Ten Commandments, because it is not the
single breach of any one, but in effect the violation of all and every one: It
is no one sin, but all sins, because it is the In let and Sluice to all other
Sins. The Devil having moistened and steeped him in his Liquor, shapes him like
soft Clay, into what mould he pleases; having shaken off his Rudder and Pilot,
dashes his Soul upon what Rocks, Sands, and Syrts he lists, and that with as
much ease as a man may push down his Body with the least thrust of his Hand or
Finger. He that in his right Wits and sober mood seems Religious, modest,
chaste, courteous, secret; in his drunken fits, swears, blasphemes, rages,
strikes, talks filthily, blabs all secrets, commits folly, knows no difference
of Persons or Sexes, becomes wholly at Satan's command, as a dead Organ, to be
enacted at his will and pleasure. Oh that God would be pleased to open the Eyes
of some Drunkard, to see what a Dunghill and Carrion his Soul is become, and
how loathsome effects follow upon thy spiritual death, and sting of this
Cockatrice, which is the Fountain of the other two following, temporal and
eternal death.

How terrible a Theater of God's Judgments against Drunkards, such as might
make their Hearts to bleed and relent, if not their Ears to tingle; to hear of
a taste of some few such noted and remarkable Examples of God's Justice, as
have come within the compass of mine own notice, and certain knowledge; I think
I should offend to conceal them from the World, whom they may happily keep from
being the like to others themselves.

Here follows above one Hundred and twenty various, sad, and fearful Examples
of Gods Judgments on notorious Drunkards and Health-Drinkers in England and
Foreign Countries, with the places they Lived in; twelve of the chief are
Graved on Copper Plates, to deterr all others from the like Provoking Sins,
least the like Judgments do befall them.
1. AN Alewife in Kesgrave near to Ipswich, who would needs force three
Serving-men (that had been drinking in her House, and were taking their leaves)
to stay and drink the three Outs first; that is, Wit out of the Head, Money out
of the Purse, Ale out of the Pot; as she was coming toward them with the Pot
in her Hand, was suddenly taken speechless and sick, her Tongue swollen in her
Mouth, never recovered Speech, the third day after died. This Sir Antheny
Felton, the next Gentleman and Justice, with diverse other Eyewitnesses of her
Sickness, related to me; whereupon I went to the House with two or three
Witnesses, and inquired the truth of it.

2. Two Servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for a Rump of a Turkey,
struggling in their drink for it, fell into a scalding Cauldron backwards;
whereof the one died presently, the other lingringly and painfully, since my
coming to Ipswich.

3. Anno 1619. A Miller in Bromeswell coming home drunk from Woodbridge, (as he
often did) would needs go and Swim in the Mill-pond; his Wife and Servants
knowing he could not Swim, dissuaded him; once by entreaty got him out of the
Water, but in he would needs go again, and there was Drowned; I was at the
House to inquire of this, and found it to be true.

4. In Barnwell near to Cambridge, one at the Sign of the Plough, a lusty young
man, with two of his Neighbors and one Woman in their company, agreed to drink
a Barrel of strong Beer, they drank up the Vessel; three of them died within
twenty four hours, the fourth hardly escaped after great Sickness. This I have
under a Justice of Peace his Hand near dwelling, besides the common fame.

5. A Butcher in Hastingfield hearing the Minister inveigh against Drunkenness,
being at his Cups in the Alehouse, fell a jesting and scoffing at the Minister
and his Sermons; and as he was drinking, the Drink, or something in the Cup
quackled him, stuck so in his Throat, that he could get it neither up nor down,
but strangled him presently.

6. At Tillingham in Dengy Hundred in Essex, three young men meeting to drink
Strong Water, fell by degrees to half pints: One fell dead in the Room, and
the other prevented by Company coming in, escaped not without much sickness.

7. At Bungey in Norfolk, three coming out of an Alehouse in a very dark
Evening, swore, they thought it was not darker in Hell it self: One of them
fell off the Bridge into the water, and was drowned: the second fell off his
Horse, the third sleeping on the Ground by the Rivers-side, was frozen to
death: This have I often heard, but have no certain ground for the Truth of it.

8. A Bailiff of Hadly, upon the Lord's Day, being drunk at Melford, would needs
get upon his Mare, to ride through the Street, affirming (as the Report goes)
That his Mare would carry him to the Devil; His Mare casts him off, and broke
his Neck instantly. Reported by sundry sufficient Witnesses.

9. Company drinking in an Alehouse at Harwich in the Night, over against one
Master Russels, and by him out of his Window once or twice willed to depart; at
length he came down, and took one of them, and made as if he would carry him to
Prison, who drawing his Knife, fled from him, and was three days after taken
out of the Sea with the Knife in his hand. Related to me by Master Russel
himself, Mayor of the Town.

10. At Tenby in Pembrokeshire, a Drunkard being exceeding drunk, broke himself
all to pieces off an high and steep Rock, in a most fearful manner; and yet the
occasion and circumstances of his fall were so ridiculous, as I think not fit
to relate, lest, in so serious a Judgment, I should move Laughter to the Reader.

11. A Glasier in Chancery Lane in London, noted formerly for Profession, fell
to a common course of drinking, whereof being often by his Wife and many
Christian friends admonished, yet presuming much of Gods mercy to himself,
continued therein; till upon a time, having surcharged his Stomach with drink,
he fell a vomiting, broke a Vein, lay two days in extreme pain of Body, and
distress of Mind, till in the end recovering a little comfort, he died: Both
these Examples related to me by a Gentleman of worth upon his own knowledge.

12. Four sundry Instances of Drunkards wallowing and tumbling in their drink,
slain by Carts; I forbear to mention, because such examples are so common and
ordinary.

13. A Yeoman's Son in Northamptonshire, who being drunk at Wellingborough on
a Market Day, would needs ride his Horse in a bravery over the plowed-lands,
fell from his Horse, and brake his Neck: Reported to me by a Kinsman of his own.

14. A Knight notoriously given to Drunkenness, carrying sometime Payls of
drink into the open Field, to make people drunk withal; being upon a time
drinking with Company, a Woman comes in, delivering him a Ring with this Posie,
Drink and die; saying to him, This is for you, which he took and wore, and
within a week after came to his end by drinking: Reported by sundry, and
justified by a Minister dwelling within a Mile of the place.

15. Two Examples have I known of Children that murdered their own Mothers in
drink; and one notorious Drunkard that attempted to kill his Father; of which
being hindered, he fired his Barn, and was afterward executed: one of these
formerly in Print.

16. At a Tavern in Breadstreet in London, certain Gentlemen drinking Healths
to their Lords, on whom they had dependence; one desperate Wretch steps to the
Tables end, lays hold on a Pottle-pot full of Canary-sack, swears a deep Oath;
What will none here drink a Health to my noble Lord and Master? and so setting
the Pottle-pot to his mouth, drinks it off to the bottom; was not able to rise
up, or to speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoaring sleep, and
being removed, One Drunk Vomiting broke a Vein after 2 days great pain Dyed.
4. being Drunk were Slain by Carts.
One Drunk Rideing over plowed - lands fell and broke his neck.
a Child that murdered his Mother he being Drunk.
laid aside, and covered by one of the Servants of the House, attending the
time of the drinking, was within the space of two hours irrecoverably dead:
Witnessed at the time of the Printing hereof by the same Servant that stood by
him in the Act, and helped to remove him.

17. In Dengy Hundred near Mauldon, about the beginning of his Majesty's Reign,
there fell out an extraordinary Judgment upon five or six that plotted a solemn
drinking at one of their Houses, laid in Beer for the once, drunk Healths in a
strange manner, and died thereof within a few weeks, some sooner, and some
later: witnessed to me by one that was with one of them on his deathbed, to
demand a Debt, and often spoken of by Mr. Heydon, late Preacher of Mauldon, in
the hearing of many: The particular circumstances were exceeding remarkable,
but having not sufficient proof for the particulars, I will not report them.

18. One of Aylesham in Norfolk, a notorious Drunkard, was drowned in a shallow
Brook of Water, with his Horse by him.

19. Whilst this was at the Press, a man eighty five years old, or thereabout,
in Suffolk, overtaken with Wine, (though never in all his Life before, as he
himself said a little before his fall, seeming to bewail his present condition,
and others that knew him, so say of him) yet going down a pair of stairs
(against the persuasion of a woman sitting by him in his Chamber) fell, and was
so dangerously hurt, as he died soon after, not being able to speak from the
time of his fall to his death.

The Names of the Parties thus punished, I forbear for the Kindreds sake yet
living.

If conscionable Ministers of all places of the Land would give notice of such
Judgments, as come within the compass of their certain knowledge, it might be a
great means to suppress this Sin, which reigns every where to the scandal of
our Nation, and high displeasure of Almighty God.

These may suffice for a taste of Gods Judgments: Easy were it to abound in
sundry particular Casualties, and fearful Examples of this nature. Drunkard,
that which has befallen any one of these, may befall thee, if thou will dally
with this Cockatrice; whatever leagues thou make with Death, and
dispensations thou give thy self from the like. Some of these were Young,
some were rich, some thought themselves as wise as thou; none of them ever
looked for such ignominious ends, more than thou, whoever thou art: if thou
hate such ends, God give thee Grace to decline such courses.

If thou be yet insensate with Wine, void of Wit and Fear, I know not what
further to mind thee of, but of that third and worst Sting of all the rest,
which will ever be gnawing, and never dying: which if thou will not fear here,
sure thou art to feel there, when the Red Dragon has gotten thee into his Den,
and shall fill thy Soul with the gall of Scorpions, where thou shall yell and
howl for a drop of water to cool thy Tongue withal, and shall be denied so
small a refreshing, and have no other liquor to allay thy thirst but that which
the lake of Brimstone shall afford thee: And that worthily, for that thou
would incurr the wrath of the Lamb for so base and sordid a sin as
Drunkenness, of which thou may think as venially and slightly as thou will.
But Paul that knew the danger of it, gives thee fair warning, and bids thee not
deceive thy self, expressly and by name mentioning it among the mortal sins,
excluding from the Kingdom of Heaven. And the Prophet Esaias tells thee, That for
it Hell has enlarged it self, opened its mouth wide, and without measure; and
therefore shall the multitude and their pomp, and the jollyest among them
descend into it. Consider this, you that are strong to pour in drink, that love
to drink sorrow and care away: And be you well assured, that there you shall
drink enough for all, having for every drop of your former Bousings, Vials,
yea, whole Seas of God's Wrath, never to be exhaust.

Now then I appeal from your selves in drink, to your selves in your sober
fits. Reason a little the case, and tell me calmly, would you for your own, or
any man's pleasure, to gratify Friend or Companion, if you knew there had been
a Toad in the Wine-pot (as twice I have known happened to the death of
Drinkers?) or did you think that some Caesar Borgia, or Brasutus had tempered
the Cup? or did you see but a Spider in the Glass, would you, or durst you
carouse it off? And are you so simple to fear the Poison that can kill the
Body, and not that which kills the Soul and Body ever; yea, for ever and
ever, and if it were possible for more than for ever, for evermore? Oh thou
vain Fellow, what tellest thou me of Friendship, or good Fellowship! will thou
account him thy Friend, or good Fellow, that draws thee into his company, that
he may poison thee? and never thinks he has given thee right entertainment, or
showed thee kindness enough, till he has killed thy Soul with his kindness;
and with Beer made thy Body a Carcass fit for the Biere, a laughing and
Loathing-stock, not to Boys and Girls alone, but to Men and Angels? Why rather
say thou not to such, What have I to do with you, ye Sons of Belial, ye
poysonful Generation of Vipers, that hunt for the precious life of a man? Oh
but there are few good Wits, or great Spirits now a days, but will Pot it a
little for company, What hear I? Oh base and low-spirited times, if that were
true! If we were fallen into such Lees of Time foretold of by Seneca, in which
all were so drowned in the dregs of Vices, that it should be Virtue and Honor
to bear most drink. But thanks be to God, who has reserved many thousands of
men* and without all comparison more witty and valorous than such Pot-wits, and
Spirits of the Buttery, who never bared their knees to drink health, nor ever
needed to whet their Wits with Wine; or arm their Courage with Pot-harness. And
if it were so, yet if no such Wits or Spirits shall ever enter into Heaven
without Repentance, let my Spirit never come and enter into their Paradise;
ever abhor to partake of their brutish pleasures, lest I partake of their
endless woes. If young Cyrus could refuse to drink Wine, and tell Astyages, He
thought it to be Poison, for he saw it metamorphose men into Beasts and
Carkases; what would he have said, if he had known that which we may know, that
the Wine of Drunkards is the Wine of Sodom and Gomorrah; their Grapes, the
Grapes of gall; their clusters, the clusters of Bitterness, the Juice of
Dragons, and the venom of Asps.

Scripture Examples of Drunkenness.
THe Sin of Drunkenness is a bewitching sin, Hos. 4. 11. It steals away the
heart from God and all goodness: It is an old sin, it began presently after the
Flood. It is a malignant sin, it drowns the Brain, wastes the Time, consumes
the Estate. And fills the Body with as many diseases as has an Horse; It is an
Epidemical sin, that has almost drowned the whole world with another deluge:
In these modern times it began in Germany, whence grew that proverb,

Germani possunt cunctos tolerare Labores:
O Utinam possint tam been far sitim!
The Germans can all Labors undergo,
Would they as well could bear their thirst also.
But since it has infected all Europe: It is grown into Fashion, to Quaff
Soul-sick healths till they make themselves like Swine, and worse than beasts:
whence one gives us this excellent rule:

Una Salus sanis, nullam potare Salutem:
Non est in pota vera Salute Salus.
Drinking no healths you drink your health they say:
And drinking healths you drink your health away.
Scriptural Examples.
The odiousness and danger of this sin may further appear to us by these
following Scriptures and Examples. Drunkenness dangerous, Prove. 23. 29. etc.
Who has woe? who has Sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who has
wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? and 31. 4. It is not for Kings,
O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink Wine: nor for Princes, strong drink:
Deuteronomy. 21. 20. And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our Son is
stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice: he is a glutton, and a
drunkard; Prove. 20. 1. Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever
is deceived thereby, is not Wise. Hos. 4. 11. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine
take away the Heart. Nah. 1. 10. For while they be folden together as thorns,
and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble
fully dry. 1 Cor. 11. 21. For in eating every one takes before other, his own
supper: and one is hungry, and another is drunken.

Threatened, Isai. 5. 11, 22. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning,
that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night till Wine inflame
them. 22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink. Amos 6. 6. That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves
with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for affliction of Joseph.
Prove. 23. 21 For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and
drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags. Isa. 28. 1. 3* Woe to the Crown of
pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim: whose glorious beauty is as a fading
flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with
wine. V. 3. The Crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under
feet. Joel 1. 5. Awake ye drunkards, and weep and howl all ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouth. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God.

Forbidden, 1 Cor. 5. 11. But now I have written unto you, not to keep company,
if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one, no
not to eat. Luke 22. 34. And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the Cock shall not
crow this day, before that thou shall thrice deny that thou know me. Ephesians. 5.
18. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be ye filled with the
Spirit: Hab. 2. 15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: that put
thy bottle to him* and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their
nakedness. Mat. 24. 49. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to
eat and drink with the drunken: Luke 12. 45. But and if that servant say in his
heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to beat the menservants,
and maidens, and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken, etc. Romans 13. 13. Let us
walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness, not in strife and envying.

Staggering is a sign of a drunkard, Job. 12. 25. They grope in the dark
without light, and he makes them to stagger like a drunken man. Psalm. 107. 27.
They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man; and are at their wits
end. Isa. 19. 14. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof:
and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man
staggereth in his vomit.

Lot, Genesis 19. 32. Come, let us make our Father drink wine, and we will lie
with him, that we may preserve seed of our Father. Noah, Genesis 9. 21. And he
drank of the wine, and was drunken, and he was uncovered within his tent.
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30. 16. And when he had brought him down, behold they were
spread abroad upon all the Earth, eating, and drinking, and dancing, because of
all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and
out of the land of Judah. Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 28. Now Absalom had commanded his
servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry with wine, and when I
say unto you, Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not, have not I commanded you?
be courageous, and be valiant. Benhadad, 1 Kings 20. 12. And it came to pass
when Benhadad heard this message, (as he was drinking, he, and the Kings in the
Pavilions) that he said unto his servants, Set your selves in array. And they
set themselves in array against the city. David made Uriah drunk, 2 Samuel 11 13.
And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him, and he made him
drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his Lord,
but went not down to his house. Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 2. Belshazzar whilst he
tasted the wine, commanded to bring the Golden and Silver vessels, which his
Father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple which was in Jerusalem, that
the King and his Princes, his Wives and his Concubines might drink therein.
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 36. And Abigal came to Nabal, and behold, he held a feast in
his house like the feast of a King, and Nabals heart was merry within him, for
he was very drunken, wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the
morning light.

More Scriptural Examples of Drunkenness, and how that great Sin has been
punished.
THe Amalekites being drunk were destroyed, 1 Samuel 30. 16, v. to the 21. And
when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad upon all the
earth, eating, and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that
they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of
Judah. And David smote them from the twilight, even unto the evening of the
next day: and there escaped not a man of them save four hundred young men which
rode upon Camels and fled. And David recovered all that the Amalekites had
carried away: and David rescued his two Wives. And there was nothing lacking to
them, neither small nor great, neither Sons nor Daughters, neither spoil, nor
any thing that they had taken to them: David recovered all. And David took all
the flocks, and the herds, which they drove before those other cattle, and
said, This is David's spoil.

David Recovered all the spoil he had taken at Ziglag and his two Wives:
Benhadad King of Assiria being drunk, with thirty two Kings more, is defeated;
1 Kings 20. 16. to the 22. v. And they went out at noon: but Benhadad was
drinking himself drunk in the Pavilions, he, and the Kings, the thirty and two
Kings that helped him. 17. And the young men of the Princes of the Provinces,
went out first, and Benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men
come out of Samaria. 18. And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take
them alive: or whether they be come out for war, take them alive. 19. So these
young men of the Princes of the provinces, came out of the City, and the Army
which followed them. 20. And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled,
and Israel pursued them: and Benhadad the King of Syria escaped on an horse,
with the horsemen. 21. And the King of Israel went out, and smote the horses
and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.

Elah King of Israel, being drunk, he is slain by Zimri, 1 Kings 16. 8. to the
11. In the twentieth and sixth year of Asa King of Judah, began Elah the Son of
Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah two years. And his servant Zimri (captain
of half his Chariots) conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking
himself drunk in the house of Arza Steward of his house in Tirzah. And Zimri
went in, and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa
King of Judah, and reigned in his stead. Belshazzar being drunk, was slain by
God; he praised the Gods of Gold, etc. And in the same hour came out the Hand
writing against him, Dan. 5. Mean, Mean, Tekel, Upharsin.

King Herod being drunk, caused John Baptist to be beheaded, Mat. 14. 6. to the
12. But when Herod's birthday was kept, the Daughter of Herodias danced before
them, and pleased Herod. Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her
whatsoever she would ask. And she being before instructed of her Mother, said,
Give me here John Baptists head in a charger. And the King was sorry:
nevertheless for the Oaths sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he
commanded it to be given her: And he sent and beheaded John in the prison: And
his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel, and she brought it
to her Mother. Titus 2. 12. Teaching us that denying all ungodliness and wordly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. 1
Pet. 4. 3. 4. For the time past of our Life may suffice us to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine,
revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries. Wherein they think it
strange, that you run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil
of you.

Other Examples Foreign and Domestic.
1. Whilst the Gaul's besieged the Roman Capitol, they sent out a great party
to Sack the Country thereabouts, who being Laden with spoil were returning
toward Rome: And at night being full of Wine, they laid them down to sleep,
not fearing any Enemy: At which time Camillus with his men came upon them, all
his Soldiers giving a mighty shout, yet could the Gauls hardly be awakened,
they were so deadly drunk, so that they were easily all of them slain either
upon the place, or by the Horsemen in the pursuit: Plutarch.

2. The Tuscans besieging Sturium, (a City that was confederate with Rome)
Camillus marched privately with his Army against them, and coming upon them
found the Tuscans secure, Eating and Drinking themselves Drunken; by which
means he slew most of them without resistance: And thereby freed the City from
danger. Plutarch.

3. Many Dutchmen in Joppa drinking themselves drunk upon St. Martins-day
(their Arch-Saint,) the Turks came in suddenly upon them, and cut every ones
throat, to the number of 2000. And indeed they were quickly stabbed with the
Sword, who were Cup-shot before. Fullers Holy War.

4. Edgar King of England perceiving that his people had learned of the Danes
(many of which were in this land at that time) to drink excessively, whereupon
ensued much Drunkenness, together with many other Vices: He ordained certain
wooden Cups with pins, or nails set in them, commonly used, making also a law,
That whosoever drank past that mark at one draught, should forfeit a sum of
Money, one part to the Informer, and the other to the Judge or Chief Officer.
Sp. Chron.

5. Eschines commending Philip King of Macedon for a Jovial man, that would
drink freely; Demosthenes Answered, That this was a good quality in a Sponge,
but not in a King. Plut. in vit. Demost.

6. Alexander the Great having taken Persepolis, wherein was a stately Palace
of the Kings of Persia, in a drunken fit, by the persuasion of Lais the Harlot,
burned it down to the ground. Diod.

7. A Turk having in one of their great Feasts drunk wine too freely (which is
a thing forbidden in their Law) being apprehended and carried before the Gand
Vizier, and there found guilty, was adjudged to have boiling Lead poured into
his Mouth and Ears, which was accordingly executed. Turk. Hist. p. 1332.

8. Phocas a drunken, bloody and Adulterous Tyrant, was worthily slaughtered by
Heraclius, who cut off his hands and feet, and then his privy parts by
Piecemeal.

9. Not long since a Soldier in Salisbury, in the midst of his health-drinking
and Carousing in a Tavern, drank a health to the Devil, saying, That if the
Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not believe that there was either
God or Devil. Whereupon his Companions stricken with horror, hastened out of
the room; and presently after hearing a hideous noise, and smelling a stinking
favor, the Vintner ran up into the Chamber, and coming in he missed his Guest;
and found the window broken, the Iron Bar in it bowed, and all bloody; but the
man was never heard of afterward.

10. A young Gentleman being drunk, as he rode homewards was thrown by his
Horse, and had his brains dashed out by the Pomel of his Sword.

11. Anno Christi 1629. there was one T. W. a notorious Blasphemer and
Drunkard, upon a small occasion being angry with his Wife, not daring to
proffer violence to her, drew his Knife and stabbed himself.

12. The same year one J. B. of Ely a Gentleman's Coachman, being exceedingly
given to Swearing and Drunkenness, drinking himself drunk on a Sabbath Day at
Sermon-time, fell from his Coach-box, and was killed by his Horses.

13. Anno Christi, 1621. one R. B. of Ely, who used to travel on the
Sabbath-dayes, seldom or never coming to Church; as he went to the Market at
St. Ives being drunk, Gods Judgment overtook him; for going up the River in his
Boat, he fell over into the water and was drowned.

14. Anno Christi 1618. one T. A. of Godmanchester, being a common Drunkard,
was entreated by a Neighbor to unpitch a Load of Hay: And being at that time
drunk, the Pitchfork slipped out of his hand, which he stooping to take up again,
fell from the Cart with his head downward; and the Fork standing with the Tines
upward, he fell directly upon them, which striking to his heart killed him
immediately.

15. Anno Christi 1628. J. V. of Godmanchester, a known Drunkard and Scoffer at
Religion, fell from the top of a Pear*tree and brake his neck. All these are
attested by sundry Godly Ministers.

16. Anno Christi 1551. In Bohemia five Drunkards were Quaffing, and
blaspheming the Name of God: And the picture of the Devil being painted upon
the wall, they drank healths to him, who the night after paid them their Wages;
for they were found dead with their necks broken and quashed to pieces, as if a
wheel had gone over them the blood running out of their mouths, nostrils, and
ears in a Lamentable manner. Fincelius.

17. A Vintner that accustomed himself to swearing and drunkenness, as he was
upon the Lords day standing in his door with a pot in his hand to invite
guests, there came suddenly such a violent Whirlewind as carried him up into
the Air, after which he was never more seen.

18. Armitus and Cinanippus, two Syracusians, being drunk, committed Incest
with their two Daughters. Plut. The like did Lot, Genesis 19. 33, etc.

19. Cleomenes King of Laceaemonia, drinking himself drunken fell distracted,
never recovering his wits again.

20. Anacreon the Poet, a notable drunkard, was choked with the Husk of a
Grape.

21. Zeno the Emperor was such a drunkard, that he would often lie as one dead
for many hours, so that he grew odious to all, and to his own Wife, who once
sinding him in that case, caused him to be laid in a Tomb, with a great stone
on the top of it, where he was miserably pined to death: Platina.

22. But a few years since in Gloucester-shire, an horrid Patricide was
committed by another ungracious Son, being drunken, upon his Father, whom he
desperately slew.

23. The like unnatural villainy was committed by one Purchase, an Essex Monster,
upon the Body of his Mother, whom he slew for the same cause.

24. John Maginus reports, that Fliolmus King of the Goths, was by his drunken
Servants thrown headlong into a great Vessel of Ale, and therein drowned.

25. Plato, who elsewhere holds that men should be sober, and forbids
drunkenness as an unseemly thing; yet in the Feasts celebrated to Bacchus, he
lets loose the reins to intemperancy, and thinks it then no fault at all to be
drunk.

26. In the Parish of Castleterra in the county of Cavan in Ireland, a
Gentleman when he met with Jovial Comrades, used to drink healths, and to fling
the Glasses against the Walls: he delighted also to contradict what Ministers
delivered in their Sermons, and having heard one preach of the benefits and
trial of a justifying Faith, after Sermon he demanded of the Preacher, Whether
he could remove mountains? If I could see you do that, then (said he) I would
believe you had faith, otherwise not; for does not the Gospel say, If a man
have faith but as a grain of Mustard Seed, he shall say to Mountains, Be
removed hence, and it shall be done? But at length this Gentleman was stricken
with the Smallpox, which got into his throat in such manner, that he could not
swallow, nor let down a little Beer to cool his excessive internal heat,
wherewith being tormented he broke out into these expressions, to an honest man
that stood by: O Thomas, would I could now receive one of those glass-fulls of
drink which formerly I have thrown against the walls in a frolic: And
afterward when he saw there was no remedy but die he must, he said again, O!
that now I had Faith like a grain of mustard seed! And a little after he
deceased, in the fifty seventh year of his age.

27. We read of a drunkard who in the midst of his Cups sold his Soul to the
Devil for a Tankard of Wine: And the Devil forthwith had his bargain. Theat.
Hist.

28. The like of a Woman, who at a Whitson-Ale fell a cursing God, having
nothing but the Devil in her mouth; so long, till at last the Devil came, and
hoisting her up into the Air, threw her down again in a place not for remote,
where she was found dead.

29. Acosta and Benzo write of the West-Indians, that they are exceedingly
given to Drunkenness, the people there for the most part delighting themselves
beyond measure in intoxicating their brains in strong Liquors; in which mad and
distempered fits they many times commit many salvage Outrages, and unruly
pranks one against another, and account it a matter of praise so to do: I saw
(says Acosta) two men coming drunk out of a Tavern, for a very trifle kill one
another with the same Sword.

30. Alexander the great, when he was drunk, would hack, and hew, kill, and
slay he cared not whom, and oft-times his very Friends; as he did Clytus his
dear friend, who had formerly saved his life, whom in a drunken mood he
commanded presently to be slain: Neither would he hearken to Ptolomy and
Perdiccas, two of his great Captains, who upon their knees would have begged
one days respite for him: Though the same Alexander when he was sober, would
have slain himself for having caused Clytus to be slain. Q. Curt.

31. Tenthio King of the Illyrians, in his drunkenness slew his own brother
Pleuratus. Polybius.

32. Of Bonosus the Emperor it was said, that he was born, Non ut vivat, sed ut
bibat: Not to live, but to drink: And when (being overcome by Probus) he hanged
himself; it was said in scorn that a Tankard hanged there, not a Man.

33. What a Beast was Marcus Antonius, that he wrote a book in Commendation of
his great strength to bear strong drink?

34. Philip King of Macedon in his drunkenness once passing an unrighteous
sentence, the Woman concerned therein appealed from Philip now drunk, to Phiilp
when he should be sober again.

35. The Carthagenians made a Law that no Magistrate of theirs should drink
Wine.

36. The Persians permitted their Kings to be drunk but one day in a year.

37. Solon made a Law at Athens, that drunkenness in a Prince should be
punished with death, Prove. 3. 1, 5.

38. Domitius the Father of Nero, slew Liberius an honest Roman because he
refused to take off his Cups as he commanded him.

39. Amos 6. 6. That drink Wine in Bowls: Not in Cups, Pots, or Chalices, but
in Vessels of price, and largest receipt, that they may be accounted, and
called (as young Cicero was) Tricongii, such as can drink whole ones, and no
small ones neither.

40. Diotimus of Athens, for his excessive drinking was termed (...), Tundish.

41. Aeneas Silvius tells us of one Henry Earl of Goricia, who having two Sons,
drunkards both, was wont ofttimes in the night to call upon them, and ask
whether they were a thirsty? And when they gave him no Answer, he would himself
carry Wine unto them, pressing them to drink, and if by reason of sleepiness or
late excess, they refused, he would return in a rage to his Wife, and call her
Whore, saying they were Bastards, and not his Sons, who could sleep all night
without being athirst.

42. Vortigern King of the Britains, being well warmed with Wine, was ensnared
by the Daughter of Hengist the Saxon, which proved the undoing of the British
Nation. Pol. Virg. Hist. Ang.

43. Venture Mero aestuante cito despumat in libidines: A Belly or stomach
boiling with Wine, does suddenly foam up into a scum of sinful lusts and foul
Affections: Hierom.

44. Bonzo relates of the Indians of Peru, that when they have drunk away that
little reason wherewith they are endowed, they use to fall to immodest
embracings, without respect had to Mothers, Daughters, Brothers, Sisters, or
any other Relations whatsoever.

45. Saint Jerome could not be persuaded that a Drunkard could be a chaste man.

46. A certain young Man that had devoted himself to a pious and retired course
of life, was much assaulted by the Devil, by sundry temptations, and pressed to
make choice of one of these three sins: Once to be drunk, or to lie with his
Neighbors Wife, or to kill his Neighbor; and the temptation so far prevailed,
that at the last he chose the first; ( viz.) Once to be drunk, as deeming it
the least sin: But when the Devil had drawn him to that, at the same time both
the other sins were committed by him.

47. Ad universa, vel crudelitatis, vel turpitudinis facinora perpetranda
facilis invenitur via, cui nulla sobriae mentis ratio, sed ebrietas dominatur.
A drunken man is easily drawn to commit any villainy: Bern.

48. Pausanias makes mention of a Company of young men in Greece, who upon a
time contrary to the command of their Captain Aristomenes, being drunk, offered
Violence to the Chastity of certain young Virgins; and so violent they were
therein, till the sword and death put an end to the same.

49. The cruel Tyrant Lucius being drunk, became like a mad Horse; and when he
could not prevail to satisfy his lust upon the Daughter of Philodemus, he
barbarously slew her Flying for shelter into her Fathers Arms. Plut.

50. What a Beast was Darius King of Persia, who commanded this Inscription to
be set on his Tomb: I was able to hunt lustily, to drink Wine soundly, and to
bear it bravely. Strabo.

51. Saint Augustine in his Confessions, tells us a story of his Mother, who by
sipping a little Wine at first when she filled the Cup, came by degrees to be a
Tippling Gossip, and at last to drink off her whole Cups. Sin that is modest at
first, afterward grows shameless.

52. In Lacedemon, Crete and Carthage, the name of a drunkard was so hateful
and contemptible, that such as were found guilty of this sin were disabled to
bear any public Office, and thrust out of the Senate (if they were
Magistrates) with shame and ignominy. Alex. ab Alex.

53. Levinus Lemnius writes of the Dutchmen, the High-Germans especially, and
that part of the low Countries that borders upon them, that they never account
that man worth whistling for, that will not strenuum se potatorem praebere;
upon all occasions prove himself strong to drink strong drink.

54. Suetonius relates, that Novellius Torquatus was highly honored amongst
the Romans, for that he could drink three Gallons of Wine at a draught without
taking his breath: for that he fairly drank off his Liquor and left no snuff
behind; and after he had drunk so much, he neither stammered in his speech, nor
unburthened his stomach by vomiting; for which he was preferred to be Proconsul
of Syria. Pliny.

55. Also Firmus who assumed the title of Emperor in the absence of Aurelian,
when he had drunk off two Buckets of Wine, went forthwith to a Banquet, and
seemed as sober as if he had drunk none at all. Vopiscus in vita Firm.

56. Flaccus and Piso had Dignities bestowed upon them, the one being made a
Proconsul, the other Governor of the City of Rome, for that they were strong
to pour in strong drink: Suet.

57. One Hulderick a Bohemian, told Frederick the Emperor, That he trained up
his Sons to drink great quantities of Wine without disturbance: Thou art wise,
said the Emperor, the same thing did Mithidrates; but if it happen that I have
a Son, if that Son shall not hate excess of Wine, I shall hate him. Aeneas Sil.

58. Anno Christi 764. London and York, Donwick and Doncaster, with many other
places in this Land were consumed with Fire, (says the Historian:) If any one
ask the cause, we can render none more probable than this, That it was a
Judgment of God upon them, for their Gluttony and Drunkenness. Antiq. Brit. p.
291.

59. Anno Christi 1567. Tir-Owen the Irish Rebel, was such a Drunkard, that
when his Body was immoderately inflamed with drinking strong drink and
Usque-bagh, he used many times to be set in the Earth up to the Chin to cool
himself. Camb. Eliz.

60. Luxury is ordinarily the Companion of Idolatry, as Ex. 32. 6. 1 Cor. 10.
7. Rev. 18. 13, 14. O Monachi, vestri stomachi, etc. At Paris and Lovane, the
best Wine is called Vinum Theologicum, the Divinity Wine: It Is also called
Vinum Cos: Coloris, Odoris, Saporis Optimi.

61. Drunkenness is a detestable Vice in any, but especially in men of Place
and Power, Prove. 31. 4. Woe be to those drunken Vice-gods (as in the worst
sense they may be best called:) Woe to the very Crown of their pride in drinking
down many, Isa. 28. 1. As Marcus Antonius wrote, or rather spued out a Book
concerning his own abilities to bear strong drink; Darius also boasted of the
same faculty in his very Epitaph, as we saw before.

62. Drunkenness in a King is a capital sin, and makes the Land reel: Witness
Belshazzar, carousing in the Bowls of the Sanctuary to the honor of Shar his
drunken god.

63. Alexander the Great drunk himself to death, and killed forty one more by
excessive drinking, to get the Crown of one hundred Eighty pounds weight, which
he had provided for him that drank most. Plut.

64. Tiberius the Emperor, for his tippling was called Biberius.

65. Erasmus for the same cause called Eccius, Jeccius: for, as he lived a
shameful Drunkard, so being nonplust at Ratisbon by Melancton, he drank more
than was fit that night, at the Bishop of Mundina's Lodgings (who had store of
the best Italian Wines;) and so fell into a Fever, whereof he dyed: Jo. Man.
L. Com.

66. Drunkenness is a flattering evil, a sweet poison, a cunning Circe that
besots the Soul, destroys the Body, Dolores gignit in Capite, in Stomacho, in
toto corpore acerrimos: Breeds grievous diseases in the head, in the stomach,
and in the whole man: At last it bites like a Serpent, and stings like an
Adder, Prove. 23. 32. The Drunkard says as the Vine in Jothams parable, Non
possum relinquere Vinum meum. Take away my Liquor, you take away my Life: but
at last it proves like the Wine mentioned by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 33. The Poison of
Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps. Trap.

67. Austin Brings in the Drunkard saying, Malle se vitam quam Vinum eripi: And
Ambrose tells us of one Theotinus, who being told by his Physicians, that much
quaffing would make him blind; Vale lumen Amicum, said he; Farewell sweet Eyes,
if ye will bear no Wine, ye are not Eyes for me: He had rather lose his sight
than his sin; his Soul than his lust, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Psalm. 11. 6.

Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong
drink, that continue until night till wine inflame them: Isa. 5. 11.
More Foreign Examples of Drunkenness and Drunkards.
1. John Manlius, in his Common-places, p. 244. Tells us of three abominable
Drunkards, who drank so long till one of them fell down stark dead; and yet the
other two nothing terrified with such a dreadful Example of divine Vengeance,
went on to drink, and poured the dead man's part into him as he lay by them.

2. Darius boasted of the same faculty in his very Epitaph.

3. The Greeks, when they met at Feasts or Banquets, drink small draughts at
first, which by degrees they increased till they came to the height of
Intemperancy. Hence Graecari, and as merry as a Greek.

4. Minos King of Crete, ordered that his Subjects should not drink one to
another, unto drunkenness.

5. Seneca calls drunkenness a voluntary madness; another calls it a
Noon-day-Devil.

6. Cato that was a most severe censurer of other men's manners, had this
objected against him; Quod nocturnis potationibus indulgeret: That by night he
would drink soundly.

7. I was once with a Drunkard (says mine Author, a Godly Minister) that lay a
dying, and after I had prayed with him, in came one of his old Companions in
Sin, and asked him, How he did; at which he was ready to gnash his teeth; and
made to me this dreadful Reflection concerning him: O that, that was the wicked
Wretch that drew me away; if it had not been for him, I had not been in so
lamentable a case upon my Deathbed.

8. Bonosus a Britain, and bred up in Spain, usurped the Empire of Rome in the
Reign of Probus; of whom it is written* That he would drink so much Wine, as
ten great drinkers could not drink so much: and therewithal, he had two
wonderful properties: The one was that how much soever he drank, he was never
drunk: The other was, that when it pleased him, he could piss it out as fast as
he poured it in, without retaining any jot within his body. Being overcome by
Probus, he hanged himself. The Emperor Aurelian was wont to say of him, That
Bonosus was not born to live, but to drink. Imperial Hist. page 211.

9. Tiberus Nero made Novellus Tricongius Pro-consul, for that he could drink
three Pottles of Wine together with one breath.

10. He also preferred Lucius Piso to the Government of the City of Rome,
because he could sit drinking with him continually for two whole days and
nights together. Suetonius.

11. To prevent drunkenness, and the evil consequents of it, the Carthaginians
forbad their Magistrates all use of Wine.

12. Solon punished Drunkenness in a Ruler with Death.

13. Anno Christi 1578. February 10. in the Country of S^aben, about Eight
persons that were Citizens and Citizens Sons (whose names my Author sets
down) met together at a Tavern, whereof the Masters name was Anthony Huge, on a
Sabbath morning, where they drank themselves drunk, and then began to blaspheme
God, and to scoff at the Host; who advised them to leave drinking, and to go to
Church to hear the Word preached; at which they not only continued to mock, but
went on in their drinking; when suddenly the Devil came in among them in the
habit of a Cavalier, who drinking to them, set their mouths in such a fire,
that these Drunkards not only became amazed thereat, but also after a miserable
manner were all strangled to death. Stephen Batemen, Professor of Divinity.

14. Anno Christi 1556. in the Town of St. Gallus, in Switzerland, there was
one Peter Besler, who was born at Rotmund, but was now a Servant to a Citizen,
whose habitation was near unto St. Gallus: This dissolute young man was much
given to the beastly Sin of Drunkenness; and upon Trinity-Sunday, which was May
the 21st, he together with some of his Companions went to the Town of Sangal,
there to be merry: And when they had drunk freely, this young man began to rail
at, and to quarrel with his Companions; and using many Blasphemies against God,
he added this Execration also: If I serve my Master any longer, I give my Body
and Soul to the Devil. When he had staid there all night, in the morning
awaking, he began to think what words he had uttered the night before; yet
having no other means of subsistence, he resolved to return to his Masters
Service; but going out of the City, when he was now not far from his Masters
House, a man met him clad in black, and fearful to behold; who said unto him,
Go to (Good fellow,) I am now ready to take that which is my right, and which
thou gave me yesterday: Which when he had said, taking the fellow by the
hand, (who was amazed with horror, and altogether astonished) he threw him to
the ground, and so vanished. Not long after this, this miserable young man
being found by some of the Neighbors, had his hands and feet drawn together;
and being brought to a Lodging, he had the use of all his Limbs taken from him,
and so continued till he dyed miserably. Ibid.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. It Is good to be warned by other
men's harms.

Healths Drank one Drinks off a pottle pot of Sack and - dies within two hours
after.
One Drowned in a Shallow brook of water being Drunk, his horse standing by.
5. or 6. Drank Healths in a Strange manner and dyed one after another in few
weeks.
An exceeding Drunkard in Pembrock shire being Drunk, broke himself all to
pieces from an high Rock.


More Examples worthy of serious Consideration.
THere is a very remarkable Story published by Mr. Robert Abbot Minister some
years since of Cranebrook in Kent, concerning one William Rogers an Apothecary
there, that was exceeding much given to Drinking, and Sabbath breaking: He was
in his general course, as he relates of him, a Young man of a sweet and
pleasing temper: It was reported, that the Devil never abused a better Nature;
and he was observed never to Swear or Curse in all his Life, except once; but
was often admonished and persuaded by Mr. Abbot to come to the Church on the
Sabbath-dayes; at last he was prevailed with to come, though he had often
promised, and failed: The Lords day before in the morning, when as he said he
was ready to come to Church, he was taken sick, and betook himself to his Bed;
it was but as a fit of an Ague, which being over, he was the next morning in
his old course again; but about the middle of the week after, the messenger of
Death came, and Mr. Abbot forthwith addressed himself to him in his Chamber,
saying, Oh how often have you deceived God, your own Soul, and me! and what is
now to be done? I fear you will dye, and then what will become of you? His
sickness so prevailed, that it emptied him of any hopes of Life, and filled him
with thoughts of his present Guilt, and future Judgment before the great God,
who is a consuming fire: He apprehending his own misery, made it known to him
and others; there was too great a fire within to be Smothered, it burned in his
own Soul, and it Lightened from his Heart and Lips, into the Ears and Hearts of
those Friends that were about him. One while he cries out of his sins, saying,
I have been a fearful Drunkard, pouring in one draught after another, till one
draught could not keep down another; I now would be glad if I could take the
least of Gods Creatures which I have abused: I have neglected my Patients,
which have put their Lives in my hands, and how many Souls have I thus
murdered! I have wilfully neglected Gods House, Service and Worship, and
though I purposed to go, God strikes me thus before the day of my promise
comes, because I am unworthy to come among Gods people again. Another while he
falls to wishing, Oh, that I might burn a long time in that fire, (pointing to
the fire before him) so I might not burn in Hell! Oh that God would grant me
but one Year or a Month, that the world might see with what an Heart I have
promised to God my amendment! Oh that God would try me a little! but I am
unworthy. Another while he speaks to his Companions, praying all to be warned
by him to forsake their wicked ways, lest they go to Hell, as he must do. He
forgot not his Servant that was young, calls him to him, and tells him, That he
had been a wicked Master to him; But be warned by me, said he; you have a
Friend that has an Iron Furnace, which burns hot a long time, but if you give
your self to my sins, you shall be burned in the Furnace of Hell, an hotter
Furnace, millions of millions of Ages: Therefore look to your self, and be
warned by my Example, who must be burned in Hell for ever; I must to the
Furnace of Hell, millions of millions of Ages. The Minister offered to him the
Comforts of the Gospel* Promises of the largest size, showed him that God was
delighted to save Souls, and not to destroy them: But he cried, It was too
late, I must be burned in Hell: He pressed him with tears not to cast away that
Soul for which Christ died; and told him, Christ rejected none that did not
reject him: He answered, He had cast off Christ, and therefore he must go to
Hell. He often complained, that former Counsels and Prayers might have done him
good, but now it was too late; he was no Swearer, Whoremonger, Thief, no
scoffer at Religion, no Perjured wretch, nor wilful Lier; yet when Conscience
was awakened, and sat as Judge on him, he confessed his being given to
drunkenness, and neglect of men's bodies, and neglect of Prayer and other
duties, hearing the Word, and keeping the Sabbath Day: which caused him to pass
this heavy doom on himself, and at last in Idleness of thoughts and talk he
ended his miserable Life: And whatsoever God has done with his Soul, we are
bound to hope the best; this sad example is a warning-piece from Heaven, to
warn all young men to leave off their evil courses, lest a worse thing befall
them. He desired others might be warned by his Example.

The Relation of him the said William Rogers was published by Mr. Abbot,
called, The Young man's Warning piece.

I shall here give you a short Relation how Nathaniel Butler, who murdered his
Friend John Knight in Milk-street, London, August 6. Ann. 1657. behaved himself.
NAthaniel Butler, declared that before this Murder committed, he was addicted
to diverse sins, as Drunkenness, etc. which he himself freely confessed. For
instance:

1. He was a great Company-keeper, and given to Gameing very much; whereby he
gained Money and several Watches of Young men, one whereof he restored to the
Owner after his Conscience was awakened in prison.

2. He enticed some Servants to purloin from their Masters, and sell the Goods;
then would he and they go together, and spend the money among themselves.

3. He lived in Fornication, frequenting the company and the Houses of Harlots;
insomuch that (as he himself under his own hand informed me) he judged this
very sin of Whoredom did draw him on to that of shedding blood. Concerning
which fact I shall now speak, as also concerning his carriage in Prison, and at
his Execution, being an eye and ear witness thereof.

4. This Nathaniel Butler, came from Alten in Hampshire, where he was born; and
at the time of his apprehension, was an Apprentice with one Mr. Goodday, a
Drawer of Cloth in Carter-lane, London; during which time he became acquainted
with one John Knight, and Apprentice also in the same City. These two were much
together, but especially when Mr. Worth (John Knight's Master) was gone to
Bristol-Fair; then did these two young men lie together several nights at Mr.
Worth's house, at the Rose in Milk-street; where in the Shop, on Wednesday
morning being the sixth of August 1657. Nathaniel Butler seeing some Bags of
Money, he was thereupon tempted to take away the Life of his Friend and
Bedfellow, that he might securely convey away the money which he had now seen
in the Till of the Shop. After they had been abroad that day, at night they lay
again together, the bloody design running still in the mind of Bulter: he
intending about the dead of the night (for so he expressed himself to me) to
destroy the Young man by cutting his Throat: Accordingly he took his Knife in
his hand, but his Heart would not suffer him to do it; then he laid down the
Knife again; yea, he took up and laid down his Knife several times (so he told
me) before he acted his cruelty: But in the morning very early, he did indeed
fall very violently and inhumanely on the Youth, who lay harmlesly asleep upon
the bed. The first wound not being mortal, awakened him, whereupon he struggled
and made a noise (not considerable enough) which was heard into another room of
the same house. Then Butler chopped his fist into the mouth of the Young man, and
so they two lay striving and tumbling very near half an hour, before the fatal
blow was given; but at length, he did most barbarously murder the Young Man,
giving him a very ghastly deadly wound cross the Throat: And then he went down,
taking away out of the shop a sum of money in two bags, being about One
hundred and ten pounds: And so with his double guilt of Robbery and Murder,
leaving his bloody Shirt behind him, and a lock of his own hair in the hand of
the dead Young Man, which Hair was pulled off in their striving together, one
to commit, the other to prevent the fact; after he had so done, he went to his
Masters house in Carter-lane, where he privately laid the Money in a new Trunk
that he bought with part of the Money. This Murderer abode for certain days,
that is from* Thursday to Saturday, at his Masters house unsuspected, following
his business at home, as formerly.

5. Many thoughts and jealousies were working in men, who should be the
Murderer: And in a few days, one in Milk-street (the street where the Murder
was done) knowing that Butler used sometimes to be with the Young man who was
now murdered, went to Butlers Masters house in Carter-lane, and spoke with him,
by whose words and carriage, he supposed he might be guilty, and so caused him
to be apprehended: But yet for some small time, the said Butler denied the
Fact; but at length confessed, That he, and he only did it. After his
apprehension, he was brought before the Lord Mayor of London, to whom he
declared the murder, and the circumstances of it, crying out for a little Time
for his Soul, and much lamenting his Sin. That night he was committed to
Newgate, and there lay exceedingly startled about the state of his Soul, saying
often, What will become of my poor Soul! What shall I do to be saved! beginning
now to see the sinfulness of sin. Whom I may compare to Manasses in three
respects. 1. As to matter of Fact; for Manasses shed much innocent blood, 2
Kings 21. 16. so did he shed (too much) innocent blood. 2. He something
resembled Manasses in his Imprisonment, mentioned 2 Chr. 33. 11. As Manasses
was taken and bound with Fetters, so was he clapped in the hole or Dungeon of
Newgate, with heavy Irons about his legs. 3. Manasses and he were one and the
same in this sense, that when they were in affliction, they besought the Lord
God, and humbled themselves greatly before the God of their Fathers. For this
great Offender could often say, He could never be humbled enough.

Upon the 13 of August, when he was arraigned at the Sessions in the Old Bailey,
he pleaded Guilty to the Indictments, with very much shame, confusion of face
and sorrow of heart: And on Friday the 15 of August, he demeaned himself very
humbly before the Bench, heartily submitting to the Sentence of death that then
passed upon him, saying, He had destroyed the Image of the Eternal GOD;
alluding (as I verily believe) to those words in Genesis 6. 9. -- For in the Image
of God, etc. After his Sentence, he was conveyed back to prison; penitently
acknowledging, that he had neglected the good Word of God, and therefore was
the longer kept off (through ignorance of the Gospel) from closing with Christ
Jesus. But after a few days discourse with several Ministers and others, who
opened the Scriptures to him, he began to understand (through the Grace of God)
the Word of Grace. And though he had many good Books brought to him by diverse
visiting Friends, yet he chiefly looked into the holy Scriptures themselves,
and found very much advantage, light and peace, by these following passages out
of the Old Testament, viz.

2 Samuel 12. 9. Where Nathan spoke sharply to David, for despising the
Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in the sight of the Lord, in killing Uriah
the Hittite with the Sword, verse. 13. David said to Nathan, I have sinned
against the Lord; and Nathan said to David, The Lord also has put away thy
sin. From hence he understood the readiness of God to forgive confessing,
repenting sinners, though they are guilty of innocent blood.

Job 33. 27, 28, He (the Lord) looks upon men (Oh that men would look after
the Lord!) and if ANT say, I have sinned and perverted that which was right,
and it profited me not; he (that is the Lord) will deliver his Soul from going
into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

Isa. 45. 18, 19. -- I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain?

Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will ABUNDANTLY pardon; The
word abundantly he used to pronounce with an emphasis; for he saw (his eyes
being now anointed with spiritual Eye salve) that he had multiplied sins
exceedingly, and that he stood in absolute need of the Lords abundant
multiplied pardons: whereof he had good hope through this good word of Isaiah.

Ezekiel. 18. 23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the
Lord God, and not that he should return from his ways and live?

30. -- Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions; So iniquity
shall not be your ruin.

31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed,
and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will you die, O house of
Israel?

32. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, wherefore turn your
selves, and live ye.

Ezekiel. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord, (here the poor
Prisoner would note to his comfort, that a repenting sinner had not only the
Word and Promise of God for forgiveness, but the Oath of God, to give such a
sinner the greater assurance of pardon,) I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his ways and live: Turn ye, turn ye,
(see the importunity of God with poor sinners for the good of their souls) from
your evil ways; For why will ye die, O house of Israel?

Micah 7. 18. was a place pleasant to his Soul. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy,
Verse. 19. He will turn again, (as one does when his anger is gone) he will have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast ALL their
sins into the depth of the Sea.

Now I shall give you a short List of some New Testament Texts, whereby the
Lord conveyed Counsel and Consolation to this doubting, staggering, poor Wretch.

Mat. 18. 11. -- For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even
so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have eternal life; for God SO loved the WORLD, that whosoever
(this word [ whosoever] he spoke with joy) believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life: Now (says Nathaniel Butler) I am one to whom this
word speaks; and therefore God gave the Lord Jesus Christ for my Soul; I
believe in him, and therefore I trust to live eternally through him, according
to the gracious terms of the Gospel.

John 6. 37. -- And him that comes to me I will in no wise (here he would
repeat and reiterate these words in NO WISE CAST OUT, in NO WISE, in NO WISE)
cast out.

1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men,
the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due
time.

In hearing, reading, and conferring upon these (and many more) Scriptures, he
would often say to me and others, These are good Scriptures, brave Scriptures;
are they not brave Scriptures? He would make very diligent and frequent search
into his Soul, concerning the sincerity of his Sorrow, and would not easily
believe that his Repentance was true, or that he had right to the precious
Promises of the Gospel. But by much speaking to him by many good people, that
he would apply Christ, and also by seeking unto God for a spirit of Faith for
him, he did begin to act a faith of recumbency and adherence, being (as he
often said) persuaded the Lord Jesus Christ was able to save to the uttermost,
and willing to save such as come unto God by him; yet he could not come up to
that full assurance of hope and confidence, as he desired; and we also desired
heartily on his behalf. Yet for some certain days before his suffering death,
it pleased the God of all Comfort, to give him Joy and Consolation, and
sometimes strong consolation, insomuch that he would at times express very
great inward gladness, which all that knew his former mournings, were glad to
see, and glorified God for giving him the Joy of his Salvation; for he was so
satisfied concerning the favor and mercy of God toward him in Jesus Christ,
that he rather now desired Death then feared it; as seeing death through Jesus
Christ without a Sting. He was executed in Cheapside against Milk-street end,
and died penitently:

See more at large in the Books of Nathaniel Butler and William Rogers.

Here follows a True Relation of the Wicked Life, and Shameful-happy Death of
Thomas Savage; Imprisoned, Justly condemned, and Twice Executed at Ratcliff,
for his Bloody Fact in Killing his Fellow Servants, on Wednesday, October. 28.
1668.
THomas Savage, born in the Parish of Giles in the Fields, he was put out
Apprentice to Mr. Collins, Vintner, at the Ship-Tavern in Ratcliff, where he
lived about the space of one year and three quarters: in which time he
manifested himself to all that knew him, to be a mere Monster in sin: in all
that time he never once knew what it was to hear one whole Sermon; but used to
go in at one door, and out at the other; and accounted them fools that could
spare so much time from sin, as two or three hours on a Lords day, to spend in
the Lords service. He spent the Sabbath commonly at the Alehouse, or rather at
a base house, with that vile Strumpet Hannah Blay, which was the cause of his
ruin; he was by a young man (now gone to Sea) first enticed to go drink there,
and after that he went alone, and now and then used to bring her a Bottle or
two of Wine, which satisfied not her wicked desires; but she told him, if he
would frequent her house, he must bring money with him: he told her often, he
could bring none but his Masters, and he never wronged his Master of twopence
in his Life: still she enticed him to take it privately: He replied, he could
not do it, because the Maid was always at home with him: Hang her Jade, says
this impudent Slut, knock her brains out, and I will receive the money; this
she many times said; and that day that he committed the murder, he was with
her in the morning, and she made him drunk with burnt Brandy, and he wanted one
Groat to pay of his reckoning: she then again persuaded him to knock the Maid
on the Head, and she would receive the Money: he going home between twelve and
one of the clock; his Master standing at the Street-door, did not dare to go in
that way, but climbed over a back door, and comes into the Room where his
Fellow Servants were at dinner: O says the Maid to him, Sirrah, you have been
now at this Bawdy House, you will never leave till you are undone by them: He
was much vexed at her; and while he was at Dinner, the Devil entered so strong
into him, that nothing would satisfy him but he must kill her; and no other
way, but with the Hammer; to which end, when his Master was gone with all the
rest of his Family to Church, leaving only the Maid and this Boy at home; he
goes into the Bar, fetches the Hammer, and takes the Bellows in his hand,
and sits down by the fire, and there knocks the bellows with the Hammer:
the Maid says to him; Sure the boy is mad, Sirrah, what do you make this noise
for? He said nothing, but went from the Chair, and lay along in the Kitchen
Window, and knocked with the Hammer there; and on a sudden threw the Hammer
with such force at the maid, that hitting her on the head she fell down
presently, screeching out: then he takes up the Hammer three times, and did
not dare to strike her any more, at last the Devil was so great with him, that
he takes the Hammer and strikes her many blows with all the force he could,
and even rejoiced that he had got the victory over her: which done, he
immediately takes the Hammer, and with it strikes at the Cupboard-Door in his
masters Chamber, which being but slit Deal presently flew open, and thence he
takes out a Bag of Money, and putting it upon his arm, under his Cloak, he
went out at a backdoor straightway to this base house again: when he came
thither, the Slut would fain have seen what he had under his Cloak, and knowing
what he had done, would very fain have had the Money; he gave her half a Crown,
and away he went without any remorse for what he had done. Going over a Style,
he sat down to rest himself, and then began to think with himself; Lord what
have I done! and he would have given ten thousand worlds he could have recalled
the blow. After this, he was in so much horror, that he went not one step but
he thought every one he met came to take him. He got that Night to Greenwich,
and lay there; telling the people of the house that he was to go down to
Gravesend: that night he rose and walked about, and knew not what to do,
Conscience so flew in his face: The Mistress of the house perceiving the Lad to
have Money, and not sealed up, said, I wish this Lad came by this Money
honestly. The next morning he going away toward Woolliedge, the Mistress of
the house could not be satisfied, but sent for him back, and told him, Sweet
heart, I fear you came not by this Money honestly. Yes, indeed Mistress, says
he, I did; for I am carrying of it down to Gravesend to my Master, a
Wine-Cooper. We live upon London Bridge, and if you please to send any one to
my Mistress, I will leave my Money with you.

So there were some people going to London, and he writ a Note to send to his
Mistress, and he left the Money with the woman of the House, and went his way,
wandering toward Woolliedge, and there was in the Shipyard; about which time
news came to Greenwich of the Murder that was committed at Ratcliff by a
Youth, upon his Fellow Servants, and that a Bag of Money was taken away: the
Mistress of the House forthwith concluded that sure it was the same Youth that
was at her house, and that was the Money: whereupon she sent men out presently
to seek him: who found him in an Alehouse, where he had called for one pot of
Beer, and was laid down with his head on the Table and fallen asleep: One of the
men calling him by his name, Tom, says he, Did you not live at Ratcliff? He
said, Yes: And did you not murder your fellow servants? He confessed it: And
you took so much Money from your Master, he acknowledged all: then said they,
You must go along with us: He said, Yes, with all my heart. So they went
forthwith to Greenwich, to the house where he lay that night: where when he
came, he met his Master with some Friends, and when his Master spoke to him of
it, he was not much affected at first, but after a little while burst out into
many tears: thence he was conveyed to the Justice at Ratcliff, where he fully
confessed the Fact again, and by him was committed close Prisoner in the Goal
of Newgate, where Mr. H. B. (who after some acquaintance with him, had this
preceding Narrative from his own Mouth) came to see and speak with him: and he
seemed but little sensible of what he had done. Are you (said he) the person
that committed the murder upon the maid at Ratcliff? He said, Yes: O what
think you of your condition? What do you think will become of your precious
Soul? you have by this Sin not only brought your body to the Grave, but your
Soul to Hell, without Gods Infinite mercy: Were you not troubled for the Fact
when you did it? Not for the present, Sir, said he; but soon after I was, when
I began to think with my self what I had done. The next time he asked him,
whether he were sorry for the Fact? He said, wringing his hands, and striking
his breast, with tears in his Eyes, Yes, Sir, for it cuts me to the Heart to
think that I should take away the Life of a poor innocent Creature; and that is
not all, but for any thing I know, I have sent her Soul to Hell: O how can I
think to appear before Gods Bar, when she shall stand before me, and say, Lord,
this wretch took away my Life, and gave me not the least space that I might
turn to thee: he gave me no warning at all, Lord: O then what will become of me?

Soon after the imprisonment of this Thomas Savage, in Newgate; upon the desire
of one of his Friends, Mr. R. F. and T. V. went to him in the Prison, and had
liberty, with much readiness from the Keepers to discourse with him: They asked
him, if he were the person that had murdered the Maid? He answered, that he
was; they did then open to him the heinous nature of that sin, endeavoring to
set it home upon his Conscience, telling him of the express Law of God, Thou
shall not Kill, and the express threatenings, That whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. They spoke to him of the Law of the
Land, and the punishment of Death which would certainly be inflicted upon him;
that he had but a few Weeks more to live, and then he would be Tried, and
Condemned, and Executed: but they told him, that the punishment of the temporal
Death was but small in comparison with the punishment of Eternal Death in Hell,
which he had deserved, and was exposed unto. They told him, that so soon as
Death should make a separation between his Soul and body, that his Soul must
immediately appear before the dreadful Tribunal of the Sin-revenging God, and
there receive its final doom, and be irreversibly sentenced to depart from the
presence of the Lord, into everlasting fire, if he were found under the guilt
of this, or any other sin. They asked him if he knew what Hell was? telling him
what a fearful thing it would be for him to fall into the hands of the living
God; how intolerable the immediate expressions of Gods Wrath would be upon his
Soul, what horror and anguish he would there be filled withal, and how he
would be bound up in Chains of darkness until the Judgment of the great day;
and then told him of the glorious appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ to
Judgment: that Soul and Body should be then joined together, and condemned
together, and punished together with such exquisite torments as never entered
into the Heart of man to conceive; declaring the Extremity and the Eternity of
the Torments of Hell, which were the just demerit of his sins. Then they asked
him, whether he had any hopes of escaping this dreadful punishment of Hell? He
answered, that he had: they enquired the grounds of his hopes? He told them,
that he repented of his fault, and hoped God would have mercy on his Soul. They
asked him, whether he thought his Repentance could procure for him a Pardon? He
knew no other way. They told him that God was just, and his Justice must be
satisfied: and there was no way for him to do it, but by undergoing the Eternal
torments of Hell: and did he know no way of satisfying God's Justice besides?
and pacifying his anger that was kindled against him? No, he knew not any: And
yet did he hope to be saved? He answered, Yes. They enquired whether ever he
had experience of a gracious change wrought in him. Herein he could give no
account, and yet hoped to be saved. They told him his hopes were unsound,
having no good foundation: and he would find himself disappointed: that it was
not his Repentance, his Tears, and Prayers (though he ought to use them as
means) that would save him, if he fixed the Anchor of his hope upon them. That
if he hoped to be saved in the condition which for the present he was in, he
would certainly be damned: that he must cast away all those groundless hopes he
had conceived, and endeavor to despair in himself, that being pricked and
pained at heart, through the apprehensions of the wrath of God ready to fall
upon him, and seeing no possibility of flying and escaping, if he looked only
to himself, he might cry out, What shall I do to be saved? and enquire after a
Savior. And then they spoke to him of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the way of
Salvation by him, which before he was sottishly ignorant of, as if he had been
brought up in a Country of Infidels, and not of Christians. The words spoken
to him by these two Ministers, seemed to take little impression upon him
whilst they were present, yet after they were gone, the Lord did begin to
work, and he did acknowledge to Mr. B. that two had been* with him (he knew not
their names) whose words were like arrows shot into his heart, and he did wish
he had those words in writing, especially one expression of T. V. That he would
not be in his condition for ten thousand Worlds, did affect and so affright
him, that he said it made his hair stand on end.

Mr. Vincent, Mr. Francklin, Mr. Doolittle, Mr. Janeway, discoursed with him,
and he suffered very penitently and cheerfully at Ratcliff near his Masters
House.

We do not read of any more of all the drunkards and debauched persons, that
were Converted, but those two, Nathaniel Butler and Thomas Savage, whom God
gave true Repentance unto.

A Common Drunkard, is the fittest man to make a debauched. Health-drinker of,
they are so near akin to one another, that there is little difference: you can
hardly know one from another, and it is seldom seen, that a Health is begun for
his Majesty, or his Highness the Duke of York, till the Feasters are well
entered in there Glasses of Wine first.

This I can Witness, That one Evening this Winter, two or three Drunken
Companions met another drunken man in the street, and did ask him if he would
drink the Dukes Health: He answered presently, Yea, I Will drink any man's Health:
Is not the King and Duke much beholden to such for their Love, that can show it
in no better way? We are commanded, and its our duty, to Fear God and to Honor
the King; and he that truly does so, will pray heartily to God to bless and
preserve his Majesty from the danger of all Popish and Sham-Plots: and this way
is better to show their true Love to the King, than in a Sinful Custom of
Healths, which provokes the King of Kings to send Judgments on the Kingdom.
Read Dr. Stillingfleets Text, of his Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons,
Novem. 13. 1 Samuel 12. 24, 25.

Some Audacious Abominable Health-drinkers were so Wicked as to drink a Health
to the great Prince of Darkness, their Father the Devil; and it is credibly.
Reported, he came boldly amongst them and carried away some of them, as bold as
he was. One being told, that unless he left off his Drunkenness and Whoring he
would loose his sight: He answered thus, Tum valeat Lumen amicum, -- Then
Farewell Sweet Light.

One was put to his choice, which of these sins he would choose to commit,
either to be drunk, or to kill his Father, or to lie with his Mother: he
refused the two last, and was drunk, and then committed the other two.

At one great Feast in the City since his Majesty's happy Restoration, I heard
they were so mad, in their Frolic Cups of Wine and Healths, as to drink down
small live Fishes, and make Fish Ponds in there Bellyes: it is a wonderful Mercy
it proved not their last drinking. So to abuse themselves and Gods Creatures,
by Drunkenness and Gluttony, it is the way to provoke God to send a Famine on
the Land; for such wanton excessive doings.

Remember the Plague time. There died, in that one Year of the Plague, Anno,
1665. 68596. in London and Liberties. And let us not forget the Lamentable Fire
time, the 2d Septem. 1666. As it was computed, there was consumed to Ashes,
thirteen Thousand and two Hundred Houses, with a vast deal of Goods and Rich
commodities, to the undoing of many Thousands, besides the Ghastly walls of
eighty nine Parish Churches and stately Houses and Halls, with the Royal
Exchange, which cost almost an Hundred thousand pounds the new building it
again. You can expect but a brief touch of things in this Paper, but it may
serve for a Memento, and a Caveat to take heed of sin, that is the Plague (or
cause) of all Plagues and Judgments in the World; and it caused God to drown
the old World, and to Rain down Fire and Brimstone on Sodom, five Cities
together; and he is able to do the like again to any Nation that provoke him.
We may fear this immoderate Rain and flood in the Country; and beyond the Seas
a while since, how many have been drowned, persons and Estates by it! it speaks
aloud to England.

God threatens to punish a people four seven times more, Lev. 26. 18, 21, 24,
28. v. except they repent. And we ought to Fear that great God, that is able
easily to Kill both Body and Soul, and cast them into Hellfire. Drunkards are
named amongst the greatest sinners that shall be shut out of Heaven.

Ten several Arguments to prove that Drunkenness is a great, a Dangerous and a
Woeful Sin.
Arg. 1. That Drunkenness is expressly against the command of God.

(1.) Drunkenness is plainly and expressly forbidden in Gods Word, Ephesians. 5. 18.
Be not drunk with wine. Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any Time
your Hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and Drunkenness. Romans 13. 13. Let
us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and Drunkenness. The Drunkard
cannot plead Ignorance, that he did not know Drunkenness to be a sin; he cannot
plead for himself as Peter did for the Jews that put Christ to Death, Act. 3.
17. I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers. 1 Cor. 2.
8. For had they known it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory.
Drunkards sin against light; both against the light of Nature, for Nature
teaches us that it is a shameful thing for a man to be drunk: and against the
light of Gods Word, and that is a great aggravation of sin, to sin against the
light of Gods Word: sins of ignorance are as it were no Sins, compared with
sins against Knowledge. Joh. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken to them they
had not had Sin, but now they have no cloak for their Sin. Drunkards cast Gods
Word behind their backs, and trample his Commandments under their feet: God
says, Be not drunk with Wine: take heed left your Hearts be overcharged with
Drunkenness: But they say in effect, though not in words, We will not regard
these Commandments of God; let God say and do what he will, we will take our
fill of Wine and strong drink: Drunkards and other sinners that know Gods will,
and will not do it, contemn and despise God. Psalm. 10. 13. Wherefore does the
Wicked contemn God? Drunkards are guilty of Rebellion against God, who is King
of Kings and Lord of Lords: for sinning against the Light of Gods Word, is
accounted Rebellion; Job 24. 13. They are of those that rebel against the
Light: and that is a heinous Sin, to be Stubborn and Rebellious against the God
of Heaven. 1 Samuel 15. 23. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and
Stubbornness is as iniquity and Idolatry.

Arg. 2. It is a Beastly Sin.

Drunkennss is a beastly Sin, in depriving a man of his Reason, and makes him
carry himself like a Beast: it is a vile thing for a man to degrade, and make
himself like a Beast. Job 18. 3. Wherefore are we counted as Beasts, and
reputed as vile in your Sight. Bildad thought himself and his Friends
wonderfully disparaged, when he thought they were counted as Beasts; but how do
they vilify and disparage themselves, who do in reality make themselves no
better than bruit Beasts by their drunkenness: Yea this sin makes a man worse
than a Beast; the Ass is a Silly Beast, yet the Ass will not drink to excess,
they drink no more than will quench their thirst, Psalm. 104. 11. The Wild Asses
quench their thirst: And therefore, as Solomon sends the Sluggard to the Ant,
Prove 6. 6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise; so may
I send the Drunkard to the wild Asses: Go to the wild Asses thou Drunkard, and
consider their ways and be wise; who having no guide, overseer or ruler, never
drink any more than will quench their thirst, though they meet with the best
and pleasantest Springs, and purest Fountains under Heaven; and will thou who
have had many Instructors, that have taught thee the odiousness of this sin of
Drunkenness, be enticed by the pureness of the Wine, or the pleasantness of
this drink, to drink to excess? Toads and Serpents which are hateful Creatures,
will not drink more than is suitable and convenient to their natures: And shall
Man who was made after the Image of God, make himself worse than a Toad or a
Serdent by drinking to excess?

Arg. 3. It is a mischievous Sin both to Body, Soul, and Estate.

Drunkenness is a most Mischievous Sin, and brings a world of mischief along
with it, both to Soul and Body, Estate and good Name.

1. It does great mischief to the Soul: For (1) It besots and Stupifies the
Soul, and estranges a man's Heart from God, who is his chiefest good: Hos. 4.
11. Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the Heart: We may take Heart here
for the Understanding; as Romans 2. 21. Their foolish Heart was darkened: And so
it is true, that Wine takes away the Heart; that is, it stupisieth the mind, it
blinds and darkens the understanding, and makes men sottish; as Jeremiah
complains of the Jews, who were much addicted to drunkenness. Jer. 4. 22. My
People is Foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children, and have
no understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
Knowledge: Or we may take Heart for the Affections; and so it is true, that
Wine takes away the Heart, for Drunkenness takes off the Heart from God and all
things that are good: Drunkards have no Love to God, no delight in God; no
desire of enjoying God, no Fear of God, no Heart to that which is good.
Drunkenness is a fleshly lust; and fleshly lusts war against, and tend to the
ruin of our precious Souls. 1 Pet 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly Lusts, which War against the Soul.

2. It brings great mischief to the Body, by the painful Diseases that it
breeds in the Body, and by the Wounds and Bruises men get by falls, when they
have drunk so much they are not able to go, or to guide the Horses they ride
on; and also by the wounds they get in quarrels and contentions with their
Companions when they are in their Cups. Prove. 23. 29, 30. Who has Woe? who
has Sorrow? who has Contentions? who has Bablings? who has wounds without
cause? who has redness of Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine: Not only the
Eyes are made red, but the whole Body is inflamed and greatly distempered by
excessive drinking. Isa. 5. 11. Woe to them that follow strong drink, that
continue till night, till Wine inflame them. Our Bodies should be the Temples
of the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 6. 19. What, know you not that your Body is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? And it is dangerous defiling the
Temple of God with excess of Wine or strong Drink: 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.

3. It brings ruin on a man's Estate; Prove. 23. 21. The Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to poverty. Many persons by their drunken and sottish
courses waste fair Estates, that were left them by their Parents: Others that
have been brought up to Callings, spend all they gain by their Callings in
excessive drinking, whereby it comes to pass that they make no provision for
their Families, but their Wives and Children are brought into great wants and
straits; such as these are as bad, yea worse than Infidels; 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if
any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he has
denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

4. It blasts a man's Reputation; it is a shame for a man to have the brand of a
Drunkard set upon him: Even Children will hout and deride a drunken man when
they see him reel and stagger as he goes in the Street.

Arg. 4. Drunkenness is the Cause of many other Sins.

The greatness of the Sin of Drunkenness will appear from hence, that it
disposes a man to many other great and crying sins: as for Instance,

1. Drunkenness disposes men to commit Uncleanness; Prove. 23. 31, 33. Look not
upon the Wine when it is red: -- Thine Eyes shall behold strange Women. When
men are overcome with Wine, they are easily drawn to commit the worst of
uncleanness: Lot though a Righteous man, being overtaken with Drunkenness,
committed Incest twice. Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess.
As Beza observes, Omnis profusio eaque summa cum turpitudine conjuncta; All
excess of riot, even that which is joined with the greatest filthiness: No
filthiness comes amiss to a drunken man, who is shameless whilst he is
overcome with strong drink. The Jews, who were much addicted to Drunkenness,
were greatly addicted to Whoredom also. Hos. 4. 11, 18. Whoredom and Wine take
away the Heart: Their drink is sour, they have committed Whoredom continually.
Their drink is sour, some interpret of the sour belches drunkards have after
their Cups: And another effect of immoderate drinking Wine, besides the sowring
of it in the Stomach, is, that it provokes men to Whoredom. Hierom has a smart
passage to this effect, Nunquam ego ebrium castum putabo; I shall never think a
Drunkard can be a chaste man.

2. Drunkards are easily persuaded to be Idolaters; for they making* their
Belly their God, Phil. 3. 19. will easily be persuaded to bow down their Bodies
to an Idol, and comply with any Religion which will suit best with their
Interest: Hos. 3. 1. The Children of Israel who look to other Gods, and Love
Flagons of Wine. Dan. 5. 4. They drank Wine, and praised the Gods of Gold, and
of Silver, and of Brass, of Iron, of Wood, and of Stone.

3. Drunkenness is accompanied with abundance of Vain Bablings, and Foolish and
Idle talk, which men have together when they are in their Cups. Prove. 23. 29,
30. Who has Bablings? They that tarry long at the Wine. And if any think there
is no great hurt in those Bablings, and Foolish talking that Drunkards have
when they sit together at Inns or Alehouses, let such consider,

(1.) That Vain Bablings hardens the Heart, and dispose a man to ungodly
practices. 2 Timothy 2. 16. But shun profane and vain Bablings, for they will
increase to more Ungodliness.

(2.) Though Foolish Talking and Jesting is made Light of, and accounted by
many a matter of Mirth, yet it is a sin brings down Gods wrath. Ephesians. 5. 4, 6.
Neither filthiness, nor Foolish talking, nor Jesting, which are not convenient:
Let no man deceive you with Vain words; for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience.

(3.) Men must give an Account for every Idle Word at the day of Judgment, and
without Repentance they shall be condemned for their Idle Words, as well as
their other sins: Mat. 12. 36, 37. But I say unto you, that every Idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of
Judgment: For by thy Words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall
be condemned.

(4.) There are few Drunkards, but they will mock and scost and rail at the
Ministers and Servants of Christ, and sing Songs of them, especially when they
are in their Cups: Prove. 20. 1. Wine is a mocker; that is, it makes men
Mockers. Mercer's note upon that Text is, Vini potor derisor Dei hominumque
esse solet: A Drunkard is wont to be a Derider of God and Men. It has been
usual with Drunkards in former, as well as these days, to sing Songs of the
People of God: Psalm. 69. 12. I am the Song of Drunkards. Now this mocking the
Ministers and People of God is a grievous Sin, it brings down wrath without
Remedy; 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. They mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
People, till there was no Remedy. Mockers bring upon themselves mighty and
unavoidable Judgments. Isa. 28. 24. Now therefore be ye not Mockers, lest your
bands be made stronger. Forty two little Children were torn in pieces by two
she-Bears, for mocking a Prophet, and calling him Bald-head, 2 Kin. 2. 23, 24.
And if God was so offended with little Children for this sin of Mocking a
Prophet, that he sent two Bears which tore in pieces forty two Children, how
offensive is it to the Lord, to hear those that are come to man's Estate,
knowing and understanding men, mock and scoff at his Servants? Though no
Judgment come upon them in this World for their Sin, yet without Repentance a
worse thing will come unto them; they shall be rent and torn, that is, they
shall be tormented in the other World for ever by the Devil, who is a roaring
Lion, a far more dreadful Enemy than the Bears that tore the little Children in
pieces.

(5.) Drunkards are usually Swearers, and some of them will Swear dreadful
Oaths, such as would make a man tremble to hear them: And Swearing, profane
Swearing is an abominable Sin, and brings a man in danger of Hell Fire: Jam. 5.
1^. But above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by
the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be
Nay, lest you fall into Condemnation.

(6.) Drunkards are oftentimes Persecutors, and Smiters of their Fellow
Servants: Mat. 24. 48, 49. If that Evil Servant shall say in his Heart, My Lord
delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunken. They are such which eat and drink with the drunken,
that smite their Fellow Servants; and smiting and persecuting the Servants of
Christ is a heinous Sin: he takes it as ill when his Servants are persecuted,
as if he himself was persecuted: Act. 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Saul did not persecute Christ in his own person, for he was in Heaven,
sitting at his Fathers right hand: but he persecuted Christ's Servants, and
Christ was as much offended at the persecuting of his Members, as if he himself
had been persecuted.

(7.) Drunkenness casts men into a deep Sleep, and makes them dreadfully
secure under those Judgments that hang over their Heads. Prove. 23. 34. Yea,
thou shall be as one that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he that
lies on the top of the Mast. Solomon speaking of such that tarry long at the
Wine, sets out their danger by one that lies on the Top of the Mast in the
midst of the Sea, who is in danger every moment of falling into the Sea and to
be drowned, yet fears nothing whilst he is asleep: Such is the case of
Drunkards, they are in danger of falling into Hell every day, and yet they fear
nothing, till God awakens their Consciences, and shows them their Sin and
Misery. When the Prophet calls, Awake ye Drunkards, Joel 2. 5. it implies, they
are in a deep Sleep, and that it is no easy matter to awake them.

(8.) Sometimes Drunkards commit Murder in their Drunkenness, and quarrel with
and kill their best Friends. It is reported of Alexander, that when he was
drunk he killed his beloved Friend Clytus: yea, there is no Sin so horrid, but
a Drunken man may* fall into it, if he has an occasion and Temptation to
commit it.

Arg. 5. Drunkenness is such an abominable Sin, that it brings down National
Judgments: whole Nations are punished for this Sin of Drunkenness; the Earth is
weary of bearing Drunkards, and often spueth out its inhabitants: we read of
the Canaanites, that their Land spued them out for their defiling it; and the
Israelites are warned not to defile their Land, lest they also be spued out;
Lev. 18. 28. That the Land spue not you out also when ye defile it, as it spued
out the Nations that were before you: And when the Israelites did defile their
Land by Drunkenness and others Sins, they were a burden to the Land; it was
weary with bearing them, it spued them out, and they were carried captive into
a strange Land: Isa. 5. 11, 13. Woe to them that rise up early to follow strong
drink, and continue until night, till Wine enslame them: Therefore my People
are gone into captivity. The Lord threatened to send mighty Adversaries against
Ephraim, for their Pride, and Drunkenness, which should come upon them as
furiously as a tempest of Hail and a destroying Storm, and as a mighty flood of
Water, that should overflow all places, and bear down all before it. Isa. 28.
1, 2. Woe to the Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim: So that Drunkards
are the Plague of a Nation, that bring down Gods Judgments on themselves, and
the place where they live: And when an overflowing Scourge comes on a Nation,
usually Drunkards have the speediest and deepest share in the Judgments of God.
Amos 6. 1, 3, 6, 7. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion: That put far away the
evil day: That drink in Bowls: Therefore now shall they go Captive with the
first that go Captive. When the King of Assyria invaded the Land of Israel, the
Drunkards were trod under feet like mire in the streets; Isa. 28. 2, 3. Behold
the Lord has a mighty and strong one: The Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of
Ephraim shall be trod under feet.

Arg. 6. Drunkards oft-times dye in the Act of Sin.

Drunkenness appears to be a great Sin, because ofttimes it is punished with
sudden Death; and sometimes Drunkards are cut off in the very Act of Sin; they
are very frequently cut off suddenly and unexpectedly. Nah. 1. 10. While they
are Drunken as Drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry: Stubble
that is fully dry, is devoured in a moment. Luke 12. 45, 46. If that Servant
shall begin to eat and to drink, and to be drunken, the Lord of that Servant
will come in a day when he looks not for him, and at an hour when he is not
aware, and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with unbelievers:
We see here the Woeful Condition of Drunkards, both in their Death and after
their Death; their Death is oftentimes sudden and unexpected, they have not a
day, not an hours warning, Rev. 21. 8. Elah a King in Israel was cut off in the
very Act of Sin, while he was drinking himself drunk in his Stewards house, 1
Kings 16. 9, 10. As Christ said to deterr us from looking back, Remember Lots
Wife; so may I say, to deter you from Drunkenness, Remember Elah, who was
killed whilst he was drinking himself drunk: And if God did not spare a King
in Israel, take heed lest he do not spare you. Besides Elah's Example, Amnon
one of David's Sons, was killed whilst his Heart was merry with Wine, 2 Samuel
13. 28. When Belshazzar had been drinking Wine with a thousand of his Lords in
the day time, he was slain in the Night, Dan. 5. 1, 30. Besides these Examples,
we have known and heard of several others that have dyed dead drunk, and never
came to Life again; others that have fallen off their Horses in their
Drunkenness, and broke their Necks; others that have fallen into the Water and
been drowned, and others cut off by other means.

Arg. 7. It unfits a man for the Service of God.

Drunkenness makes a man unfit for any good work, unfit for the service of God
and men, unfit for Death and Judgment: it makes a man unfit for Prayer, and all
other Religious duties. 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand, be ye
therefore sober and watch unto prayer: No men are fit for Prayer, but sober
men. It is probable Nadab and Abihu had distempered themselves with Wine or
strong drink, when they presumed to offer up strange Fire, and Fire went out
from the Lord and devoured them: for immediately after the Relation of their
Sin and Punishment, there is a strict charge given to Aaron and his Sons, that
they should not drink Wine or strong drink, when they went into the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, on pain of Death, Lev. 10. 8, 9, 10, 11. It also unfits a
man for the service of his Generation, especially for a place of public Trust;
many Armies have been ruined, Towns and Kingdoms lost by the Drunkenness of
Commanders. A small Army of the Israelites, not exceeding seven thousand,
setting upon the Syrians, when Benhadad their King was drinking himself drunk
with his Confederates, put the Syrians to flight, and slew them with a great
Slaughter; although besides his own great Army he had thirty two Kings that
came to his assistance; 1 Kings 16. 17, 20. And as this sin renders us unfit
for the service of God and men, so also it makes us unfit for the day of Death
and Judgment: Luke 21. 34. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your
Hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and Drunkenness.

Arg. 8. It will Exclude a man out of Heaven.

Drunkenness is such an odious Sin, that the Lord has told us expressly, that
he will not admit any Drunkards into the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not enter into the Kingdom of God: Be
not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornications, Uncleanness and Lasciviousness, Revellings and
such like: of which I tell you before, as I have told you in times past, that
they which do such things, shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God. It was a
Foolish Act in Esau, and argued him to be a profane man, to sell his
Birthright for a Morsel of Meat. Heb. 12. 16. Lest there be any Fornicator, or
profane person, as Esau, who for one Morsel of Meat sold his Birthright.
Drunkards are guilty of worse profaneness than Esau, for they part with a
better Blessing than a Birthright, namely, the Kingdom of Heaven, for a pot of
Drink or cup of Wine, which do them no good, but much hurt.

Arg. 9. It is a damnable Sin.

Drunkenness is a damnable Sin; a Sin for which men shall be condemned to the
Torments of Hell for ever. The Drunkard shall be cut asunder, and have his
portion with unbelievers, Luke 12. 45, 46. There is scarce any Sin fills Hell
like Drunkenness; following Wine and strong drink send great multitudes to
Hell: the drunken Gentleman and drunken Prince, notwithstanding all their
bravery shall descend into Hell, as well as the drunken Beggar. They that
inflame themselves with Wine and strong drink, shall be tormented in flames of
fire for ever; and then they that drunk Wine in boles, and filled themselves
with strong drink, shall not with all their entreaties get so much as one drop
of Water to cool their Tongues.

Arg. 10. It is a Bewitching Sin, very hardly left by those that are addicted
to it.

Drunkenness is an enticing, bewitching Sin, which is very hardly left by those
that are addicted to it: Neither the Word nor Rod of God prevails with men to
leave this Sin, but they go on sinning against Light, sinning against the
Counsels, Reproofs and Tears of Friends, against the checks of their own
Consciences; though the Lord afflict them in their Bodies, Estates, Good Names,
yet still they persevere in this sin: though when upon sick beds they are under
terrors of Conscience, and feel as it were some flashes of Hellfire, and make
great Vows and solemn Protestations, that if God will spare their Lives, and
raise them up again, they will leave off their Drunkenness; yet when they are
restored to Health* they return to their old course again: Prove. 23. 35. They
have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick: they have beaten me, and
I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again: Solomon speaks
here of Drunkards, who are not disheartened by all the difficulties, and
troubles* and blows that they meet with in following after strong drink; but
resolve to seek it yet again, and to persist in their dissolute courses.
Drunkards are wont to encourage themselves, and one another, to persist in
their drunken courses under all discouragements. Isa. 56. 12. Come ye, say
they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Instead of desisting they
grow more resolved in their way: and the reason why this sin is so hardly left,
and so few recovered from it, may be partly from the strength this sinful habit
gets in the Soul by the many repeated Acts of this Sin, and also from the
Pleasingnesse of this Sin to corrupt Nature; for the more pleasing any sin is,
the more hardly it is left: And chiefly from the Just and Righteous Judgment of
God, who gives up men who go on sinning against Light, unto their own Hearts
Lusts, saying to them, He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. Drunkenness
is called by some, Vitium maximae adhaerentiae; a Sin that sticks closer and
faster to a man than any other Sin.

These ten Arguments against Drunkennss were taken out of the Sermons of Mr.
Owen Stockton of Colchester, lately deceased, an able and worthy Divine, in a
Larger discourse again that Sin, well I worth the Reading, sold by Mr. Thomas
Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside: Preached upon the
occasion of a sad and dreadful Providence, which lately befell a young man, who
for some years was very hopeful for Religion, a diligent attender upon God's
Ordinances, and well esteemed of among the People of God; but afterward being
led away by temptation, he was sometime overtaken with the sin of Drunkenness,
and it seemed good to the Holy and Righteous God to cut him off in the Act of
sin, when he was (as is generally reported) so far overcome with strong drink,
that he was not able to go, but was led, and laid upon a Bed, and dyed in a few
Hours, without coming to himself again.

HIS MAJESTY'S PROCLAMATION AGAINST Vicious, Debauched, and Profane Persons,
and against drinking his Health.
CHARLES, R.

SInce it has pleased the Divine Providence in so wonderful a manner, and by
ways and means no less miraculous, than those by which he did, heretofore,
preserve and restore his own chosen People, to restore Us, and Our good
Subjects to each other, and to show Us a very hopeful Prospect, if not to put
us already into possession of that Peace, Happiness and Security, with which
this our Kingdom has been heretofore blessed; It will become Us all, in our
several Stations, to acknowledge this transcendent goodness of Almighty God in
so seasonable a conjuncture, with such a Circumspection, Integrity, and
Reformation in Our Lives, that we may not drive away that Mercy which so near
approaches Us, by making Our selves (wholly) unworthy of it. And in Order
hereunto, We think it high time to show Our dislike of those (against whom We
have been ever enough offended, though We could not, in this manner declare
it,) who under pretense of Affection to Us and Our Service, assume to
themselves the liberty of Reviling, Threatening and Reproaching others; and as
much as in them lies, endeavor to stifle and divert their good Inclinations to
Our Service, and so to prevent that Reconciliation and Union of Hearts and
Affections, which can only, with Gods Blessing, make Us rejoice in each other,
and keep Our Enemies from rejoicing.

There are likewise another sort of Men, of whom we have heard much, and are
sufficiently ashamed; who spend their time in Taverns, Tipling-houses and
Debauches, giving no other Evidence of their Affection to Us, but in drinking
Our Health, and Inveighing against all others, who are not of their own
dissolute temper; and who, in truth, have more discredited Our Cause, by the
License of their Manners and Lives, than they could ever advance it by their
Affection or courage. We hope that this extraordinary way of delivering Us all,
from all we feared, and almost bringing Us to all We can reasonably hope for,
has and will work upon the Hearts, even of these Men to that degree, that they
will cordially renounce all that Licentiousness, Profaneness, and Impiety,
with which they have been corrupted, and endeavored to corrupt others, and
that they will hereafter, become examples of Sobriety and Virtue, and make it
appear, that what is past, was rather the Uice of the Time, than of the
Persons, and the fitter to be forgotten together.

And, because the fear of punishment, or apprehension of Our Displeasure, may
have influence upon many, who will not be restrained by the Conscience of their
Duty, We do declare, That We will not exercise just Severity against any
Malefactors sooner, than against Men of dissolute, debauched, and profane
Lives, with what parts soever they may be otherwise qualified and endowed; and
We hope, that all Persons of Honor, or in Place and Authority, will so far
assist Us, in discountenancing such Men, that their discretion and shame will
persuade them to reform what their Conscience would not, and that the
displeasure of good Men toward them, may supply what the Laws have not; and,
it may be, cannot well provide against, there being by the License and
Corruption of the Times, and the depraved Nature of Men, many Enormities,
Scandals, and Impieties, in Practice and Manners, which Laws cannot well
describe, and consequently not enough provide against, which may by the example
and severity of Uertuous Men, be easily discountenanced, and by degrees
suppressed.

However, for the more effectual reforming these Men, who are a discredit to
the Nation, and unto any Cause they pretend to favor, and to wish well to; We
require all Majors, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, to be very vigilant and
strict in the discovery and prosecution of all Dissolute and Profane Persons,
and such as Blaspheme the Name of God, by profane Swearing and Cursing, or
revile or disturb Ministers, and despise the Public Worship of God; that being
first bound to the good Behavior, they may be further proceeded against, and
exposed to shame, in such a manner, as the Laws of the Land, and the just and
necessary Rules of Government shall direct or permit.

Dated the Twelfth Year of Our Reign.
See the Dialogue between Tory and Timothy in the Weekly Packet of Aug. 5.
1681. This passage:
Tory. There are a Thousand of my Companions that are not capable to express
their Loyalty any way in the World, if they should be barred from Drinking of
Healths, and Huzzaing, as if Bedlam were broken loose.


Tim. Loyalty is the indispensable duty of every good Subject, and signifies no
more than an obedience and Hearty serving of the King according to Law; and I
am sure our Most Gracious Sovereign will not be served any otherwise. Nor can I
understand how a Common Drunkard, Swearer, Whoremonger, etc. ought to be
accounted either Loyal, or a Son of the Church of England, since thereby he
violates daily the Laws of God, Nature, and the Land, and for the same ought to
stand Excommunicated by the Church.


Such as will not refrain from Intemperate drinking, and be reclamed by
Scripture, Arguments, and Examples, let the regard of their Bodily Health move
them: From these weighty reasons of Doctor Maynwaring's, showing how it impairs
their Health many ways.
Preservaton of Health in the choice of Drinks, and Regular Drinking.
DRink for necessity, not for bad fellowship; especially soon after meat, which
hinders due fermentation of the stomach, and washes down before digestion be
finished: but after the first concoction, if you have a hot Stomach, a dry or
costive Body, you may drink more freely than others: or if thirst importunes
you at any time, to satisfy* with a moderate draught is better than to forbear.

Accustom Youth and strong Stomachs to small drink; but stronger drink, and
Wine, to the infirm and aged: it chears the Spirits, quickens the Appetite, and
helps Digestion, moderately taken: but being used in excess, disturbs the
course of Nature, and procures many Diseases: for corpulent gross and fat
Bodies, thin, hungry, abstersive, penetrating Wines are best, as White Wind,
Rhenish, and such like.

For lean thin Bodies; black, red and yellow Wines, sweet, full bodied and
fragrant, are more fit and agreeable; as Malaga, Muscadel, Tent, Alicant and
such like.

For Drink, whether it be wholsomer warmed than cold, is* much controverted;
some stiffly contending for the one, and some for the other: I shall rather
choose the middle way, with limitation and distinction, than impose it upon all
as a rule to be observed under the penalty of forfeiting their health, the
observations of the one or the other.

There are three sorts of persons, one cannot drink cold Beer, the other cannot
drink warm, the third, either: You that cannot drink cold Beer, to you it is
hurtful, cools the Stomach, and checks it much: therefore keep to warm drink as
a wholesome custom: you that cannot drink warm Beer, that is, find no
refreshment, nor thirst satisfied by it, you may drink it cold, nor is it
injurious to you: you that are indifferent and can drink either, drink yours
cold, or warmed, as the company does, since your Stomach makes no choice.

That warm drink is no bad custom, but agreeable to Nature in the generality;
First, Because it comes the nearest to the natural temper of the Body, and
similia similibus conservantur, every thing is preserved by its like, and
destroyed by its contrary. Secondly, Though I do not hold it the principal
Agent in digestion, yet it does excite, is auxiliary, and a necessary
concomitant of a good digestion, ut signum and causa. Thirdly, Omne frigus per
se, and pro viribus destruit; Cold in its own nature, and according to the
graduation of its power, extinguisheth natural heat, and is destructive; but
per accidens, and as it is in gradu remisso, it may contemperate, allay, and
refresh, where heat abounds, and is exalted.

Therefore as there is variety of Palates, and Stomachs liking and agreeing
best with such kind of Meats and Drinks, which to others are utterly
disgustful, disagreeing and injurious, though good in themselves: so is it in
Drink warmed or cold; what one finds a benefit in, the other receives a
prejudice; at least does not find that satisfaction and refreshment, under such
a qualification; because of the various natures, particular appetitions, and
idiosyncratical properties of several bodies, one thing will not agree with
all: Therefore he that cannot drink warm, let him take it cold, and it is well
to him; but he that drinks it warm, does better. And this is to be understood
in Winter, when the extremity of cold has congelated and fixed the Spirits of
the Liquor in a torpid inactivity; which by a gentle Primum crater ad sitim
pertinere, secundum ad hilaritatem, tertium ad voluptatem, quartum ad insaniam
dixit. Apulius.
warmth are unfettered, volatile and brisk; whereby the drink is more agreeable
and grateful to the Stomachs fermenting heat, being so prepared, than to be
made so by it.

There are three sorts of Drinkers: one drinks to satisfy Nature, and to
support his body; without which he cannot well subsist, and requires it as
necessary to his Being. Another drinks a degree beyond this man, and takes a
larger dose, with this intention, to exhilerate and cheer his mind, to banish
cares and trouble, and help him to sleep the better; and these two are lawful
Drinkers. A third drinks neither for the good of the body, or the mind, but to
stupifie and drown both; by exceeding the former bounds, and running into
excess, frustrating those ends for which drink was appointed by Nature;
converting this support of Life and Health, making it a procurer of sickness
and untimely death.

Many such there are, who drink not to satisfy Nature, but force it down many
times contrary to natural inclination; and when there is a reluctance against
it: as Drunkards that pour in Liquor, not for love of the drink, or that Nature
requires it by thirst, but only to maintain the mad frolic, and keep the
Company from breaking up. Some to excuse this intemperance, hold it as good
Physic to be drunk once a month, and plead for that liberty as a wholesome
custom, and quote the authority of a famous Physician for it. Whether this
Opinion be allowable, and to be admitted in the due Regiment for preservation
of Health, is fit to be examined.

It is a Canon established upon good reason; That every Omne nimium naturae est
inimicum.
thing exceeding its just bounds, and golden mediocrity, is hurtful to Nature.
The best of things are not excepted in this general rule; but are restrained
and limited here to a due proportion. The supports of Life may prove the
procurers of Death, if not qualified and made wholesome by this corrective.

Meat and drink is no longer sustenance, but a load and overcharge, if they
exceed the quantum due to each particular person; and then they are not, what
they are properly in themselves, and by the appointment of Nature, the
preservatives of Life and Health; but the causes of sickness, and consequently
of Death.

Drink was not appointed man, to discompose and disorder him in all his
faculties, but to supply, nourish, and strengthen them. Drink exceeding its
measure, is no longer a refreshment, to irrigate and water the thirsty body,
but makes an inundation to drown and suffocate the vital powers. It puts a man
out of the state of Health, and represents him in such a degenerate condition
both in respect of body and mind, that we may look upon the man, as going out
of the World, because he is already gone out of himself, and strangely
metamorphosed from what he was.

I never knew sickness or a Disease, to be good preventing Physic; and to be
drunk, is no other than an unsound state, and the whole body out of frame by
this great change. What difference is there between sickness and drunkenness?
Truly I cannot distinguish them otherwise than as genus and species:
Drunkenness being a raging Disease, denominated and distinguished from other
sicknesses, by its procatarctick or procuring cause, Drink.

That Drunkenness is a Disease or Sickness, will appear in that it has all the
requisites to constitute a Disease, and is far distant from a state of Health:
for as Health is the free and regular discharge of all the functions of the
Body and Mind; and sickness, when the functions are not performed, or weakly
and depravedly: then Ebriety may properly be said to be a Disease or sickness,
because it has the symptoms and diagnostick signs of an acute and great
Disease: for, during the time of drunkenness, and some time after, few of the
faculties perform rightly, but very depravedly and preternaturally: if we
examine the intellectual faculties, we shall find the reason gone, the memory
lost or much abated, and the will strangely perverted: if we look into the
sensitive faculties, they are disordered, and their functions impedited or
performed very deficiently: the eyes do not see well, nor the ears hear well,
nor the palate relish, etc. The speech faulters and is imperfect; the stomach
perhaps vomits or nauseates; his legs fail: Indeed if we look through the whole
man, we shall see all the faculties depraved, and their functions either not
executed, or very disorderly, and with much deficiency.

Now according to these symptoms in other sicknesses, we judge a man not likely
to live long; and that it is very hard he should recover; the danger is so
great from the many threatening symptoms that attend this sickness, and
prognosticate a bad event: here is nothing appears salutary; but from head to
foot, the Disease is prevalent in every part; which being collated, the syndrom
is lethal, and Judgment to be given so.

Surely then Drunkenness is a very great Disease for the time; but because it
is not usually mortal, nor lasts long; therefore it is slighted, and looked
upon as a trivial matter that will cure it self. But now the question may be
asked, Why is not Drunkenness usually mortal; since the same signs in other
Diseases are accounted mortal, and the event proves it so? To which I answer;
All the hopes we have that a man drunk should live, is; First, From common
experience that it is not deadly: Secondly, From the nature of the Primitive or
procuring Cause, strong Drink or Wine; which although it rage, and strangely
discompose the man for a time, yet it lasts not long, nor is mortal. The
inebriating spirits of the liquor, flowing in so fast, and joining with the
spirits of man's body, make so high a tide, that overflows all the banks and
bounds of order: For, the spirits of man's body, those agents in each faculty,
act smoothly, regularly and constantly, with a moderate supply; but being
overcharged, and forced out of their natural course, and exercise of their
duty, by the large addition of furious spirits; spurs the functions into
strange disorders, as if nature were conflicting with death and dissolution:
but yet it proves not mortal.

And this, first, because these adventitious spirits are amicable and friendly
to our bodies in their own nature, and therefore not so deadly injurious, as
that which is not so familiar or noxious.

Secondly, Because they are very volatile, light and active; Nature therefore
does much sooner recover her self, transpires and sends forth the overplus
received; than if the Morbisick matter were more ponderous and fixed; the
gravamen from thence would be much worse and longer in removing: as an
over-charge of Meat, Bread, Fruit, or such like substances not spirituous; but
dull and heavy ( comparative) is of more difficult digestion, and lays a
greater and more dangerous load upon the faculties, having not such volatile
brisk spirits to assist Nature, nor of so liquid a fine substance, of quicker
and easier digestion: So that the symptoms from thence are much more dangerous,
than those peracute distempers arising from Liquors. So likewise those bad
symptoms in other Diseases are more to be feared and accounted mortal (than the
like arising from drunkenness) because those perhaps depend upon malignant
causes; or such as by time are radicated in the body; or from the defection of
some principal part: but the storm and discomposure arising from drunkenness,
as it is suddenly raised, so commonly it soon falls, depending upon benign
causes, and a spirituous matter, that lays not so great an oppression; but
inebriates the spirits, that they act very disorderly and unwontedly; or by the
soporiferous virtue, stupifies them for a time, until they recover their
agility again.

But all this while, I do not see, that to be drunk once a month should prove
good Physic: all I think that can be said in this behalf, is; that by
overcharging the Stomach, vomiting is procured; and so carries off something
that was lodged there, which might breed Diseases.

This is a bad excuse for good Fellows, and a poor plea for drunkenness: for
the gaining of one supposed benefit (which might be obtained otherwise) you
introduce twenty inconveniences by it. I do not like the preventing of one
Disease that may be, by procuring of one at the present certainly, and many
hereafter most probably: and if the Disease feared, or may be, could be
prevented no otherwise, but by this drunken means; then that might tolerate and
allow it: but there are other ways better and safer to cleanse the body either
upwards or downwards, than by overcharging with strong drink, and making the
man to unman himself; the evil consequents of which are many, the benefit hoped
for, but pretended; or if any, but very small and inconsiderable.

And although, as I said before, the drunken fit is not mortal, and the danger
perhaps not great for the present; yet those drunken bouts being repeated; the
relicts do accumulate, debilitate Nature, and lay the foundation of many
chronick Diseases. Nor can it be expected otherwise; but you may justly
conclude from the manifest irregular actions which appear to us externally,
that the functions within also, and their motions are strangely disordered:
for, the outward madness and unwonted actions, proceed from the internal
impulses, and disordered motions of the faculties: which general disturbance
and discomposure (being frequent) must needs subvert the economy and
government of humane Nature; and consequently ruin the Fabric of man's body.

The ill effects, and more eminent products of Ebriety, are; first, A changing
of the natural tone of the Stomach, and alienating the digestive faculty; That
instead of a good transmutation of food, a degenerate Chyle is produced. Common
experience tells, that after a drunken debauch, the stomach loses its
appetite, and acuteness of digestion; as belching, thirst, disrelish,
nauseating, do certainly testify: yet to support nature, and continue the
custom of eating, some food is received; but we cannot expect from such a
Stomach that a good digestion should follow: and it is some days before the
Stomach recover its eucrasy, and perform its office well: and if these
miscarriages happen but seldom, the injury is the less, and sooner recompensed;
but by the frequent repetition of these ruinous practices, the Stomach is
overthrown and alienated from its integrity.

Secondly, An unwholsom corpulency and cachectick plenitude of body does
follow: or a degenerate macilency, and a decayed consumptive A Cacotrophy, or
Atrophy.
constitution. Great Drinkers that continue it long, few of them escape, but
fall into one of these conditions and habit of body: for, if the Stomach
discharge not its office a right, the subsequent digestions will also be
defective. So great a consent and dependence is there upon the Stomach; that
other parts cannot perform their duty, if this leading principal Part be
perverted and debauched: nor can it be expected otherwise; for, from this
Laboratory and prime office of digestion, all the parts must receive their
supply; which being not suitable, but depraved, are drawn into debanchery also,
and a degenerate state; and the whole Body fed with vicious alimentary succus.

Now that different products or habits of body should arise from the same kind
of debauchery, happens upon this score. As there are different properties and
conditions of bodies; so the result from the same procuring causes shall be
much different and various: one puffs up, fills, and grows hydropical; another
pines away, and falls Consumptive, from excess in drinking; and this proceeds
from the different disposition of parts: for, in some persons, although the
stomach be vitiated, yet the strength of the subsequent digestions is so great,
from the integrity and vigor of those parts destinated to such offices; that
they act strenuously, though their object matter be transmitted to them
imperfect and degenerate: und therefore do keep the body plump and full,
although the juyces be foul, and of a depraved nature. Others e contra, whose
parts are not so firm and vigorous; that will not act upon any score, but with
their proper object; does not endeavor a transmutation of such aliene matter,
but receiving it with a nice reluctance, transmits it to be evacuated and sent
forth by the next convenient ducture, or emunctory: and from hence the body is
frustrated of nu^^ition, and falls away: So that the pouring in of much liquor
(although it be good in sua natura) does not beget much aliment, but washes
through the body, and is not assimilated.

But here some may object and think; That washing of the body through with good
Liquor, should cleanse the body, and make it fit for nourishment, and be like
good Physic for a foul body. But the effect proves the contrary; and it is but
reason it should be so: for, suppose the Liquor (whether Wine, or other) be
pure and good; yet when the spirit is drawn off from it, the remainder is but
dead, flat, thick, and a muddy phlegm. As we find in the distillation of Wine,
or other Liquors; so it is in man's body: the spirit is drawn off first, and all
the parts of man's body are ready Receivers, and do imbibe that limpid
congenerous enlivener, freely and readily: but the remainder, of greatest
proportion; that heavy, dull, phlegmy part, and of a narcotick quality; lies
long fluctuating upon the digestions, and passes but slowly; turns sour, and
vitiates the Crases of the parts: So that this great inundation, and supposed
washing of the body, does but drown the Faculties, stupifie or choke the
Spirits, and defile all the Parts; not purify and cleanse. And although the
more subtle and thinner portion, passes away in some persons pretty freely by
Urine; yet the grosser and worse part stays behind, and clogs in the
percolation.

A third injury, and common, manifest prejudice from intemperate drinking, is;
An imbecility of the Nerves; which is procured from the disorderly motions of
the Animal Spirits; being impulsed and agitated preternaturally by the
inebriating spirits of strong Liquors: which vibration being frequent, begets a
habit, and causes a trepidation of Members.

Transcribed verbatim out of Dr. Maynwaring's Treatise Of long Life.

FINIS.
Are to be Sold near the Exchange and in Popes-head-Alley.


