THE RULE OF CHARITY: OR, THE Liberal Man's Guide; Designed, For the Use of all
good CHRISTIANS.

Being the Pious Result of a Lay-Man's Ordinary Meditations.

By H.W. Gent.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the Year, MDCXC.

TO THE Right Honorable, Sir Thomas Rokeby, Knight. One of Their Majesty's Judges
of the Court of Common-Bench.
My Lord,
REligion being not that Melancholy Piece, that Obliges us to become
Unsociable, and Enemies to all that has any difference to Cheerfulness and
Plenty; but rather Instructs us, how to make use of Both, so as we may best
enjoy our Selves, and benefit Others: I hope that inherent Goodness, which has
rendered you so Remarkable for your Charity, will not refuse Her now Your
Refuge, when by Your Noble Dispositions she is Encouraged, not only to pretend
to, but confidently Plead a just Title to your Patronage.

It Is true, the Receders from this Duty, neither regards her Rule, nor owns her
Practice, but are afraid of all that carries the Face of Love, and true
Munificence; and are only Valiant in breaking those holy Laws, which Heaven
has made Eternal: That would have no such Images of God in the World, as the
Distressed; and seem to believe, Liberality, at best, but a Romish Superstition.

But let these, I say, do Right to Julian the Apostate, and Confess, it was no
Aspersion thrown upon our Religion, when he gave out, there was nothing in it
beyond a Mode of Believing, that will not allow her Sacred Sanction, nor submit
to the Rule of Charity; but had rather acknowledge Her a Popish, or an Italian
Virtue, than have Her Naturalized here, to the Prejudice of the Exchequer.

This part of it, that is here presented, is but the Imperfect Effigy of the
Precept, performed by one that is at present, rendered by his ill
Circumstances, too great a Dependent on its Mandates.

I know You would even dote upon the Piece, were it well Drawn, because it is
impossible, for Right-Reason, to resist the Charms of Truth and Love, Painted
in good Colors to the full Proportion.

My Ambition, at present, extends but to Your Pardon, not to Your Esteem; and
it is my Request, that where it cannot be admitted as a Counsel, it may serve
for an Admonition: Hoping you will have the same Veneration for the Virtue, and
not look upon Her as the less a Beauty, because I have showed Her in so mean a
Habit.

Charity takes most delight in her Self, when she goes Plainest, and is in a
Dress of Condescension; affecting no Garb so Little, as that of a Great
Fortune.

If you discern Imperfections in the Copy, let not Charity for my Sake, fall
under an Imputation; That needs no such Advocate as I am, nor such a Common
Pen, but one from an Angels Wing, to advance Her Esteem.

There is a Beauty in Holiness, exceeding that of State; and a Glory in
Humility, Superior to the proud Inscript of Monarchs: Both of these waits upon
Charity, and are the proper Ornaments of Her Profession.

But here the known Antipathy which some Persons visibly Bares to the
disregarders of this Duty, diverts my forward Pen, believing it not Pertinent
to be too Nice in my Description of that, which has been already so
excellently well expressed in your Life and Conversation.

The Consideration of which, obliges me to an unwilling Silence, by Humbly
taking leave to Subscribe my Self,

Your Lordships Most Faithful, and Most Devoted Servant To Command, Henry
Waring.

THE Rule of Charity.
IF an Authors Place or Degree that he holds, can add Virtue to Words, or
serve to procure Attention, the Crown of Solomon will oblige you to hear a King
newly become a Preacher: (The Richest Monarch that ever Reigned in Jerusalem,
and the Wisest of Eastern Sophies, steps from the Throne of David, to the Chair
of Moses, and Teaches us,) Eccles.11.4. Cast thy Bread upon the Water, and
after many days thou shall find it. This is not an ordinary Rule of Human
Policy, but the Doctrine of true Religion, by which Men are best Governed.
Commentators agree, That these words of the Preacher, [Cast thy Bread upon the
Water,] exhort us to the Relief of all such as are Distressed; which the Verse
following does Illustrate: But when they came to Expound the single words of
that Text, they differ: A few say [Cast thy Bread] that is, The substance or
matter whereof Bread is made [upon the Water,] that is, A fruitful Soil, [and
thou shall find it,] that is, Reap it again, [after many days,] that is, In
time of Harvest; these make the Precept of Charity to become an Allegory. Let
us rather say, These Alms we bestow, are as Seed dispersed, and the Poor
receives a Soil so Fertile, that daily bestowing our Charity, we Sow with a
large hand, not without assurance of receiving an ample return of Eternal
Rewards. This Exposition is the plainest, only this acceptance of the word
[Bread] seems harsh and unusual; yet we shall find that Bread may be taken for
Alms, while we converse with the Hebrews, (the Original (...)) Lehem, which we
commonly Translate Bread, is taken in the Scripture for all sorts of Provision;
in that sense you may read it, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Lehem signifies the flesh of Beasts
Sacrificed, Levit. 3.11. It is used for the Fruit of Trees, Jer.11.19. Lehem is
also taken for the Fodder of Cattle, Psalm.14.7, 9. because the Hebrew Language
consists of few words, so that every word bears many significations; which
is the reason that Lehem (among the Jews) did sometimes import all manner of
subsistence, every thing that Man or Beast used to live upon; in which sense it
is taken in the Pater Noster, when we Pray for Daily Bread, and in a larger
Extent there, implying not only the necessaries of our Body, but also that
Angels food, (that (...), Luke 13.3.) the Blessed Sacrament, by which our Souls
are nourisht for Eternity: But most Divines understands the word Bread, in the
Gramatical sense, placing the Figure in the word Waters, which carries diverse
Interpretations: Some Authors will have these words of Solomon, recommended to
us, Giving of Alms at all adventure, without having an Eye to the recompense of
Reward: As if we were advised to cast our Bread upon those rouling and
inconstant Waves, that will sooner float away with our Estates, than return us
(in this or the next life) a laudable Cargo: But the Best and Wisest, deliver
the words in a contrary Sense, which is indeed most Catholic, or Universal;
affirming, To cast our Bread (or Charity) upon Solomon's Waters, is the safest
and speediest way to Merchandise and Trade with Heaven; where, in exchange for
some small tokens of Christian Love, and cheap instances of Compassion, we
shall receive secret assurances in this Life of future Mercy, attended with
public Blessings; and, in the next, an Eternal weight of Glory. Either such
another Fish as came to discharge the Tax for Christ, and St. Peter, shall
repay our Bounty into our Bosom, or some Dolphin shall make good our Adventure:
That Bread you so graciously bestow, shall not fail to be returned with
Advantage, as the Ring of St. Arnold, in the Legend; or that of Polycratus, in
Herodotus. The Fathers of the Church further engage us to bestow our Bread, or
works of Mercy, with Waters; that is, our Alms moistened with tears of Pity; as
if a liberal hand in the Donor, should be prompted to give, by the secret
Motions of the Bowels of Compassion; and that the Sluices of Grief should remain
open, to render the Charity Perfect.

Some would have the Waters here, signify distressed Merchants, poor Seamen
and Passengers, that in their way of living, are compelled to struggle with an
Ocean of Danger; so much indeed the word carries, and more; for by Waters, all
infirm and decayed persons, all people of the meanest condition are signified,
[ Apocalypse 17.15.] such as creep into their Graves in Silence, that come and
go without notice, that pass away from this World without any noise of Revenge,
or pomp of Ceremonious Lamentation. The vulgar, the most common sort of Men,
are denoted by the word Waters, because they are very dangerous in their Use
and Excesses, unsettled in their Condition, always Rouling this way and
the other; their Temper is Weak, their Motions Irregular, always in Perturbation;
every Hurricane of State, Wind of false Doctrine, Tempest of Fears and
Jealousies, transports and hurries them hither and thither, so as they can
remain at no certainty. The Poet made such a Remark upon them, and has suited
the Epithet of Moveable, to their Inconstancy; (Mobile vulgus,) whose humor
and departure the Royal Prophet so well understood, that he thought he could
compare the raging of the Sea, to nothing more properly, than to the Madness of
the People. So when he tells us, The Waves of the Sea are gone over his head,
and entered into his Soul, Psalm. 69. he means, the Insolences of the Rabble;
for it exceedingly troubled David, to see the common people so prone to
Rebellion. The first English Bibles of Tyndal and Erasmus have it, [Lay thy
Bread upon wet Faces,] that is, upon all people in a Mourning condition, that
water their Couches with their Tears, and appear lamentable Objects of your
Pity and Compassion. St. Jerome alone Interprets the words in this manner, [
Cast thy Bread,] that is, place the Word of God [ upon the Waters,] that is,
Penitent Souls; intimating, that you are not to give your wholesome Doctrine of
Salvation, to such as will have you in Derision. Such another Caution as that,
is offered us, Eccles. 32. 4. Not to be Wise unseasonably,((...)) for so shall
we loose the good Seed of Christian Admonitions and Reproofs, upon Hearts
obdurate and impenitent. It Is a breach of that Precept, Mat.7. To cast Pearls
before Swine, by offering a Creed to those that are ready to throw Contempt
upon the Gospel. The English word [ Cast] in the two famous Translations of the
Greek and Latin Churches, is the same with Sow, Send, or Scatter: The Truth is,
the first English Translators were no very good Linguists, but made an easy
mistake of the letter Caph for Cheth, ((...) for (...)) WHEREAS THE ORIGINAL
WORD IS Shallah, ((...)) they Construed it as Shallach, ((...)) making a
notorious difference in signification; for the latter imports Deliberation and
Judgment, the former Profuseness in giving; the one sounds as if we never could
bestow too much; the other, that a Man as soon gives too much as too little:
These Interpretations do well together, and so long as they afford us diverse
excellent Rules of Practice, we may admit both as Orthodox. All objects of
Charity are here designed by the word Waters; that is, the several parts of
Mankind, all such as appear Poor, Infirm, or any way Miserable; Captives and
Gally-slaves, Exiles, decayed Merchants or Tradesmen, distressed Passengers,
Scholars not preferred, impoverished Housekeepers, that through too much
Trust, and too many bad Debts, are forced into Sanctuary; Widows and Orphans,
that are left Friendless and Desolate; Sick or Maimed Laborours, Hungry
Travelers, and weeping Penitent Strangers, and all that are destitute of
Friends and Comfort, that with dejected Countenances implore your Pity. The
World affords us such variety of sad Objects, that the Writer might turn his
Catalogue into a Volum: Some want Advice, some Law, some Religion, some
Friends, some Medicines; yes, and so numerous are Human wants and
imperfections, that I want room and leisure to express the number of such as
are Commissioned by Heaven to receive your Charity; yet all come here under the
name and notion of Waters: Is it not pity, to see the lean and naked Cripple,
that has a Stomach, to desire Bread, but wants Hands to receive it; or that
Blind Lazar, deprived of Eyes, wherewith he might behold his own Nakedness; or
the Man that is robbed of his Taste and Feeling, by Icy distempers, or grievous
Casualties? Have you never beheld the treacherous Limbs of some people, Roting
away before their Faces? Some have their Spirits so darkened, they guide
themselves, while Reason has lost the right use of her Organs; others sadly
want common Sense, to distinguish the Food that is safe, from that which is
unwholesome; showing us where Nature will leave us, when we are forsaken by
Heaven.

There remains yet another Querae, raised from these words of Solomon, ( Cast
thy Bread upon the Waters,) Whether the Royal Preacher did intend them for a
Precept, or a Council? The One does absolutely oblige, the Other recommends a
matter of Practice; If a Precept, the words must be included in the Moral Law,
and universally Bind all persons of Ability. Were it no more than found Advice,
some Men only should observe it, in some Cases; but take it (as it is) for a
part of that Eternal Law of Nature, (which ought to influence all Mankind, I
might have said, all Creatures,) What living thing is there in the World, that
does not communicate some benefit to its fellows? and by consequence, shows
it self loving and serviceable to the other parts of the Creation. And shall
Man alone degenerate? Shall be that is Master of Reason, show himself a Beast
to his Companions, whilst the most Irrational part of the Universe teaches him
the way to be Charitable? Let him not know, how to prove unkind to his Fellows;
that cannot but know, how much he has received from our good Master.

You may prove Solomon's words a part of the Law of Nature, by those indelible
Characters of the Soul, that exert their Powers in the practice of Pagans. We
find among those people, that are yet in the shadow, positive Rules of doing
Good, both to their own, and to Strangers; which not deriving themselves from
the Edicts of Divine Revelation, must be ascribed to the provident Dictates of
Nature.

But we may better prove Alms a Duty, from the express Reason of Holy
Scripture; wherein Uncharitableness is considered as a grievous Sin, because it
is inconsistent with the Love of God, and directly contradicts the meaning of
Divine Precepts.

That most eminent Seer puts the Question, 1 Job. 3.17. He that sees his
Brother in want, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? The Querae there (as in several other places
in the Bible,) is put for a vehement Negative; and imports, that in obdurate
hearts, the Love of God cannot be Resident. The Prayers of Uncharitable people
are not answered; for God gives us, because he percieves us free to give, and
forgive others: He that stops his ears at the cries of the Poor, shall cry
himself, and not be heard, was a Proverb in Jury, and continues a great Truth
all the World over, ( Prove. 21. 13.) for so God delights to retalliate with his
Creatures.

Want of Love (in us) occasions our Wants, and bespeaks Unhappiness for us in
this Life, and in the next, everlasting Perdition. There is not another Sin
charged upon Damned Dives, besides his want of Charity; and those Wretches that
are mentioned in St. Math. 25. were condemned only for their unkindness to the
Brethren, and their gross defects in the visible part of this Duty.

You would ask, In what part of the Decalogue, the Rule of Charity is
contained? Bellarmine following Aquinas, refers it to the Fifth Commandment,
which includes all Rights appertaining to Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors; and
of this last sort, the Poor are Principals: And of all Duties belonging to the
Poor, Alms is most considerable; and there is scarce any thing that we are
obliged to do for them, but comes within the Precincts of Charity.

Other Authors derive this Duty from the Eighth Commandment, and will have
Robbery to be but one and the same thing with Uncharitableness; affirming, That
he that is able to Give, and withholds his Alms from those that Want, and call
for his Relief, Robs his poor Neighbor of his just Comfort, and God of his
Honor. Therefore, the Phraise is changed, St. Luke 16. 9. and Solomon's
Precept, become an Evangelical Law; where it is not left at our choice, to do
good; but we are charged to make us Friends with the Mammon of Unrighteousness.
It Is called Unrighteous Mammon, says S. Austin, not only when it is unjustly
acquired, but also while it is Uncharitably detained from those that are
Necessitated. Is it commendable, that I live in superfluous manner, while my
poor Brother wants to suffice Nature? Sure, it is a wrong to withhold from
the Poor what I can easily spare, in their Affliction and Extremity. Superflua
diviti necessaria sunt Pauperi, aliena retinet qui ista tenet. Augustine says,
The Rich man's Exceedings, are the Poor man's Portion; so as he unjustly seems to
Defraud others, that reserves to himself more than is sufficient.

St. Ambrose, in a rougher Dialect, affirms, It is no less Criminal, for Rich
persons to deny Necessitated people Relief, than to take from them that they
have, and use violence to the Laws of Property. Yes, and some proceed further,
reducing these words of Solomon to the Sixth Commandment; making Uncharitable
Men no better than Thieves and Murderers; agreeable to that of Eccles. 34. 21.
The Bread of the Needy, is their Life; he that defraudeth them thereof, is a
Man of Blood. So that we see, to detain necessary Provision from them that
Want, is to shorten the lives of Poor men; and, as much as in us lies, to
deprive him of Succession, it is to Famish our afflicted Neighbor, (the
sharpest of all Deaths) and in him to seek to Murder his Posterity.

You hear how this Edict of Alms, has been referred to Three of the Ten
Commandments, yet more properly belongs to the Second Table, referring to the
general Law of our Neighbor; which Law, (as St. John expounds it, cap. 3. 18.)
Consists not in words alone, but in Truth, and real Testimonies of Affection.
Who shall believe we Love indeed, without apparent works of Love and Charity?
The Scripture teaches us a Method of doing Mercy, ((...)) not talking of it
only; for then are acts of Charity best performed, when fewest words are made
of the Benevolence: Giving of Alms, is at one and the same time, to Love God,
and honor Him in his Image; to make a Friend, and to relieve a Neighbor.

Our Blessed Savior calls it, An evil Generation, who demanded a sign of
their Redemption: And we cannot Repute it a better, that ask, Where is the
Mandate for well doing? A small excuse Men are willing to make use of, to save
their Estates; and where the Commandment is Positive, they seek for their own
sakes, (more than their Neighbors,) to dwindle the Precept into a Council: Yet
is this more than a mere matter of Advice; for it is a Breviate of what our
dear Master left us in Charge, at his Ascension; viz. That we Love one another;
which Love admits of no proof inferior to that of Almsgiving.

Holy Writ, and all the Tomes of the Fathers, abounds with Exhortation to this
Duty: But this is added to poor Men's miseries, they now live in a cold Age of
the World; and here, in a very chill Climate. It Is a wonder, to hear Men, every
where, boast of Faith, without Mercy; and when they show no fruits of a living
Faith, still do boast of Godliness: For ( Charitate ipsa, nihil Charius,) Love,
and its Effects, are some of our greatest Rarities.

When we speak of Christians, none can be mistaken, where we find Charity, but
the Giver, and he not easily; but admitting he may loose part of his Reward, by
valuing his Gift at too great a Rate, or by wronging himself, by the manner of
Giving; we have a great assurance, that he that pretends to Faith, without
Works, deceives himself, and the whole World, and offers to put a Cheat upon
his Master; for he does undervalue, at one and the same time, his Afflicted
Brethren, and the Truth of Divine Promises.

Some tells of three sorts of Commandmandments, that occur in Scripture,
Affirmative, Negative, and Mixed: The Decalogue consists of such as are mostly
Negative, though some of them are Affirmative; As, Keep holy the Sabbath:
Honor thy Parents, etc. And more of that sort we have in the Bible; as, Mourn
for thy Sins; Show Mercy; Do Penance, etc. There are also Commandments of a
Mixed nature; as of Restoration, and Forgiveness, etc. A Negative Commandment
does oblige all Persons at all Times, every where, and Eternally: Affirmative
Precepts are binding for ever, but not in all Times, nor in all Places; Mixed
Commandments oblige us at all Times, and in all Places; but not always.

I shall not determine to which of these Sorts the Words of Solomon may best be
reduced; but, am certain, they oblige all persons of Ability, to Confer
Benefits, and pay good Offices, according to their power, to all persons,
without Excuse or Exemption; that entreat their Assistance.

Cast thy Bread upon the Waters.] We read it Cast in our Common English-Bibles;
intimating, That if we are obliged to cast, or scatter our Charity, we ought
not to be very curious in Examining every Circumstance concerning our Gift, and
the Conditon of the Receiver; but we should give frequently, and liberally,
without an excessive Care to whom, or to what purpose our Donative is bestowed:
It is enough, that we know our own Intentions to be Warrantable, without
searching too strickly into the Meaning or Appetite of the Petitioner: Let us
not be too scrupulous in seeking a very fit Object, to make the best use of
what we bestow; lest such a severe Examination should obstruct our Charity:
It Is lawful to enquire, but not with too much Curiosity, how the Receiver
became Poor; but if he have failed in Diligence to Live, let us not fail in his
Support, for to supply his present Want, which is the way to Encourage him to
be Diligent for the future: Never let the Despicable Circumstances of any
person in Despair, or any manner of Affliction, divert thy Bounty; It is a
Niceness God cannot approve, who dispenceth many Mercies to thee, where few are
deserved.

But if we take it according to that other Reading, and Translate for the word
Cast, or Scatter; Send, or Sow; it implies Caution, and adds an Act of
Prudence to that of Charity: Then it will import a Care and Art in Giving, as
well as in Enjoyment. Where Solomon directs us to send our Charity, he does
intend we should give Alms with Discretion, and to be Cautious in dispencing
our Bounty. Alms is a sort of Merchandise that we Barter with Heaven, and which
we ought to send with Circumspection, that they may not miscarry. It Is no
Wise-man's way to be Careless of what he sends, but he commits it to the
surest Hands, that it may be safely conveyed to the Owner: A small Token, a
Ring, or a Letter, is not trusted with every idle Fellow that is of small
Trust, or no good Reputation; but we make it our Business, to know from whence
the Messenger comes, and whither he designs to Travel, that takes charge of
our meanest Presents. The Wife-man here advises us to the same Method; so to
send our Alms in the safest Bottoms, and by God's usual Messengers, that they
may be safely delivered; not suffering our Contributions to Perish, or
strengthen the Hand of the Evil-Doer: We must not Give with a Design to promote
evil Councels, ill Practices, or bad Company; least of all, must we give to
further Lascivious Courses, or multiply Places of Debauchery: To do this, is
not giving Alms, but a joining of Forces against Heaven, to augment the
Revenues of the Riotous; whose great Work is to maintain Brothels, or repair
Houses of Licentious Entertainment, where Christ has no Habitation; such
Benevolence is prejudicial to the Rule, and to the Reward of Charity.

[Send thy Bread;] Sending implies a Communication of the Good Things that are
in our Power, to such as live at a Distance, as well as to the Neigbourhood:
Let us do good abroad, for that argues true Devotion at home; not to give only
so far as our Hand can extend, but as far as our Gift can be transported by the
Hands of Others. The Household of Faith is first to be considered and relieved,
and what remains is the Portion of distressed Strangers, and Unbelievers. I
wish I could truly say, England had not as much need of this Doctrine, as any
Nation; I think we have been so far from approving our selves Charitable to
Strangers, that we scarce afford them Civil usage. Let us no more pretend to
Science and Reformation, until we cease to be Barbarous, and have learned
Humanity: What if they be remote? what if they be Jews? what if they be Turks?
what if they be Pagans? we must not excuse our selves, by pleading Ignorance of
their Lineage, their Principles, or their Country: it is enough that we know
their unfortunate Condition. Send, is an Imperative word, that leaves not the
Thing Indifferent, or at our Election; but charge us to give Alms, and to do
good, according to our Ability, without making abatement for want of Merit in
the Receiver; or for the sake of the strong Aversion we bear to his Person, or
to his Religion. The word Send, declares it a Duty incumbant, expressly
commanding us to show Mercy, without Excuses, and without Delay: If you neglect
to bestow what you can well Spare, it is at worst an Act of Injustice, at best,
a Detinue. Send your Charity where you cannot go, for fear of Corporal Danger,
or Defamation: it is infamous for some personally to give to some people; there
you must send your Charity, where your going to carry it, would bring upon you
a Scandal: Shorten not your Hand of Succor from the poor Prisoner, that is
almost pined and smoother'd in a noysom Dungeon. Send your Bounty to the Sick,
that are going to their Graves with some Infectious Disease: You may safely
send it, when you cannot go with safety. Yes, and there are some Cases, wherein
the good Christian must hazard Reputation and Life to perform good Offices;
that is, where God or Nature, his Religion or Country, are most nearly
Concerned: Here it is he must Advance against all Dangers, struggle with all
Adversities, and encounter with evil Beasts, as S. Paul did at Ephesus: We must
fight upon such great Occasions, an whole Army of Scandals; there we must not
matter Obloquy, but oppose our selves to the Tyranies of State, and stand the
unwholesome Censures of the Insolent and ungrateful Multitude. There are
Evangelical Counsels that have the same Influence over good Men, as if they
carried with them the Nature and Force of a Commandment: But these words of
Solomon are a positive Law, which, not only Invites us to, but Prescribes us
Obedience. The Neglect or Omission, to observe those Counsels, we read in the
Gospel; as, single Life, voluntary Poverty, etc. are but Imperfections in our
Nature; whereas the Breach of this Law of Charity, is a plain Sin, a
complicated Sin; and of that sort, that renders the Sinner odious in the
highest Degree; because there is more comprehended in this Law of Love, than in
all other Laws, Divine and Humane; for Love is the Life and End of Laws, and
this one is the Accomplishment of the Ten Commandments. There is nothing
enjoined by the Church, for Defects in Almsgiving, because there it is that
God reserveth the Sentence to Himself, and punishes the failure in that Duty,
with more than the Church is willing to Declare: Only God has been pleased to
Reveal how far good Works are acceptable to him, and what Happiness they will
procure for us hereafter, that He may see how far we are willing to proceed in
our Charity, for the sake of Divine Love, and for an Eternal Reward. Send your
Alms therefore as far as Paul or Silas, Camels, or Ships will carry them; from
Rome to Macedon, or Antioch; or from the place of your Residence, to Jerusalem
or Hungary: To this end we were endued with reasonable Faculties, with the
Comforts of this Life, and all those Temporal Blessings that are reached within
the Complicated Name of an Estate; that we might Honor our God in Compliance
with his holy Will; and that we might enjoy and benefit our selves and others.

[Send thy Bread.] Bread is of excellent Use, and large Extent; signifying all
that is necessary for Man's Subsistence: All manner of Provision is included in
that Monosyllable. The Chaldee. Dialect expresses a Sumptuous Feast, by the
word, Bread delighting to set forth a large Bill of Fare in a few Letters, and
with a single word, to furnish a Table more for Pleasure than Necessity. And
this luxurious Sense, the word Bread carries, Ecclesiastes 10.19. For which
cause some inform us, the Grecians derived the word [(...)] that signifies
every Thing: and their God Pan, from Panis, that goes for Bread among the
Latins; neither is the Dearth of Flesh, Wine or Oils, but the want of Bread
alone, styled a Famine in Scripture. Bread is termed the Staff of Life, that
supports the Feeble, ( Psalm 104.) And, fullness of Bread, was ever reputed one
of the greatest Blessings of the Jewish Nation; the Plenty thereof prevents
Insurrections; for such as followed Christ, chiefly for the sake of the Loaves
and Fishes; more for the Miracles he wrought, to feed them, and heal them, than
for the sake of his Prayers, or his Preaching. The Multitude, (I mean those
that are ready to make their Belly their God,) are most Devout there, where
they can find most Bread, and care not to embrace a Religion that commends
Fasting: remove their Altars, set aside their Bishops, take away their Priests,
and their Christ too, you provoke them not much, so as you leave them entire,
their Wine and their Manchet. Our ordinary Prayer, is for daily Bread, with
which every one of us ought to rest contented, is the one thing necessary, if
it be taken for our common Provision; but it is the only thing necessary, if
taken as diverse excellent Writers, and Dr. Person upon the Creed, Expounds it,
The Divine Food of our Souls, the Blessed Sacrament. The Roman Satyrist knew
how much the People valued Bread, while he informs us, they covet nothing above
[ Panem and circenses,] Bread and Recreation; meaning by the First of the Two,
all necessary Provision. [ Cast thy Bread;] that is, thy Substance or Estate,
thy Means of Living; or whatever a Man needs: If it be dear to thee, it will
be dearer to thy God; who when you esteem it not much, values it as little. He
was no less than a Royal Divine, that uses this Expression; Shall I give to
God that which costeth me nothing? The Poor are God's Receivers, and his
Factors; if you have Ability to Dispense much to them for his Service, and to
send great Things by their Hands, you shall be certain of ample Returns. That
is not to be called Charity, but ridding of your House, to bestow some pitiful
thing upon the Poor, that other-ways to keep, would disparage their Master. How
can Men expect their Reward to be Great, where they place a matter of so small
Merit? Bread, implies something that is good, and somewhat in readiness; to
show you, that you are to Give with Expedition, that which may prove beneficial
to the Petitioner: That which you bestow, ought to be wholesome, or
advantageous, conducing to the Health or Profit of the Receiver: You are not so
much to expect his Pleasure; though in some Cases of Despair or Sickness, that
is not altogether to be neglected. Let your Bounty be such as Nature requires,
rather than a Banquet, or piece of Rarity.

Cast, or Send thy Bread; give the same in Substance or in Quality, with which
Thou do usually furnish thy own Table: So it is in the Chaldee, Spare from thy
own Mouth the Bread of thy Table: For this end did the Church anciently appoint
frequent Fasts, that the Provision which was spared by good Men's Abstinence,
might supply the Wants of those that groaned in Poverty.

Thus by feeding the Mouths of the Hungry, thou do engage the Tongues of the
needy Beads-man, to make Prayers and Intercessions for Thee at the Throne of
Mercy, praising God for thy sake, the Author of all Good to Mankind; and by
their Importunate Petitions, taking Heaven by violence, and calling down
Blessings upon Thee and thy Family.

It was thus our Forefathers; thus the first and best Christians Fasted,
giving those Dishes of Meat to the Poor, which themselves should have eaten.
But now, [ Terras astra reliquit;] Devotion is fled, and too many, not only
devour the Meat and Subsistence of the Poor, but the poor Men too; while any
thing given to Charitable Uses, is interpreted with a purpose to Feast
Parish-Officers. How many may we see Fatted daily with Varieties, and Surfeited
with Exceedings; serving the Poor with nothing, or that which their Dogs would
refuse; delighting more in Foddering their Beasts, than Relieving their hungry
Brethren; and to feed Hogs, or Hounds, are Covetous to pine helpless Christians.

I hope in all this there is but little Reformation; to let the poor Man want
Bread for his Family, while a Rich Esquire perhaps usurps the Owners Living;
driving out poor Christians from their own Habitations, to keep Hawks, and
Whores, and Hounds, in their Abodes: You cannot imagine it is this Solomon
means, when he says; Cast thy Bread upon the Waters. Bread is a cheap and ready
thing to bestow; you need not go far to porcure such an Alms for the
unfortunate Petitioner.

This Imports, that we must not serve the Poor with Delays, but make Dispatches
in our Charity; because, what we are to give is ready; there is no occasion for
us to go to Bordeaux for Wines, or to Virginia for Smoke; or to fetch Indian
Silks, or Import Persian Tapsteries, in order to perform Works of Mercy: Give
your Bread, that is neither Dear to purchase, nor difficult to procure. What
should they, poor Hearts, that stand waiting for your Alms, do with useless
Toys, or extravagant Curiosities? It Is no Charity to bestow a Thing that is
vain, or superfluous, tending more to Man's Admiration, than Profit. You may
Give and Debauch, as well as Give and Relieve; it is Bread, not Bottles of
Brumswick or Canary, that are required; What is it you can more easily reach,
or forgo? Yet is this Bread more acceptable to the hungry Soul, than Ingots of
Gold in a Wilderness, or a Palace of Ivory. If the Historian did not take too
much upon Trust, those Aegyptian-Children that were suckled by Goats, and not
permitted to hear any Humane Speech, were taught by Nature to pronounce the
word Beccos, that signifies Bread in the Coptick Language: But if the truth of
this Report fails; it is certain, our Lamp of Light, [ Byolychimum;] by which
we live, and move, and make such a Figure as we have, subsisteth not, but by
daily supplys of some proper Oily Nutriment: and Nature cannot be so far
wanting to Her-self, and to Us, as not to seek and demand (after her own way)
somewhat of Subsistence to preserve that Vital Flame from sinking in the Lamp,
or in the Heart, its Receptacle, from a dark Extinction.

[ Cast thy Bread.] The Bread thou give must be thine; it ought to be stamped
with the Character of Property; let it be thine by some known right, and
indisputable Possession: Thine lawfully, not obtained by Fraud, or Violence. He
that grindeth the Face of the Poor, to feed an Hospital with the Bread of such
Gettings: He that purveys, purloins, and pilfers, and out of much, so gathered
together, thinks to distribute a little, bestowing now and then some small Alms
for Ostentation, does an iller thing, than the Man that steals a Goose, to
stick a Feather: for, to lessen a Levy for the Poor, he puts a scorn upon all
obligations of Nature; and to open himself a way to the Name of Riches, he
forces a breach in the Law of Nations; so promising to himself not to show a
Bounty, that shall exceed noise and appearance, he falls under those Curses,
that constantly pursue Covetous and unjust Wretches. Not much inferior in doing
wrong, is he, that owes all he bestows, and means not otherwise to discharge
his Debts in this World, than by making God (by giving to the Poor) Trustee for
ballancing his present Account, and his Debtor, to make good his future Estate:
This is not to be truly Charitable, out of his own, (as every man ought to be,)
but out of his Creditors Coffers; and seeming to be Zealous for God, he
wrongeth his Friend that lends or forbears the Charity he makes bold to
dispose: Nor is it a single Injury; because in such acts, he does prejudice to
Human Society, that is best preserved by just and punctual Dealing: Have we not
those among us, that by Wit and Deceit, live out one half of the year,
exercising them both in Worldly matters? and the other half, they wear out much
in the same manner, with specious pretenses of Law, and Religious Hypocrisy;
they walk with their Eyes lifted up to Heaven; and would have all others do so
too, that they may not be able to discern the Lands and Tenements they have
seized upon Earth, by the Arts of Oppression.

Such as can Usurp Lordships under a Pretext of Law, and take Sanctuary in a
Church, while they Rob the Hospital, shall They hope to expiate their Sins by
some small Contributions? or to escape the Torments of Hell, by leaving at
their Death some small Legacy to the Poor of the Parish? Their hopes are vain
and dangerous, that hope by Building an Almshouse, to obtain a License from
Heaven, for the Usurpation of a Lordship; what is this, but to render our
selves Slaves to the Prince of Darkness, and Enemies to good and honest Men,
all our lives; only with hopes of serving God a little at our Death, and of
doing some good, it may be an hour before our Funerals? Let all good Men rather
believe, that Shame and Confusion, and horrid Specter, attend the Tombs of
such unjust Persons! and that the Houses, from which those miserable Wretches
are conveyed, (when Life and Sin forsakes them) shall be daily Besieged with
the Cries of Widows and Orphans, and with the Curses of all those distressed
Creatures that were undone, and made pitiful objects of Charity, by the power
and artifices of those Ill-livers; and that those Mansions of theirs (if there
be left one Stone upon another) shall remain upon Earth, but as execrable
Monuments of their Impiety. Supposing there were none of these, yet to defer
our Charity till Death, is to lose much of the commendation that is inseparable
from holy Practices; because then it appears a work of necessity, to give that
away, which we cannot longer possess: sure it is not a very deserving matter,
for me to pretend to relieve or gratify some person with that thing, which
refuses any more to own me for its Master. Thus Divines love to speak, that
they may quicken Charitable minds, to call down Blessings betimes upon
themselves, and their Posterity; to secure their Estates to their Issue, by
giving Alms according to their Power; and that the best Christians may thereby
feel and acknowledge the reward of good Works, before they change their
condition.

Send thy Bread.] Thou have no Authority to dispose, (under the notion of thy
own,) of the Bread of the circumvented Buyer, or the defrauded Labourer; least
of all must you bestow the Shewbread, or that which has been Sacrilegiously
taken from God's own Table; but send the Bread that is lawfully thine, by just
Title and harmless Possession; if not thine by Inheritance, yet thine by Gift,
Purchase, or Labor; thine by some honest way of Trading or Desert; thine by
lawful Arts, or laudable Industry: Whosoever gives Alms of ill gotten Goods,
does worse than the Fellow that offered a Sow to Pallas: It Is a great affront
that he does to the Deity, offering to GOD that which is more loathsome to Him,
than Swines Blood, the price of a Dog, or the hire of an Harlot: He Kills the
Son, before the Father's Face, says the Wisdom of Sirach: Eccles. 34. 20. He
Sells Joseph his Brother, that he may carry home a Coat to his Sier. I wish
there were fewer of those Men in this Age, who being Honored with the Blessing
of a plentiful Estate, are yet Covetous to become the Executors of their
poorest Neighbors; making daily Merchandise with the Beggar'sPenny, selling
the Sweat of the Laborers Brows, his single Beast, or little Cottage; and when
they have given themselves Possession of all the small Pittance he has, they
continue to force him into desperate Extremities. This is not to Cast thy Bread
upon the Waters; but to cast thy self backward, to Worship the Tempter, and
gratify him with thy Fall and Degradation.

It Is no better, to cozen all the Week in the Shop, that you may give Alms on
the Lord's Day; or to Impoverish as many as possibly you can, in your whole
Life, only to leave behind some small Relict of an Estate [ when you Die,]
either to Feast the Parish, or Repair the Church, or Adorn it, as some (not of
the better sort of Christians) fancied they did, by placing a Cheap-Figure of
the Serpent upon the Steeple.

The Wicked Man's Legacy to the Poor, when this World will continue no longer
with him, is no Charity, but a sort of Restitution; which cannot produce its
proper Effect, because it is not performed to the right Party. Let that
therefore be thine, that thou give away, that thy Alms may be more acceptable.

Cast thy Bread upon the Waters.] We may understand by these Waters, all those
that are most subject to Tears, the Sick and Friendless, and such as are any
way brought into Distress: The Stranger, the Widow, and Fatherless, that go
hand in hand, throughout the Scripture.

All those sad objects of Pity, that are not only sent into this World, to show
what the Lord is able to do, but also, what Flesh and Blood deserves to suffer,
(and more than that, to make Experiment of what Men are willing to do for GOD,
our great Benefactor) are sent hither to be Receivers of our Charity: You may
read their Errand in their Faces, and their Commission in Scripture; where GOD
passes His Word for the Foundation of the Charitable Man's Merit; and gives
His Justice and Honor to be Security for your Repayment: It Is this Infallible
Word of God, upon which you put the Adventure; these Waters would deceive you,
without that Word's Assurance: For, what Recompense can you expect from the
meanest Abject, from such as are loaded with this World's Injuries, with
Losses, or with Nature's Imperfections?

It Is the way of many of those that stand upon good Bottoms (as to this Life)
to make use of the Times, and of all Expedients, to Advance or Secure their
Fortunes, to Court those that are in high Places, and Flatter such as are in
Authority; whereas GOD gives us an Original of another nature, Exalting the
Humble, and Filling the Hungry, while the Rich are sent away Empty; not out of
Hatred to their Persons, but because He has already conferred upon them
extraordinary Favors, and rendered them (before) remarkable Objects of his
Bounty; those Waters are Fluxive and Inconstant: Court the Waves, and they will
Drown you for your Kindness: Yes, and much like that, is the Temper of the
poorest sort of People; Give them, and they will throw themselves upon you, and
throw Dirt in your Face; yet their Aspersions shall but add weight to their own
Sorrow, and imperfect Comfort.

The Waters you Feed, shall threaten your Ruin with their raging Motions and
Inconstancy; yet the Command runs, you must Feed these Waters, though it is the
Nature of them to let the Benefit sink and disappear: Fear not, it is in their
Will, but not in their Power, either to hide or to drown your works of Mercy:
And, for your Encouragement, remember these Waters, even the poorest Vassals
are made for your Ease, your Honor, and your Advantage; make it your business
to employ them in the best manner: These Waters will do you good, if you
understand their Uses; there is a way for you to be Charitable to the Poor, and
at the same time receive profit by their Service. It is an Element that is an
useful part of the World; and without the Poor, the Rich knows not how to
Subsist.

Livy, long ago, made Three sorts of Men, and his division is thus far
verified; there has always been a Governing part, and a Teaching part among
Men; and there is a Third sort, that seem to have been Born merely for Labor
and Obedience. He that has his Talent in his Head, or in his Coffer, must
employ such as have it in their Hands and Feet; by which, they may serve
themselves with the just and necessary Comforts of this Life, and, at the same
time, prove Benefactors.

Cast thy Bread upon the Waters.] intimating, we are obliged to do Good,
without Grudging, as if what thou Give were to Perish; not looking to
perpetuate thy Name, or obtain a present Applause; not expecting so much as a
verbal Recompense from the Receiver. Write upon the Sea, with the best of
Pencils, and a Man of exquisite Sight shall not find there one legible
Character: No more should we perform acts of Charity, for Sight or Ostentation;
because the Good Works that are most secretly carried, shall be most, and most
openly Rewarded; yet there is a Time, when Good Works ought to be Visible, and
so to be Transacted, that they may be discerned:

1. For Distinction, that a good Christian may be signalized by his Charity.

2. For the Example and Encouragement of others; such Lights are now a days
wanting, to those that are misled in the ways of Darkness.

GOD has so ordered his Blessings, that many times visible Good Works, and
public Rewards meet, and are as the noise of so many Waters: The flux, reflux,
and freedom of Motion in that Element, teaches us to multiply Good Works, and
give Alms Liberally: The Lord loves the Cheerful Giver, whose Acts of Charity
resemble the Waves rolling one upon another.

Whoever communicates his Bread unwillingly, more to deliver himself from the
Petitioner's Importunity, than for the sake of Christ, or in obedience to his
Commands; that Man, surely, either distrusts GOD's Knowledge, or his Promises,
imagining his Master is ignorant of his Estate, or his Meaning; or he dares not
trust Him, to requite his Kindness.

Will you hear another Reason, that may prevail with us to Cast our Bread upon
the Waters; It is, because those Waters, by their several Channels, return to
their Head and Fountain. CHRIST is that Head, Source, or Spring of those
Waters, on which our Bread is to be scattered. Christ is styled Shiloh in our
English Bibles, signifying a Fountain of living Waters: The Poor stream from
Him; and, by them, our Charity shall suddenly be returned into Christ's Bosom:
For this, among other Reasons, our Shiloh, the Savior of the World, did appear
Poor, and destitute of Friends, and Temperal Comforts, to promote, and to make
Trial of the World's Charity.

Care is to be taken, that the Frowns of the Alms-giver may not sour the Bread
he bestows; but let a liberal hand, and a cheerful Heart, accompanied with
Affability, render the Gift more obliging, and the Gratuity more valuable; so
will your Kindness every where be welcome; so will it be manifest, you Give for
the Love of Christ, and not merely in hopes of a Requital: He that shows
Mercy, let him do it with Cheerfulness, says the great Doctor of the Gentiles,
Romans 12. 2 Cor. 9. 7. From such a Generous Mind proceeds the Name of
Liberality, says Seneca, in his Tract of Benefits; whose Sentences, more than
Moral, seem Abstracts of that Evangelical Doctrine, which St. Paul Taught the
Romans, to whom Seneca was a Friend, and some think a Disciple: Those Gifts are
less acceptable that casually fall, or have been extorted by vehement
entreaties; but of the Two, the first are most grateful; that is, where a
Kindness that was designed for one Party, happens, against the Will of the
Donor, to be the Lot of another; which sometimes comes to pass, through a
mistake, by our particular Providence.

A good Christian will approve himself habitually Kind; and he will, in
preparation of Mind, always remain Charitable. This readiness to Give, is
pleasing to Heaven, as much as to the longing Receiver; whose desire is not
prevented, although his Demands are, by the greatest expedition that can be used
in dispensing your Bounty: ('it is in these cases, that speedy Help is double
Assistance; Multaque gratius venit quod facili, quam quod plena manu datur.) It
matters not, whether the Hand be full, so as it be ready to communicate.

The Person that doubts or delays to relieve the Poor, shows some
unwillingness; and while he takes time to consult the case, and defers his
Answer, by causing the Petitioner too long to wait upon his Pleasure, he spoils
the Benefit.

Go, and come again to Morrow, are the words of no good Christian, and but of
an ill Neighbor: It Is a subtle sort of Denial, that proves the more cruel,
because it is Politic. I would choose rather to refuse the Mendicant's Request
at once, than twice to Answer him coldly; so as my delays, by tyring the poor
Creatures Patience, shall force him to seek that Assistance from others, which
is in my Power to contribute. Such is the spiritual Nature of all Works of
Mercy, they are apt to evaporate by slow effusions; whereas he that suddenly
Gives, by shortning the Time, doubles the Receiver's Profit. You cannot be
delighted with the Sighs, Groans, and Tears of Christians, almost Pined and
Naked; Must the sorrowful Accents of the Poor, awaken your dull Charity? Then
suppose your self as much in Want, and as importunate, imploring at the Gate of
Heaven, of GOD, for Mercy; then imagine an Angry Judge delaying to give Ear to
your Complaints: Why should not that GOD you have so much, and often Offended,
use you with the same vigor, and examine you with the same strictness? Why
should he not hear, before your Face, ill Neighbors accusing you with Violence
and Falsehood; scarce permitting you to plead in your own defense? Why should he
not take all advantage of your Pleading? This is your way; and therefore, no
more than in Justice you ought to expect. Forbear your hopes of Mercy, after
your Death, which in your Life you have refused to extend to your afflicted
Brother.

Cast thy Bread upon the Waters.] Remember it is an Element of Universal use,
in which all plead a freedom; designed for the Benefit of all Creatures; and
such is the nature of Charity; It Is universally communicable, and ought to be
every where flowing. We are obliged, not only to Give, but to Give universally,
without respecting the Person, or enquiring too severely into the occasion, or
other circumstances of his Decay: Hear Saint Paul publishing this Doctrine,
Gal. 6. Do good unto all Men: It Is a general Rule, without exception; yet there
is a Remark follows in the Tenth Verse of that Chapter, That it ought to be
done to the Household of Faith especially; directing our Alms to be distributed
in a more particular manner to some, than to others.

Receive the Rule therefore in this Sense, Do good to All, but to some more
eminently; Give there, and Give yonder, but Give here more plentifully; Allow
them, but Maintain these; there Relieve, but here Support: You must look upon
the Household of Faith as your own Family, that calls for your Paternal Care and
Conduct, as the Neighborhood does for your Kindness.

The best next, are those good Offices showed to your Country: Then all Men,
and the whole World of Pagans, so far as they Want, and you are able to
Contribute, are become Objects of your Charity: For all good Christians are so
far from wishing, and so much further from endeavoring the Confusion of any
Person, that they make it their daily business; not only to pray for the
Conversion of All, but uses all Means, at all Times, to benefit their Souls
with their Bodies.

Truly, that Mandate for Alms is very large, St. Luke 6. 30. Give to every Man
that asks, etc. and He that Imposes that Command, is Lord of all that we
Possess: And that we may afford so to Give, He has made us as large a Promise,
St. Matthew 7. Ask, and you shall have; Seek, and you shall find, etc. St.
Jerome, with an Eye upon these words of our Blessed Savior, says, We must do
Good without Discretion; not Setting, but Sowing; not Planting, but Scattering
our Acts of Charity; not using too much Exactness, but all manner of Freedom in
Giving; so shall we reconcile to our selves a multitude of Blessings. Thus are
we encouraged by the Prophet Isaiah, Blessed are you that Sow beside all Waters.

The Evangelical Seer herein imitates the Language of Solomon, Cast thy Bread
upon the Waters, etc. Ben. Sira, varies the Phrase, saying, Scatter thy Bread
upon the Waters, and upon firm Land also: By Firm Land, he means Men of
Estates, Men that are in no Want, as Magistrates, and Temporal Powers, (they
are the Terra sirma,) and the Rule is, to make this Commandment of Charity
extend to that great Duty of Obedience, to which the Jews, as well as we, had
enough to be Exhorted; that their Man of Israel desired should include all sort
of Allegiance, which is a Debt of the Subject, to the Supreme Power of the
Nation; but because this is a Tiffany piece, that will abide but gentle
touches. I shall leave the Rabbi to manage his own Argument: It Is certain,
Love comprehends all that we owe to Superiors, as well as Inferiors; and we
ought to Obey the Higher Powers; more for Conscience sake, than Terror.

This is the meaning of those Doctors, that tell us, Dominion is founded in
Love, and that by Love, the World is Governed: But, while I am discoursing of
Alms, I shall confine the Words of Solomon to a more narrow Signification: And
forsaking the notion of the Rabbi, side with that of the Philosopher, Vbiamque
homo beneficio est locus; Wherever a Man is, there is place for a Benefit; for
where there is a Man, there is Misery; which, as soon as he declares, we are
obliged to show him Mercy. When the Poor Man stands at thy door, in
expectation of thy Kindness, be careful your Examinations of his Person, his
Parentage, his Education, his Country, his manner of Living, be not over
tedious or detrimental; not made to protract Time, or find Excuses, or that you
may take occasion of Denial: Yet you may lawfully question the Party concerned,
as the Mariners did Jonah; Who art thou? Where is thy Habitation? What Is your
Employ? Not as a News-monger, or one fond of Idle Stories; but as a good
Christian, to discourage Idleness, and promote Piety: Not looking for eminent
Virtues in the Beggar, nor demanding large Testimonials; as if you were to
bestow an Office, or bequeath him your Estate; as if you were not then designed
to relieve his present Wants, but to reward his Merits: Enquire only for
God's-sake, and Give for God's-sake, from GOD alone expecting a Recompense.

What if these Waters are many? What if they rise higher and higher upon our
Practice? Fear not the failure of your Estate, because the Sacrifices are
frequent and numerous; because Alms is derived from the Corruption of the
Greek, Eleemosynary, [(...)] whose Root is Mercy, [(...)] of which Christ is
the Fountain, and that Fountain is inexhaustible: Yet there is a Barbarous
Author, derives Elemosynary, from two words of the Hebrews, viz. Eli, God; and
Mois, Water; and to confirm his Derivation, He styles Alms, the Dew of Heaven.
The Gentleman seems to have been no great Proficient either in Greek or
Hebrew; for He might have taken his Etymology, with as great Reason, from Elias
and Moses; and from that inferred, Charity comprehends the Whole Law, and the
Prophets.

But, leaving Etymologies, Alms is defined a work of Mercy, Love, and
Liberality, persormed only for GOD's sake, to some necessitated Persons. In the
Work, there is to be considered somewhat within us [ aliquid intus] so as,
looking at home, we find it a Christian Act of Mercy; but if we look abroad, it
appears an external Act of Charity, that is exerted in Obedience to the Divine
Commandment: We make it a Beauty, by putting upon it the becoming Face of
Liberality: It Is conceived by Compassion; but Love gives it the hand of
Accomplishment. A Bountiful Hand and Heart, oblige even those that Hate you, by
making their Favors Public; and, by this happy way of doing well, bribe their
Enemies into good Nature.

If you desire to see the Mother of Alms, let me tell you, first, if she could
appear in Human Shape, nothing but Truth could vye Beauty with her; for her
Name is Charity: She is spotted with Stars, and spangled with Divine Graces.
Here give me leave to say, That Almsgiving is a good Work, and is Meritorious;
but the Merit is not placed upon the bare human Act, but upon the Grace of
GOD's Holy Spirit, and upon his never-failing Promise, which are the Grounds,
and constitutive Principles of all Merit. It Is not us, but the Grace of God
working in us, and the Third Person of the Holy Trinity, co-operates with us,
that deserves GOD's Notice, and his Recompense, [ Principia meritorum omnium
sunt Divina:] Yet not excluding the Will and Disposition of the Almsgiver, that
has the Honor, in all good Works, to cooperate with his Maker. GOD is Love;
and all Works of Love, partake so much of the Divine Nature, that they must
needs be Crowned. But this Discourse relates to the Promise; yet we were
Treating of the Commandment, which injoyns us to Give; weighing the Receiver's
Wants, but over-looking his Deserts; for we are not bidden to Taste those
Waters, that we are to cast our Bread upon, to prove, whether they are Sweet or
Bitter; for, who-ever gives Alms, not because GOD has so Commanded, but
because he supposes either the Poor have Merited so much at his hands already,
or now do, or will hereafter deserve his Charity; that Person, to speak
properly, gives not an Alms, but discharges the Debt, and stateth an Account.
So he that gives not merely for the Lord's-sake, but in hopes of some Human
Requital, instead of bestowing his Alms, he purchases a Kindness, and makes
himself an Interest. The especial attract of Alms, ought to be Divine Love,
without any by-respect to Temporal Returns, or the Merits of the Receiver.

Why should I tire you with Repetitions? Effects of Love ought to be enlarged
only to such as are really Necessitated; for Want is the proper Object of
Mercy. Where there is no Want, there may be Favors, Gifts, and Presents, but
no perfect Charity.

Thus far in reference to the Definition: The Division of Alms has anciently
been in Seven Spiritual Acts, respecting the Soul: 1. To Pray for. 2. To
Forgive. 3. To Admonish. 4. To Instruct. 5. To Counsel. 6. To Comfort: And, 7.
To Forbear.


And in Seven more, as pertinent to the Body.

1. To Feed the Hungry, and give Drink to the Thirsty; which some divide, and
make Two different Offices; but I take it as one and the same Act of
Benevolence, putting in the second place, viz. 2. Assistance, or Protection of
the Weak, from Bodily Dangers. 3. To Cloth the Naked. 4. To Lodge the
Harbourless. 5. To Visit the Sick. 6. To Bury the Dead: And, 7. To Redeem the
Captive, and c.
These are principal Acts of Charity, which affords us a mighty Prospect into a
large Field of Discourse, but somewhat beside our present business: I desire
only to lead you to this Duty; to that end, setting before you, how much good
those best of Men, that went before us, have performed for our Example: If we
look no farther than the Jews, ( GOD's Select People) they were enjoined every
Third Year, To Tithe the increase of their Lands a Second Time, for Charitable
Uses, (after they had Tythed it once for the maintenance of the Clergy:) So we
read, Deuteronomy. 14. They gave a Tithe extraordinary designed for an Alms, to Four
sorts of People: 1. The Stranger. 2. The Fatherless. 3. The Widow: And, 4. The
Poor Infirm Levite, that could not Officiate.


And in Harvest, they were forbidden the Reaping every Corner of their Fields,
and might not gather up the Gleanings: They were not permitted to pull every
Cluster of Grapes in their Vintage: Nor to beat every Bough of their Olives:
Nor to fetch a Sheaf forgotten.

These were Elemosynary parcels, designed for the Relief of all that were Poor
and Afflicted. These Statures are recorded, Levit. 19. 23. And the same
Commands, and Prohibitions, we find Deuteronomy. 24. rendering this single, as
sufficient, I am the Lord, your God; which adds force to the Mandate, and puts
a period to the Duty: as if the Sacred Volume had thus declared; Murmur not at
these Orders, nor grudge such considerable Leavings; for, I am the Lord, you
are but Tenants at Will: All you possess, is Mine: It is an Honor I do you, to
give you the Title: You hold your Lands, your Lives, your All, of Me, by
certain Services, and by Courtesy: I am the Lord; the Property Resides in Me:
There is nothing yours, at most, but by Will, or by Copy; so as you have no
Right to Ingrose the good things of this Life, or to hold them in durance. I am
the Lord; from Me you receive all your Treasure; therefore, fear not Poverty: I
gave you this, and can give you more; take My Word, your Alms shall be doubled
in Blessings, and restored into your Bosoms.

The Jews were Commanded not only to be Charitable in the Field, but had a
plain Statute for Almsgiving, at their own Houses, Deuteronomy. 15. If there is a
Poor Man among thy Brethren, within thy Gates, thou shall not harden thy Heart,
nor shut thy Hand from thy poor Brother; but thou shall open thy Hand wide, and
thy Heart shall not be grieved, when thou Give.

Observe in the Text, Three Motives to Compassion.

1. The Man is Poor. 2. He is near in Blood, One among thy Brethren. 3. He is
within thy Gates.
Let his Poverty make you sensible of his Want: Let his Relation move you to
Pity: Let his Neighborhood inflame your Affection. And you may there take
notice of Two directions in Giving:

1. Dispense your Alms with a hand wide open; that is, Give Bountifully.

2. With a willing Heart, free from Grudging.

These latter Authorities are derived from the Law that was given at Mount
Sinai. Let us now here the Prophets.

David makes it a Characteristical Note of a good Man, to be Merciful; and
holds giving Alms the best use of an Estate, Psalm. 72. 2. He names it the
great work of the Messiah, to Defend the Poor, Heal the Infirm, and Succor the
Afflicted.

Solomon, his Son, informs us, Prove. 29. 7. A Righteous Man considers the
cause of the Poor; adding in the 14. ver. of the same Chapter, The King that
faithfully judges the Poor, shall have his Throne Established: And this is the
Wisest of Monarchs.

You may read in the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, The way to Divine and Eternal
Honor, is dealing thy Bread to the Hungry, lodging Exiles, covering the Naked;
and, in a strange Phrase, to draw out thy Soul to the Empty: Then He continues,
Thy Light shall arise from Obscurity, thy pristine Darkness shall become Light,
and resemble the Sun in its Glory. This is the Evangelical Prophet.

We read in the 22. Chap. of Ezekiel, GOD threatens the Jews with many
terrible Judgments, for Oppressing the Stranger, and Vexing the Fatherless and
Widow. This is the Priest of the Captives, transferred with Jehoiachim.

Daniel makes Alms the truest sign of sincere Repentance; and will have
Charity put into the definition of the Righteous. This is the Man of Visions,
to whom all Changes, which should concern the Jews, from the Babylonian
Captivity, to the general Resurrection, was Revealed. These preceded the
Messiah; and their Writings make the biggest part of the Old Testament. Let us
now consult the Gospel.

To begin with the Baptist. These Alms are the good Fruit He demands; Fruit fit
for Penitents to produce. Our dear Master Preaches the same Doctrine, St. Luke
II. Give Alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean unto
you: As if C HRIST had told us, Alms are instead of all Levitical
Purifications; and are accepted in Heaven sooner than the curious Prescription
of Moses. Love is a Flame that cleanses better than the Legal Rites; and a
Fire that is consistent with Holy Water; the small Sacrifices of Christian
Love, recommended in the New Testament, have Virtues Superior to the first
Fruits, and those greater ones of the Old Testament: They have power to
Sanctify our Whole Estate, to make it Firm and Fertile, and to propagate it
with our Issue. It Is more Blessed to Give, than to Receive; that is a Maxim of
the Blessed JESUS, which his Apostles and Disciples did approve; and every true
Christian will acknowledge.

St. Peter mightily presses us to Christian Love, and Hospitality, 1. Ep. cap.
1. ver. 22. Seeing you have purified your Souls, in Obeying the Truth, through
the Spirit, and to unfeigned love of the Brethren, see that you love one
another with pure Heart fervently. This is the Prince of the Apostles.

St. John speaks of nothing so much, as Love and Charity, 1 Ep. St. John,
cap.4. Let us Love one another, for Love is of GOD, and c. This is the Beloved
Disciple.

St. James extols good Works much, and with some vehemence promotes Charity;
deriding the Solifidian Professors, that have nothing, [(...),] besides a
strong credulity; with which Julian upbraided some early Believers, that
expected Salvation by Faith only. This James was the first Christian Bishop of
the Holy City Jerusalem.

St. Paul, whose Writings too many wrested to their own Destruction; which was
one cause some other Apostles wrote so little, and some wrote nothing: He was
careful and zealous to deal with the first Christians of Rome, and those in
Greece and Asia, for a Collection, as St. Peter, St. James, and St. John had
charged him, when he first Traveled to make Proselytes, Gal. 2. And this is
the great Doctor of the Gentiles.

Will you have another added to these Four great Apostles. The Author of that
Learned Epistle to the Hebrews, writes in this manner, To do Good, and to
Communicate forget not; for with such Sacrifices GOD is well pleased. If you
will contend, that Epistle was Written by St. Paul, I shall be content to Humor
you, seeing the Doctrine of good Works shall receive no disparagement by his
Authority.

Thus far the Duty has been ratified by Precepts: But Examples are more
forcible motives to Well-doing, and are as numerous in the Bible; pointing out
to Christians (as so many Mercuries) the direct way to Felicity.

Abraham, sitting at the door of his Tent, looks for some weary Traveller, to
whom he may give an Instance of his Charity; who, for his repeated Works of
Mercy, deserved the Reverend Title of the Father of the Faithful.

Lot, standing at the Gate of his City, does expect some distressed Stranger to
make experiment of his Kindness, and Taste his Hospitality; He gave the
wandering Passenger a Meeting, lest he should be prevented in his Courtesies.
This was an Oriental Prince and Prelate, Patron of the Five Cities, and Lord of
Zoar.

It was the custom of Job, to entertain the Fatherless in his House, and invite
the Poor to his own Table. This Man, if you will have it so, was High Priest of
Hierapolis, and Prince in Arabia.

Solomon, in such Practices, was Exemplary; showing himself in Love, as well as
Empire, a Successor to his Father David. This Man, after God's own Heart,
thought himself not degraded by particular Acts of Devotion and Charity. He
knew how to reconcile Love and Honor; and reputed himself no less a King, for
distributing, at certain Seasons, a Loaf of Bread, a Flaggon of Wine, and a
Portion of Flesh, to every single Person of his decayed Subjects.

Observe how the Jews, when they were returned from their Captivity, celebrated
their Festivals with remarkable Contributions. Their Forms of Devotion ended,
they did enjoy themselves in a generous participation of Delicacies; they drank
freely, to Cheerfulness, not to Excess, and dispatched away Provisions to the
Poorest Families, that they might be sharers in the Joy, and the Feast, which
they were not able to furnish; and be made Partakers in the Gratitude they paid
to Heaven, by showing themselves pleased for National Blessings.

We read Genesis 21. 33. of the Patriarchs Grove, which, the Rabbis inform us,
was planted purposely for Charitable Entertainments; which they gather, because
the Letters of the Name [(...) Eshel, a Grove] signify by Cabalism, Meat,
Drink, and Lodging; viz. Achilah, Sh(...)tyan, Linah.

To pass from the Jews to the Christians; How are the Churches of Achaia and
Macedonia celebrated in St. Paul's Epistles, for their generous Contributions?
The Prayers and Alms of Cornelius ascended to GOD, showing their Master the way
to Heaven: And though both are very laudable, yet the Fathers ascribe to Alms the
pre-eminence.

So to Live, and practice Religion, is to accomplish the Laws, and comply with
the Will of Solomon: It Is to do more than that comes to; for Solomon was but a
Type of Christ: But to exercise Love, is to follow the steps of Christ himself,
and to obey the Dictates of the Supreme Master; who, having no Purse-bearer for
Himself, had always a Treasurer for the Distressed; and daily wrought Miracles,
to satisfy their Wants in the Wilderness; choosing rather to Fast Forty Days,
than to multiply Loaves for appeasing his own Hunger; He having no House to
hide his Head in, laid his Commands upon the Heavens, that his Followers might
be freed from the Injuries of the ill Weather. While he was contentedly
deprived of ordinary conveniences, He was not contented his Disciples should
suffer; but, for their sakes, made use of his Divinity, that He might show
Himself Hospitable in the Desert.

It Is not for Men alone to pretend to, or claim the Glory that attends
Christian Love; for Women seem naturally more Compassionate. Sacred and
Profane Story will furnish us with Infinite Precedents of their Charity: The
Zereptan Widow, to relieve the Prophet Eliah, hazzards the Pining of her self,
and her Son, and puts to the adventure, all the sad accidents of a miserable
Famine. Another cast Two Mites into the Corban, (or Sacred Treasury) from which
the Poor of all sorts were Relieved. It was her Whole Pittance; and to approve
her self Charitable, she runs the Risk of the most disconsolate effects of
Poverty. Charity (the Name is Feminine, and) has always been Pictured in the
Shape, and with the Features of a Beautiful Woman: The Christian Church takes
delight in the rehearsal of the Names of her loving, and her officious
Daughters: She has many such as Dorcas, that employ, and please themselves in
Lodging Strangers; in working admirable Pieces for Temples and Altars; and
designing their Studies and Portions for the public Uses of True Religion.
They exercise their Christian Virtues, by giving Alms daily, Washing the Saints
Feet, Visiting the Sick, and Comforting all those that are in any manner of
Affliction.

Credible Historians acquaint us with the Hospitality of the Ancient City
Bretinore, in Italy; how the Burgesses vyed Bounty, and strived to exceed one
another, in putting Obligations upon Strangers. So great was their emulation to
do good, that, in sine, they determined to Erect a Collume in their Market, to
which Brazen Rings in Plates were fastened; upon those Plates, the Names of all
the Noted Families in Town were Engraven'd; all Strangers were carried thither,
and made choice of one of those Names for their Reception: The House, to which
the Stranger by choice desired to resort, was forthwith informed, by one of the
daily Waiters; the Master of the Family thereupon came rejoicing, and conducted
his Guests, that was sometimes miserable Poor, to his House, with signs of
Triumph: And, why not? seeing Charity goes attended with Reward and Victory.

It Is not always, that we ought to do well with so much Solemnity: For many
times, Works of Mercy are best performed with privacy. Sound not a Trumpet when
thou give Alms, says our dear Master, St. Matthew 6. No, not a Trumpet, says
Chrysologus; because such Kindness, attended with a Noise, comes not so much
like a Friend, as like an Enemy: It seems to Insult over the Wants of the
Receiver, and to assault his Modesty. This is not to Relieve so much, as to
Triumph over thy poor Brother. It is worse: It is an upbraiding of GOD, as if
He was beholding to your Favor, and could not enable that poor Heart to
Subsist without your Charity. If that be the English way of giving Alms, such
Donors must pay themselves with the popular Name of Patriots, or Benefactors to
the Public. They must forbear their Pretensions to future Recompense; because
our Great Master declares, they have their Reward. The prevailing Prayers of
the Poor, and the neverfailing Promise of GOD, shall prove but of small
advantage to their mistaken Souls, that had no respect to either of them, in
their Almsgiving, but only to the Applause of the People.

Let it suffice, that GOD discerns thy Bounty; make Him only thy Witness, that
is to be thy Judge; and the Righteous GOD shall make Requital, that knows how
much confidence you repose in his Justice. You may remain assured, He that
would not have the Left Hand know what the Right Hand gives, will not allow
you to tell them that will tell every Body, how much you bestow. Give Alms
there, where there is no Man to discover it, and Thy Father, which sees in
Secret, will Reward you openly.

Thus we have Traverst the Commandment: Let us proceed to the Promise; Thou
shall find thy Bread, after many Days, which thou do cast upon the Waters.

Seeing Riches are valuable Blessings, such as afford us in this Life no
despicable Comforts; it concerns us to know, for whose sake, and upon what
account, we cast them away; for it is somewhat to deprive our selves, and our
Posterity, of their Service: Hear me, therefore, and acknowledge the Charitable
Practices of the Church, to be sounded upon the highest Reason. You will be
loath to part with your Treasure, but upon the best Security; you shall have
the best Word of a King, and a Priest; and They are both inviolable. Solomon
ingages his Honor, that you shall find it; which is as much as to secure you,
you shall be no Losers. What you scatter upon the Waves, does not Perish; but
the Stream will return to restore your Kindness.

Have you never seen a Ship, of good Burden, Laden with the Richest
Merchandise, Arrive in a safe Haven? She carries out of the Owners sight; She
makes a Voyage of many days; yet, at length, she returns her Treasure upon the
Exchange, and brings the Adventurer an advantageous Cargo.

But the Ship may be wrackt, and there the Lading may Perish: But Here you run
no such hazard: For, supposing the Poor should Miscarry, your Alms will be
safely conveyed to the Port; for the Bearer is no sooner out of your Door, or
the Gift out of your Hand, but GOD takes it into his Protection and Custody:
Holy Angels are the Convoy, and CHRIST looking upon the Donative, now to be
Consecrated, undertakes to balance all Losses. He considers of Gains, to place
to the Donor's Account, and of a way to double your Interest: The Lord charge
himself with the Gift, wherever it is; and therefore does not allow you to
demand or expect Repayment, by Word or Deed, from a Third Person.

Let it be the part of Publicans and Sinners, to Feast their thriving
Neighbors; while He that designs to perform Acts of Charity, must, by his
Invitations, make the Sick, the Blind, and the Lame, his Guests, and those poor
People that want a Dinner: So shall he be Blessed; so shall he make himself a
growing Interest: If he dare take the Word of the World's Messiah, he shall not
fail to be Rewarded at the Resurrection of the Just, St. Luke 14. which some
offer to assert, shall precede the general Resurrection. The Reward is certain,
Thou shall find it; the Terms are positive. Our good Deeds cannot pass
unregarded: Not a Cup of cold Water; not a Morsel of Bread, shall escape GOD's
Notice, or fall short of His remuneration.

Thou shall find it; Thou thy self. It Is a strange Kindness, that all Persons
have for their own Flesh and Blood: Men are now adays, more than ever, Lovers
of themselves; and they will adventure that upon their own Heads, which they
dare not trust upon the Heads of their Children and Relations. What Man is he,
that possesses an Estate or Honors, which he desires not to continue for
ever? Behold a way to preserve your Dignities, and hold your Manors to
Eternity! Convert them into Solomon's Bread, and Cast them upon the Waters; it
will prove pregnant of Blessings, and, resembling good Seed, it will continue
to grow and ripen, and to yield an everlasting Harvest: You shall find it,
after many days, in Heaven.

Suppose a Man as Solicitous as can be, to Get and Save; it is not in his Power
to secure his Estate upon Earth, so much as to the Fourth Generation.
Notwithstanding his Gains, he has no certainty, but that Poverty shall seize
his Sons or Nephews: But if you covet, to secure your Possessions to the Third
and Fourth Generation, take the Measures here prescribed by Solomon. You shall
not only leave an Assurance to the Third Heir, but you shall also retain what
you give away: And, changing the Property by those Alms you bestow, you shall
both make it theirs, and your own for ever. It Is only so much of your Estate,
that you can possibly lose, as you are not free to impart: For all that you
give in the way of Charity, you shall surely find; and reckon so much goes
toward the making your Spiritual Body the more Glorious; and to purchase for
you one of those many Mansions, in the House of our Heavenly Father; where
every token of Christian Love shall appear an Ornament to the Donor, to render
him bright as a Star, and serve his Appartment, instead of Painting and
Coronish. Why, good Sir, should you then demand or expect a Requital at the
Hand of him that Receives the Boon? As if you knew not the Man to be GOD's
Receiver; or, as if you were altogether unacquainted with the Disposition of
that Just and Bountiful Master he serves. Would you have many Thanks returned?
Or, would you be highly Courted? Or, basely Flattered out of your Benevolence?
Thanks and Praises are but indifferent Bribes; they pay no Debts, but only
serve to corrupt Servile Spirits: Make your self greater than that, and
manifest more Honor than that comes to; for to disburse considerable Sums for
those base ends, is no part of Charity, but an ill Exchange.

Where real Effects are Bartered for Oily Words, and Slavish Gestures; [Gratis
non datur quod gratiis venditur,] so doing, you sell your Kindness, and make
but a bad Market; because, at the same time, you lose Possession of that you
had, and lose sight of your Play Master. If that be your way to distribute
Bread, for the sake of respective Honors and Address, you must compound with
them for the whole Debt; and accepting less than half Pay, for the Whole, take
your leave of additional Blessings, and future Glory; choosing to take the Word
of a a Beggar, rather than the Word of GOD; you lose, at an Instant, both your
Commemoration and Requital.

When your meaning is to find your Bread, give it upon GOD's Account, that GOD
may become your Debtor; so shall the Bread thou do dispense, nourish thy own
Soul unto Life everlasting.

Thou castest Bread upon the Waters, which vary themselves in many Figures, and
often change their condition; yet, through the Divine Power, and Truth, it is
reserved for your Use, and the Bread is found again; intimating, how the
Substance of all things is perserv'd entire, and lives Eternally.

The Bread which you lately did impart, you have given over for lost: It Is not
so, your Fear imposes upon your Reason; the same shall be returned in another
Nature, and in a larger measure. How, are you qualified to Receive, but are not
contented to Give? Is it your design to put limits to Providence, and confine
this World to rest in your Coffers, that was created in Motion?

The Gift is put here, by an happy Figure, for that Fruit and Recompense,
which, after many days, follows the Act of Giving, it is so contrived, to
render the Giver as certain of the One, as ever he was sure of the Other: As
there is upon Earth, a Communion of Saints, maintained by certain Spiritual
Acts of Devotion, mixed with Charity; so there is an everlasting Retaliation
between Alms, and its Recompense.

There is a Time set down (though not many circumstances of it,) when the
Charitable Person shall be Rewarded, after many Days, says the Royal Preacher;
so I thought, says the Miser, my patience will be tired with waiting, for the
Interest of my Money; it will be long, you say, (and I know not how long) e're
I shall be the better for that I give away. Does my Father lie the easier in
his Grave, for the Legacy he left to the Poor of the Parish? His condition
might have been more easy [Chuff] had he bestowed upon his Son better
Education; all his Cares and Prayers are lost upon you, his Successor; that
show your self ungrateful to Heaven, and to your Parents.

I leave you to Time and Torment, to correct your Mistake; but know, these
words ( After many Days) carry their own weight; a Sense so pleasing, and
include an Argument so strong, that when you, and your Ingratitude, are Buried
together, it shall serve to oblige Generations to come to the performance of
this Duty. It Is After many Days, the Charitable Man is said to find his Bread;
to signify, he shall live many Days; his Life shall not be shortened, neither
shall his Death be sudden: But his Days shall be prolonged in this World,
merely that he may do good in his Generation.

The Wicked and Blood-Thirsty Man shall not live out half his Days; for Wicked,
you may read Uncharitable, because the greater part of Wickedness proceeds from
a defect of Charity. But there shall be Days added to the Bountiful Man's
Years, as to Hezekiah's; until his Years, with his Virtues, increase beyond the
number of his Hairs, and procure for him everlasting Benedictions, and
Embellishments.

Thou shall find it after many Days: It Is as if the Wiseman had said, Thou
shall live many Days, to do good with thy Riches; and, when thou have finished
thy Course, of multiplying good Offices to thy Brethren; then, After many Days,
thou shall find an Heavenly Treasure, to the Accomplishment of thy Felicity.
Think not the time long, because the Pay is certain; think it not tedious,
because at that time, Blessings are growing for thy Comfort, and multiplying
for thy Use and Advantage. Why should you think the Time long, when all Time is
inconsiderable, less than a Minute, compared with that Eternity, which shall
afford you an Abyss of Joys, and Treasures, that can never Perish?

Thou shall find it after many Days: There is a Time set a part, in the secret
Will of GOD, wherein the Lord has decreed to make you a plenary Requital. Not
of some Earthly thing, which is Transitory; but full Pay, and of a nature
Spiritual, Glorious, and Permament. It may be, what you give away to Day, you
would have again to Morrow; the Seed you Sow, does not grow with that
Expedition; you must allow it Time to dye, and to revive again; and to grow,
before it can ripen to Harvest: But you dare trust Earth further than Heaven.
If you will have your Reward before its due time, you must have it imperfect,
as immature Fruit gathered out of Season.

But, my Advice is, and it is Solomon's, To give it leave to come to
Perfection; so shall you be sure to find it, After many Days, such as you
desire to have it, in all points absolute.

It Is the Will of GOD, that as He forbears to Punish us many Days, and many
Days waits for our Amendments; so we should add Patience to Charity, that, at
once, the Two Virtues may be Crowned.

However, for our greater Encouragement, there are present Renumerations
appointed for those that are Charitable; they shall have their Wishes very much
gratified in this World, and in the World to come, their Hopes shall expire in
a happy Fruition. Here, in this Life, you shall receive the Wages of Love, in a
good measure; but, in the next, you shall enjoy what you expect in a
satisfactory manner; or, as the Chaldee Paraphrase reads it, Plenarily. For
indeed, these words, After many Days, are principally referred to the
Resurrection, and future Glory. Can you pretend to Christian Faith and Hope,
and at the same time, Despair and Murmur? Will you prescribe your GOD the Time,
any more than the Method of Payment? Hear the Voice of our Savior! Lo, I come.
Yet you say, Where is the Promise of his Coming? If there be many Days before
Christ's Advent, there is the greater Preparation making for your Reception;
and when He comes, you will be fully satisfied for attending the Lord's Leisure.

Shorten not your Hand of Relief, because GOD pays Interest, for the whole
Time of your Forbearance: You spoil your Recompense, by coveting to have it
suddenly. Comfort your self in recollecting the good Offices you have
performed; and in a good Conscience in GOD's Promise, and in Comforts of this
Life, that are ordinarily conferred and enjoyed by the Charitable Person, as
sure Earnest of a future Reward. Have a little Patience, the Days may be many;
yet, at most, they are but Days, that will soon expire. Persist in your Godly
purposes; It Is not long, e're Mercies will plentifully return into your Bosom.

The Time of waiting is not expressed by Tears, or Months, nor by so much as
Weeks; but only by Days, that quickly come to their Period. Days are mentioned,
because a Day receives denomination from, and has reference to the Sun's
Motion; importing, how Christ, the Son of Righteousness, has in this Day many
great Works to perform in the Hearts of the Faithful; many Divine Graces to
quicken; many Methods of Holiness, and Measures of Redemption to finish; we
must not antedate our own or others Happiness. When the Work of Christ is
perfect in us, we shall surely find the Reward of our Charity.

Come then with a cheerful Heart, and a Liberal Hand; give the World an
Instance of that Love and Bounty, which appears in imparting much to many; and
shows it self with advantage in the quantity of the Gift, and the multitude of
Receivers.

He that Sows Bountifully, (or as the Greek reads, in Blessings) 2 Cor. 10.
shall Reap in Benedictions and plentifully. The Apostle there proves, That the
same Assurance the Seed-Man has of an Increase, according to the proportion of
his Sowing, that GOD will multiply his Favors upon the Alms-giver, with
equivolent augmentations of Glory.

It was David's way of Praying, and ought to be ours, Have Mercy upon us, O
Lord, according to the multitude of thy Mercies: Which is so far Doctrinal,
that we must afford a multitude of Mercies to our poor Brethren; and then we
may approach the Throne of Grace with boldness, having Assurance that our
Petitions will be Answered.

You shall find it, after many Days, says the Royal Preacher; and, though a Miser
may refuse it, yet a good Christian ought to look upon Solomon's Word, as
better Security than Bond and Judgment. You are to have Regard to the poor
Man's Wants, and at the same time, to your own Ability; and confiding in
Providence, are to Give rather more than your Estate can afford; for such is
the Advice of the discreet Nobleman to his Son; Tobit, Chap. 4. Of abundance,
Give accerdingly. Of a Little, be not afraid of giving Alms of that Little; for
thereby thou boardest up to thy self Treasure against the day of Necessity. Did
I not tell you this before? His Opinion agrees with mine; You are to live upon
the thing only which you gave away. It follows in the 10. Verse of that 4.
Chap. Alms deliver from Death; meaning Death Eternal: Where you find, in what
manner you shall be repaid your Acts of Charity, with Life everlasting.

But still you Haesitate, and look as if you would Reply, I am very loath to
part with a present Estate, without a present valuable Consideration: That is
your Mistake; you part with no present Estate, and you receive that, at
present, which ought to be your satisfaction. What would you be Recompensed
for? you have so much only, as you can use; the residue you fancy to be yours;
but there is no more yours, than you can enjoy; of a Thousand Manors, and Ten
Thousand Droves of Cattle, these may please your Eye, and your Conceit, and
with the thoughts of Possessing, you may satisfy your hungry Humors; but,
indeed, another shall enjoy as much as you. Your Parks, Woods, Warrens, and
your Game, with all the Delights and Gallantries of your Family; out of all
these, you can take no more than Meat, Drink, and Clothing; for which, a small
Estate would suffice. But, here, you are Superior to many, having wherewithal
to do good; that is, many good things trusted to your disposal; and, here, you
have a ready way pointed out, to make a Temporal Income to become Spiritual and
Eternal: for, only by giving Alms, you shall lay up for your self Treasure in
Heaven, of which you can never be deprived; and you shall forthwith receive
some Temporal satisfaction, for your Acts of Charity. For the Merciful Man
never fails of particular Blessings in this Life, by Health, Strength, Wit,
Peace, Preservation from Dangers, by sure Friends, by a good Wife, by hopeful
Children, by secret Contentment in the Mind, and Joy that is unspeakable; by a
clear Reputation, and quiet Conscience: By some or more of these Enjoyments,
the Charitable Person shall immediately find his Bread, that he has scattered
upon the Waters.

Placing, therefore, One Eye upon your present Condition, fix the Other on the
poor Man's Necessities; and let the fight of his Miseries, be the Rule of your
Mercies; for, in Almsgiving, much is but a little, where more is wanting; and
a little is much, where that little suffices.

Let the greedy Chuff plead a Distinction of thine and mine: Let him do what he
can to secure Property: Let him Intail his Lands, and enterprise all he may, to
confirm his Title, or enlarge his Possessions: Let him call Good Works a kind
of Community, and oppose Alms as much as levelling: Let him say, All that I
hold, is mine; and what wrong can I commit, by keeping my own to my self? For
my part, Sir, I love Peace and Plenty; your Speech-making ought to be directed
to them, that affect Lawless Lives, or Civil-Wars, seeking to deprive others of
their Rights, and their Inheritance. I should like Religion better, if the
Teachers were not as so many Leaches, Give, give, continually; I love to hear
them Preach up Christ Crucified, and forbear their old Popish Stories of Alms
and Good-Works: You know, there was no Beggar in Israel; and, were I
Task-Master General, there should be none lest in England. But, I think, of all
poor People, the poor Gentleman is the most importunate; his Hands is always
full of Briefs, and Letters of Request; and I seldom see one of that Tribe, but
I am feeling in my Pocket.

When you have spoken your pleasure, Nabal, against Christian Love, and
Charitable Contributions, it is but one way of wounding your self with your own
Weapon; seeing the way to make that you possess your own, is by your power of
disposal: Which, if it be never put into Act, how can you be assured you have
such a Power. By giving it a-way, we come to know it is yours; and, as without
Property, there can be no Charity; so Charity, in its several Acts, does best
confirm Property: From the Laws of Thine and Mine, you bring an ill Inference,
whereas, by Giving, those Laws are best put in Execution: You must give, not
only for the Preservation of Discipline and Order, but also for the maintenance
of your Title. Unless the Bread be yours, how can you dispose of it? There is
neither Giving, nor Obligation by Gift, where all is in common. If you peruse
the principal Causes, of the first distinction between Mine and Thine, long ago
confirmed by Custom, by the Positive Laws of GOD, and of all Nations; you will
find these, among others:

1. Encouragement to Labor, to prevent Idleness; for, where the most
Industrious, and the most Negl gent Person, were to be sharers alike of a
common Fund, too many would lie basking in the Sun, while others were Sweating
at their Employment.

2. For Preservation of Peace; they being most remote from War, that have most
to lose; who cannot soon be induced to Fight, so long as they can quietly enjoy
their Effects, and Fruits of their Labor and Industry.

3. To distinguish Families; because it appears the Will of Heaven, that some
Houses should be remarkable for Blessings, some for Virtues; and that some
should be styled, from their Inheriting of Ancient Riches, Generous and Noble;
while others should be noted, for a Dull, and Idle Generation, born under
Command, to remain Slaves and Peasants.

With this distinction, of Thine and Mine, began a Subordination of Men in
Civil Societies, for the sake of Government. But, of all these causes of
difference of Estates, none is greater than this, That there might be some
Endowed with Riches, to impart; and that there might be some poor People, to
make trial of the Rich Man's Faith in GOD's Promises, and designed for his own
Good, to make Experiment upon his Charity: That, by contributing much in this
Life, he might obtain, in the next, a more Illustrious and lasting Inheritance.
Art thou a Propriator? yet you must own a Lord in chief of all your Substance.

The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; all Lands are held of him in
Capire: So, to allege Property, when GOD Commands you to dirburse something
upon his Account, is to say somewhat that is answered by the Laws of Supreme
Right, and suspended by the degrees of Charity. It is enough, that you have the
Honor, and the Happiness of Distribution, and to reserve enough for your own
Uses: Take what suffices for your Family, defraud not your Successors; and
behold those poor People yonder, are sent to be Sharers of all that is to be
spared from You, and your Posterity: If this or that be needless to you, the
same presently becomes one of their Necessaries: And what you reserve, cannot
be so much your own, because it is overplus to your Use every way, unless you
put it to Interest, to that Company of Beads-Men: For, at the Instant you
dispose it to them, the same is entered in the Day-Book of Heaven; and out of
that Treasure, you shall be Repaid: And you shall find it, After many Days,
infinitely multiplied.

Observe, how Nature communicates; The Sun, out of his abundance of Light,
gives a Largess of it to the Moon; Lucinoe gives Alms of the Light she receives
to the Earth, that is founded in Darkness: This Earth, having no Light to
spare, freely imparts such useful Matters, as she carries, though of another
Growth and Temper, to her ungrateful Inhabitants: The Clouds, newly replenisht
with Rain, empty their Stores upon the parched Mountains; they discharging
themselves into the Rivers that overflow, pay Tribute to the wide Ocean. Nilus
and Euphrates are proud, in swelling over their Banks, to make the adjoining
Meadows Fertile. The glutted Bear and Tiger, have sometimes quitted their Prey,
to others half pined, and to Beasts less Ravenous; while the more Civiller
Creatures of every Species, have been famous in Story, for many tokens of
Affection; showing how all things, from the highest to the lowest, correspond
for a mutual Relief: Here and there is an accursed Shimei, or a churlish Nabal
excepted; that says, Who is David? Talk not to me of the King, or the Prophet;
I know not that Man in the World, for whose sake I would little my Estate:
Shall I take my Bread, and give it to Strangers? It is enough, Churl, that you
know the Petitioners to be Men; and, that you may know, every Man is of more
value, than a Mint of Gold and Silver: Would you lose a Man, for a Morsel of
Bread? Shall I take my Bread, and give it away, do thou say? It Is thy Bread,
indeed, by the Favor of a better Master than thou art; but so, that it is not
always, and every way thine. There is a certain Clause in the Conveyance, that
speaks it thy Bread to Give, not thine to withold: It Is yours to dispose of,
not to detain; the disposal of which, looks toward the Communion of Saints that
is on Earth, with those in Heaven.

There is Bread of participation in every House, as the Eucharistical Bread is
eminently such in Churches: And, for maintaining a Correspondence between
Divine and Humane Love, and their Effects, we are taught to make daily
Petitions: It Is you, Miser, that makes bold to change our Lord's Form of
Prayer; calling that Your Bread, in your selfish Language, which is called Our
Bread, in the Language of our Redeemer; And that is, and ought to be the Idiom
of all good Christians. Which word [ Our] does import a Christian Communication.

Shall I take my Bread, and Cast it upon the Waters? How dare you put such a
Question? Impudent Man, says St. Ambrose, What is thine but thy Sins? Did you
command the Earth to nourish it? the Clouds to Water it? the Sun to Ripen it?
What was yours when you came into this World, Mourning and Naked? What Silver
and Gold did thou bring in thy hands? What Furniture for a House? What
Garments for a Covering? Your Pride, in such Questions, does wrong to your
Discretion; for, all you Possess, you have received. The Richest Heir must
acknowledge himself beholding to the Rule of Charity. Here you found all at
your Entrance, and Here you shall leave all at your Departure; you shall not
carry with you so much, as is spent upon your Obsequies. All these things you
so much covet and hoard, without asking your leave, will stay behind; unless
you take this only sure way to make them yours, and carry them with you, by the
proceeding Methods of Charity: That is a way, that will certainly convey your
Lands and Goods to your future Use; which will at once, by Sanctifying them,
dedicate them Eternally to your Service.

To secure those unjust Gettings of your Ancestors, and make such a firm
Settlement of your Estate, as you desire to be made at the same time on your
Posterity; you must take Solomon's Counsel; for so will it wear well, and
endure many Generations.

Hear me farther: Is not he, that puts this Question, like the same Man, that,
in a few late Years got an Estate by Fraud and Oppression? And dare you say,
Shall I Cast my Bread upon the Waters, when all the Goods you possess, may be
so many private Wrongs, or public Grievances? Call them no more Thine, for
which you robbed Innocents, stripped Honest Men Naked, and forced others to
Beggary. You say, Must a Man impoverish Himself, to relieve Strangers? You have
a Family to maintain, Rents to pay, Farms to stock, and Houses to furnish; so
that you set an Honest Care, in opposition to Divine Charity, and give the
Servant the upper-hand of the Mistress: Whereas this Celestial Virtue, demands
only what may be spared, [(...)] such as are rather Ornaments, and Complements
of your condition, than necessaries of Nature; though these also be required, to
save the Life of a public Person of your dearest Friends, and nearest
Relations.

But your State and Place require all your have, and more: Believe me, No! both
Commands you to be Charitable: Your Honor is engaged by your Preserment, to do
good according to your Title; whatever is absolutely necessary to your Person,
is not to be sequestered by Charity, which calls for only so much as may be
spared from your Person, and your Dignity; for all that appertains to
distressed Objects, is, as to you, Superfluous. Fear not, Solomon requires none
of your Necessaries, but your Exceedings: He desires no prejudice to your Body,
but to your Vices; and, seeking your Health, offers you means to prevent
Diseases. Cannot you spare one Dish of Meat, one Loaf of Bread, one Coat, of
many, one Shilling opportunely, to keep Life in a poor Body.

Here me, Sir; Feed more at your Gates, and fewer in your Mews, Kennels, and
Stables; Consider, how you disburse in needless Accoutrements, in Foreign
Toys, in altering and furnishing your Houses. This Turret, that Cupolo might be
spared; these Marble Columns, yonder Trrass-Walks; these Thorough-Lights, them
Tapistry Hangings; that Garnishing, those Orient Jewels, be mighty chargable: I
could have spared much of this costly Pearl; and, with some of that, I would
have cased some poor Tenants: I would have Employed some poor Laborers,
Redeemed some poor Captives; I would have Lodged and Victualled some poor
Travelers; I would have set some poor Prisoners for Debt at Liberty; I would
have placed some poor Orphans Apprentices; and have given Portions for the
Marriage of some poor Maidens: Some College, or School of good Literature,
should have been Endowed; some Hospital Founded, etc. So should you make a
competent Provision for your selves, Here, and Hereafter acquire Mansions of
Eternity: So should you Live in favor of God and Man, and obtain that due
Respect from your Neighbors, which your Avarice and Vanity now makes
Counterfeit, by thus beginning to be Frugal at the right end; for Charity has
converted many Prodigals from Extravagant Courses; and, by making them Masters
of themselves, has made them Lord of great Estates; of which Christian Virtue,
those only may complain, that have small Experience.

FINIS.

