A COUNTERMINE OF UNION TO THE JESUITS Mine of Division, Whereby they Contrive
(...) Blasting of the Work of Mercy, and the Return of a Flood of Ruin and
Desolation upon this Church and Nation.

Being a short PLATFORM OF Expedients for Peace, For the Preservation of all,
and for the Repair of the Great Distractions that have bin upon us, by an Happy
Reconciliation of the Differences that are amongst us, Directed to the Right
Honorable, THE Council OF State.

By THO. VVARMSTRY, D. D.

ROMANS 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.

ROMANS 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for Peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams at the Crown in Saint Paul's Church yard.
1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD PRESIDENT AND THE Council OF State.
Right Honorable,
IT has pleased the Lord to raise you up to be Instruments of Mercy, and
Blessing, and Peace, unto this afflicted and distracted Church and Nation; He
has led you on unto this Blessed Work, by strange Operations of his Divine
Providence, by Wonderful Returns unto the prayers of his people, and by a Hand
stretched out from Heaven; He has done great Things for you, and by you, for
his people; And has set Honor and Happiness before you, that your Names may
be precious to all Generations: But yet the Work is not so secure, but that
Imprudence in some, and Violence in others, and Malice in those that are
enemies to your worthy Proceedings, are too too busy to obstruct and overturn
the glorious Business you have in Hand. There is great need of Watchfulness
and Moderation, to make way for an Happy Issue unto your Proceedings. That
therefore I may be in some measure serviceable unto GOD, and You, and his
People in This, (as we are all bound to wait upon Him and You, as his
Instruments therein) I crave leave humbly to present these short Expedients for
Peace unto your Hands, Which if you shall be pleased to accept and countenance,
The Beams of your favor, I hope, will make them grow, and bring forth the
desired Fruit; And thereby you will exceedingly Oblige

Your Humble and Faithful Servant in all the Ways of Holy and Righteous Peace,
T. VV.

EXPEDIENTS FOR PEACE.
1.THat we all labor to reconcile God unto us, and to obtain peace with him,
by an humble confession of our several sins, and true and Godly sorrow, from
them, and conversion from them and by flying unto his mercy by true faith in
Christ Jesus, for as our division from God, who is the Center of our Union, is
the fountain of all our discord with one another; so our reconciliation unto
him, must be the foundation of our reconciliation and peace with one another;
which cannot otherwise be comfortably obtained, nor firmly established, Isa.
57.23. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

2. That all spiritual Tyranny be laid aside whereby men take upon them to make
their judgments or apprehensions; and too too often their passions, and
interests, the rule of other men's consciences. And that the imposing of rules
be left unto the Magistrate and Governor.

3. That the spirit of abomination may be abandoned, whereby Satan has taught
people to reject things as wicked and impious, because others whom they dislike
embrace them. And that the faults of persons, may not be laid upon callings, or
upon their tenants.

4. That we may take heed of a private spirit, whereby people are so apt to
require, that all things may be done to the satisfaction of them, and of their
party; without any or at least an equal regard unto others, as if their
concernments were the only interest of the world, and their apprehensions or
opinions, the rules of Government to all mankind. Which abominable pride, and
uncharitable neglect of others, is the great Mine of division. But we must
remember that the design of the framing and reforming of Church Matters, is
not only to please or satisfy, those that are of this or that persuasion, but
to provide for the good of all. Not only to secure or rectify those that are
within, but also to gain and bring in those that are without, 1 Cor. 10.32. We
must give no offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God. 1 Cor. 9.21. But become all things to all men, that by all
means we may gain some. We must consider what is the concernments of Papists,
of Turks, of Jews, of Heathens, as well as of our selves; That we may remove
all impediments and discouragements from them, and give them all inducements,
and helps, that we can, to bring them into the truth. It is a very great
mistake in the reforming of things in the Church, to go as far as we can, from
those that are strangers or enemies to the truth. Indeed we should come as near
them, as God will give us leave, that we may bring them over unto us. I admire
the wisdom of our reformers in this Point, and fee and pity the follies of
those that are wifer in their own conceits; We should ask our selves some
times the question, Quota pars mundi sumus: how great a part of the World we
are. And not set such a value upon our selves, as if all the rest of the World
must be left to perish for our satisfaction.

5. That in the framing of Church Discipline and order, the weakest Christian
among us, may be most considered. Romans 15.1. For they that are strong must
bear the infirmities of the weak. but the weak cannot come up to the strength
of the Strong. Genesis 33.13, 14. Jacob must not overd-rive his Flock, but must
keep pace with the Women and Children, though Esau out-ranne them, and will not
keep them company.

6. That it be resolved that the peace of the Church, is above all Ceremonies
whatsoever. And that those things ought to be ordered not by private men, but
by Governors, as appears most conducible to edification, and conversion. And
that these walls of the Church, should be made all of Lodestone; not only to
defend those that are within by their strength, but also to draw those that are
without. And we must take heed of that foolish and pernicious error, which is
so often committed in the spiritual Architecture of these latter days.
Whereby men are so intent, upon the satisfaction and the making of the Wall,
that they forget to make the Gate, to admit others in or to let us out to them,
to do them good. And have gone about to bring the Church to the state of Laish
in too too great a measure, Judge. 18.7. To have no business with any man. We
must remember the true Church has the charge of the false and corrupt members
of the World, to endeavor to save and bring them in.

7. That all names of strife and division (as to any odious or contumelious use
of them) may be abolished, as Puritans, Presbyterians, Independents, Caveliers,
etc. that they may not be Ensigns of contention amongst us.

8. That the comprehensive way may be embraced in matters of difference That is
to say; that way, that may satisfy all as much as may be. As in the case of
Episcopacy and Presbytery, where some would have the Government to be by
Episcopacy, others by Presbytery. Let them be both joined in a moderate
subordination to end the quarrel; which is otherwise never like to be decided.

9. That the safe way where it is to be found, may silence controversies and
discourses concerning ways that are more dangerous, viz. That that which is
safe may be embraced, and that which appears questionable rejected.

10. That all the Rules of God, as well one, as another, yet in their several
orders may be acknowledged and owned, viz. 1. The Rule of truth, of holiness,
justice, and purity. 2. of Order. 3. of Charity. 4. of Expedience.


And that that wise saying of Mr. Calvin may be embraced and practiced, Sicut
Charitas fidei, ita libertas subjicienda est Charitati. As our charity is to be
subject unto our faith, so our liberty is to be subject unto our charity.

11. That there may be some of the most moderate, and sincere, uningaged of all
parties chosen, to entertain a fair discourse about matters in controversy,
and a moderatour appointed, and that this be managed in private, that weak
People may not be present, who are not able to judge of the force of an
Argument. Remembering the Rule of the holy Apostle. Romans 14.1. Him that is weak
in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.

12. T^^^ the proceeding may be not by formal disputation, ^^ich has in it so
much of engagement to opposition, but by a more familiar way of discourse.

13. That the things wherein the several parties differ from one another, may
be drawn up into a summary or brief, that they may be proposed to
consideration.

14. That the first consideration may be, whether the controversy be worth the
debating, whether the question be material to be decided or no, and if not,
that it may be cast out.

15. That in case the controversy be of weight, it be considered whether a
fair interpretation of one another, may not reconcile the difference, and that
all (...) or quarrel about words may be studiously prevented, and avoided,
together with all bitterness of language, and violence of Spirit.

16. That those things wherein we differ may be composed, by an appeal to
those things wherein we agree.

17. That mysteries of Religion be allowed to be above the search of humane
reason, and not exposed to the unsound force of arguments, drawn ab absurdo
Consequente from absurd consequences, which is not safe to be used but in
matters that are clear unto reason.

18. That the analogy of the Text and Analogy of Faith; together with the
universal doctrine and practice of the Church, be admitted for the great
deciders of differences.

19. That worldly interest of all sorts may be shut out for a wrangler and a
makebate, and that all these things be resigned up entirely to the Parliament;
remembering that he is injurious that seeks to obtain that which is otherwise
his private right, either by procureing a public ruin, or by hindering the
public good.

20. That Curiosities in Religion may be laid aside, and secret things may be
left unto God, and faith and repentance looked after, according to that
excellent conclusion of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the
Lord our God, but the things that are revealed unto us, and to our Children for
ever that we may do all the works of this Law.

To conclude, let pride, ambition, covetousness, suspicion, which is, venenum
amicitiae, the poison of peace and amity, be abandoned, let all resolve to keep
within the bounds of their callings and within the limits that God has
circumscribed about them in their relations, and places, to hear with the
infirmities of one another, and make a charitable interpretation of other men's
actions, not taking upon them to judge farther then they can see, and cast out
that opinion which is the incendiary in all societies, that the miscariage of
others toward us discharges us of our duties toward them. Let us pardon one
another, and believe that Christians can forgive the greatest injuries, 1 These.
4.11. and let us study to be quiet, and do our own business, Romans 12.21. and
labor to overcome evil with good. Which is the most glorious way of Conquest,
and Victory over our Enemies. Let us agree in those things wherein we do agree,
and in that whereunto we have attained. Phil. 3.16. Let us walk by the same
rule, and mind the same things, according to that excellent rule of the
Apostle, let us put on peaceable affections and pray for peace, and not suffer
difference in opinions, to discharge from Christian love and Communion, which
is the great door, at which we must enter to mutual edification. And let it be
remembered that when the Lord is pleased to make overtures of peace, they that
do hinder it, either out of study of sides, or for maintaining of parties, or
for any other indirect end, shall answer to God for all the mischief, and
blood, and ruin. that shall follow. From which dreadful guilt the LORD
deliver us.

FINIS.

