A SERMON, PREACHED AT St. MARGARETS IN WESTMINSTER: At the Funeral of Mrs.
SUSANNA GRAY, Daughter of Henry Gray, Esquire of Enfield in Staffordshire; who on
the 29 of October 1654. began her Eternal Sabbath.

Come Lord Jesus come quickly.

And it was a custom in Israel that the daughters of Israel went yearly to
lament the daughter of Jeptha the Gileadite, four days in a year,

Judges 11. ult. LONDON, Printed by F. L. 1657.

2 Samuel 12.15, to 24. v. 22, 23. And he said, while the Child was yet alive I
fasted and wept; For I said, who can tell whether God will be gracious to me,
that the Child may live? (23) But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can
I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.


IT is not only the wonder of of David's Servants, but of all that read the
Story, why David should fast and weep while the Child was yet alive, and dry up
his tears upon the first news of the Child's death? why he should mourn and
afflict himself, while there was some hopes, with the fear of that death which
he mourned not, when it happened? This is so contrary to the Custom and Manners
of most men that seek the chiefest relief and ease of their miseries from their
complaints and sorrows, and indulge the sad remembrance of their Losses as a
kind of Reparation and Remedy while they recover them, at least in their
memories, and find them represented in their tears, and therefore at the death
of friends they invite others to bear a part with them in their grief and
lamentation.

Yet seeing David was a man after Gods own heart, and therefore his Temper and
very complexion more refined and purified with holy allayes, and even, his
passions are more to be imitated by us (for a good man is a living rule to
others, his example the best Sermon, and most pleasing direction to us, who are
ever sociable sinners, or Saints, and regard more what we see others do, than
what we ought to do.) Let us Learn here from David, not from the funeral
Preacher, how we are to behave our selves, what we are to do in the sickness
and death of friends (whether Children or other near Relations:)

This one example leads us through all the Duties we owe to others in the
saddest cases, this directs us: 1. How to behave our selves amidst the
confusion of fears and hopes in the sicknesses of our friends. 1st, To seek to
God before the Phisician; to distill our Tears for Balm, and apply our Prayers
for their first Cure; to lend them breath from our Petitions, from our sobs and
cries, before the sentence of death be passed, Who can tell whether God will
have mercy on us, and not bereave us of so great content?

2ly. How to appease and moderate our grief after the death of others, which we
could not by our tears or prayers prevent. But now he is dead, wherefore should
I fast? [should I mourn or afflict my self] Can I bring him back again?

3ly. How to return to our selves having lost our Friends, and from the death
of others to prepare for our own. I shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

These 3 Considerations will best represent the Pattern in the most lively
practical Lines for our imitation, and serve best to turn this story into an
useful moral.

How we are to behave our selves in the sicknesses and visitations of others?
Here good nature will join with piety to enforce these duties.

We are to consider what ever present visitations, as the effects and
punishments of our sins, as well as theirs who are visited particularly indeed:
This was manifest in this case of David, where the Child being truly conceived
in the sin of the Father, and born in the iniquity of the Mother, (in adultery)
could have the shame and stain of his birth only blotted out by death, and
covered by the Grave.

But this may be a safe, useful, and proper consideration in the visitation of
any Friend, to look upon his disease as bred from Gods anger against us, his
punishment of our sins, as well as from his own distemper. Austins friend, to
free him from thy corruptions? who were apter to delight in him as an associate
or brother in Iniquity, in Luxury, as that friend in Minutius (in erroribus
socius, in amoribus conscius) as a partner in sins, a ready assistant in
unlawful pleasures, and confident in wild excesses, endeared by mutual
secrecy, and society in vice; then as that friend charactered by the Psalmist,
a friend with whom thou might take sweet counsel together, and go up
together to the house of the Lord, whence it is that God snatcheth him from
thee, as Lot out of Sodom, to prevent his infection first, to God alone. Thus
looking on children (on friends) as greater stays and contents of life, as so
many Pins to fasten your Tabernacle on the earth; God loosens the Pins, to
loosen your affections from the earth, and by degrees to bring you to a
stricter dependence on him. Out of the sense of this so affectionate design of
our jealous God, did the noble Matron Melania entertain the death of a Husband
and two Sons at once, with that pious Exclamation: Expeditius tibi servitura
sum Domine; quia me tanto onere liberasti; Thou have, O my Lord, provided that
I may henceforth serve thee more freely, having released thy servant from so
great encumbrances and distractions.

In this regard David here used the most proper Cure of Gods anger, and his own
carnal affections, fasting, weeping, and praying. Who can tell whether God will
have mercy on me? forgive me my sin and delinquency, for which the Child is
sentenced to death, that the Child may live.

This Remedy of Praying and Fasting for our own sins in Another, is like the
weapon-salve that does so strange and secret cures, being applied to the
putrified matter, and the guilty weapon that made the wound, not to the patient,

2. This Consideration, that sicknesses, being but the Attachments and
approaches of death, are (as death is said to be) the wages of sin, sets us on
our first work, To remove the Cause, our sins, before we may hope to take away
the Effect, the disease of our friend. This Order the ancient Canons seemed to
point at, which enjoined the sick to send for his Confessor, before his
Physician. Think then thy friends consumption proceeds from thy languishing
toward God, from the decay of holy heat and zeal in thee. Think his Fever but
a just judgment on thy impure flames of Lust, or Envy, or Revenge, or thy
immoderate affection toward him; his Lamenesse upbraids thy halting between
God and the world; his Stone the Symptom of the hardness of thy heart; his
bad spleen argues thy rotten malice, and what ever corruptions answering still
some more corrupt desires of thy Soul, so will thou find as great necessity to
Physic, and purge thy Soul, as the others body.

3. After the Cause is removed, by washing away with thy tears thine own or thy
friends stams, then may thou safely, orderly (and as the Physicians prescribe
secundum artem) proceed to remove the Effect; to use all the means God allows
for recovery; for to this end (says the wise man) God created the Phisician as
well as the herbs of the field, for the time of need: Only remember that you
first beg the life of God, before you seek it from the Phisician. 'Twas Asahs
fault, not that he sought the Phisician, but that he did not seek the Lord; 2 Chronicles. 16.12. only as you use the means, so trust not in them, but in Gods
blessing, and believe they have no farther operation, or virtue, than while
they are joined with your Prayers. Epaphroditus Recovery St. Paul ascribes to
Gods mercy on him, and on the Corinthians, but his mercy awakened by prayers,
Phil. 2.26, 27. his own preservation from the sentence of death passed against
him at Ephesus to combat with wild beasts [1 Cor. 15, 32. which was drawn upon
him by more Salvage Beasts; Demetrius and his Silver Smithes, Act. 19.24] he
imputes to the Prayers of the Corinthians 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10, 11. Who knows
whether our letting our hands fall from prayer has not caused death to prevail
over the person we now mourn for?

2. Duty or enquiry. How we are to moderate our grief in the death of near
Relations, which by these degrees will be discovered.

1. Some affections, some natural passions are not to be denied; God does not,
like the Lacedaemonians, load his Children with stripes, and require that
hardiness in them, that they should return no signs of griefs nor groans at
all. It Is no stoical Apathy, no senseless stupidity God requires, but only
patience under his chastisements; for if we did not feel the blow, how should
we look up to the hand that smites us? How should affliction lead us to godly
sorrow, but by that sensible sorrow which is according to the world? that which
is natural is first, and then that which is spiritual. Even worldly sadness,
and melancholy is a good disposition to Devotion, and a fair degree to an
humble temper. We find our Savior weeping over Lazarus Grave, insomuch as the
people could infer thence, See how much he loved him. John 11.35, 36. I know
no Divinity (but that which the Sword and the Spirit, unlike that which came in
the shape of a Dove, has framed in this latter age) that excludes humanity,
but delights always to plant it self in soft breasts, and either makes or finds
good nature. I find in the Catalogue, and Spawne of highest Crimes (which the
dreggs of these last times should bring forth (...), want of natural affection,
reckoned 2 Timothy 33. and that joined with Haters of God, Truce breakers, False
Accusers, unthankful, cursed Speakers, having a show of godliness, and
denying the power thereof ( Romans 1.30.) And the Apostle argues it strongly; How
can he love God whom he has not seen, who loves not his brother whom he has
seen?

So then, it is not only not unlawful, but a duty to mourn with those that
mourn, if you will receive the Apostles Prescription, Romans 12.15. It is in the
Scripture noted as an extreme judgment and curse on the wicked, Job 27.15. (
Ps. 78.64.) his Widows shall not weep, as either wanting leisure from other
sorrows, or liberty from their cruel enemies, or oppressed with Gods sore
displeasure, so far as to yield and acknowledge the just curse with silence,
Jer 16.5.7. or else, having spent their tears and grief, and dried up the
fountain of sorrow, their very heart, Ezekiel. 24.16, 17.22.23. that the heaviest
judgment you shall not mourn nor weep, but shall pine away in your iniquity,
and mourn one toward another, for one to comfort another, etc. Tears are the
first office we do for our selves, and the last for others.

They may not please themselves, that can with dryest eyes behold the
sicknesses, the losses, the Funerals of Friends, as who had attained a greater
measure of Religion or Discretion, or the Spirit, or who had subdued their
desires to a perfecter Resignation, and submission to Gods will. Let them
question themselves whether this Apathy, this stoutness, proceeds not from a
spirit void of sense and natural affection, and not from an humble Resignation
to the Providence and pleasure of God; whether this calm arise not alike to
that of the dead Sea, from a curse?

2. On the other side, Though Religion forbids not mourning, yet it forbids us
to mourn as those that have no hopes; Though it excludes not all grief, yet it
moderates our grief, and teaches us to turn our sadness to an holy sorrow,
our melancholy to devotion, and convert our discontents to repentance.
Religion otherwise will require us to weep our Carnal Tears over again, when
they flow either from immoderate or mere worldly sorrow. Hence then we are to
enquire,

3. How far we are to mourn? For what, and how we are to grieve? and and that
either in regard of the Object, or Measure of our grief.

1. In regard of the measure of our grief, we are so far to mourn, as we join
prayers with our tears; so far, (which is the true measure of all our passions,
by which we may discern when they are immoderate) as not to indulge fruitless
tears and complaints, instead of real duties. When our passions hinder not the
free use of reason and Religion, and take not up the place of other Services;
when they cause us not to omit the Evening Sacrifice, as Aaron did upon grief
for the death of his two Sons, Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10. ult. which yet Moses
is said to be content with, and God to permit, not that he indulgeth more the
extremities of this passion, (which most banisheth the sense of Humanity or
Piety) but in regard of some holy Reflection in this his grief, that included
some sorrow for the scandal and breach of Gods worship. This may be some cause
why God would not permit his Priests that natural Affection, to mourn for any
friends, but their nearest kin, Lev. 21.2. Lest it should make them less holy,
God would have them less humane then others. He would have them esteem no
relation so near to them, as that of God, and his Service; He suffers them not
to grieve for the loss of any thing, while they may, in so near a distance,
enjoy God; the reason is alleged verse 6. In them it is interpreted
Profaneness, what in others were but a commendable affection, and sign of a
good nature; seeing sorrow indulged, must needs bring with it some distraction
in Religion. The Heaviness of heart for Christ's departure, caused the Disciples
to sleep, when they should have watched and prayed. St. Gregory breaks off his
Comment on Ezekiel, to write Epitaphs on his Son; as Aaron omits the evening
sacrifice, or a great part of the Ceremony, at his Sons death.

2 In regard of the object; we are to mourn for sins first, and then for
afflictions, sicknesses, deaths, as the Effects and Consequents of sin. So that
death, and other evils, are the improper and secondary objects of sorrow, Sin
the only proper object of grief, and just cause of tears;

Because, 1st, Sin is the only evil, John 17.15. being the cause of all other
evils: and without which, miseries themselves are not miserable, but are turned
to the innocent to Exercises of their graces, and occasions of redoubled
Rewards and Glories.

2. Sorrow in other evils; save in sins only, is useless, and brings no proper
remedy, but adds more disquiet to our troubles. Our tears naturally fall upon
our breasts, as it were to wash the stains of that part; and are not to be
wasted over graves, that may save souls. Our tears ('it was the complaint of St.
Chrys^stome) are most abused by us; we lavish and spend them where they are
not availeable on outward evils, or over the dead. We seldom (says he) weep in
the right place.

But, as sins first deserve our sorrow, so affliction and misery, the
consequents of sin, more sensibly provoke our griefs, and are indeed the just,
but secondary cause and objects of Sorrow. Whence Sicknesses and Deaths are to
be considered and looked on as the wages (nothing surer than the Hirelings
wages) the effects and consequents of Sin.

For first, so Sin and Affliction in Scripture are both represented under the
name of Death. Open my eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in death; that is, in Sin
that leads unto Death, Ps. 13.3. Pray unto the Lord to take away this death
only, Exodus 10.17. that is, the plague of Vermin, that did not so much threaten
to destroy, as to disquiet Pharoabs life; In the Prophet, ( Ezekiel. 7.) sword
without, and death within, is threatened, when Famine, Plague, and other
messengers of death are denounced, whereupon the wise man concludes safely,
Prove. 8.38. He that loves sin, loves death.

2. To look on Affliction otherwise, as not sent by providence, either to
punish or to discipline us: as the Fiery Trial, either to refine and purge, to
better us, or to consume us: as the Wind, either to fan or to scatter us
utterly; is to look on them no otherwise than the Heathen, as Chances, and the
casual events of the Fates. Thus to bear them as things of course, without any
thoughts of Sin, is to say that affliction rises out of the dust, or (what is
a blasphemy God less endures) That God willingly grieveth the children of men,
( Jupiter non nocet, nisi ut prosit, Sen.)

From this consideration, (that Death and all other evils, are the effects and
consequents of Sin) will follow these father Inferences.

1. Against security in health or youth, that as Death came into the world by
Sin, so it came over all the world, in that all have sinned: that we may not
wonder when we find Children conceived in Sin should have death bequeathed to
them, before they are well entered into life. Whence they which are not marks
large enough for any of Deaths darts, for any wound, are yet wounded so often
by it, and find their grave in the womb, that even the Child that is not grown
to David's span, is yet old enough to die. No security in any place or state of
life, while we carry about us, not a body only, but a soul tempered with
contrary and corrupt humors, and a body of sin and death, as well as of flesh.
We may conclude with the Apostle, Rom: 8.10. The body is dead through sin.
What wonder if so many are cut off in the flower of their strength, e're they
well know how to live, and less how to die. It Is the sinner, not the sick or
aged person, dies. Paradise alone had the tree of Life in it; when Adam was
cast out of that, into this our Farth, he brought nothing but Death, and the
Emblemes of Mortality: See him no sooner fallen, than cast out of Paradise, a
flaming sword, and a destroying Angel driving him from the Tree of Life: the
skins of Beasts, that is, Mortality it self serving to cover him; and at last
he condemned to dig continually the earth, and to prepare his own Grave; His
posterity ever since feeding their Luxury, and sustaining their life with the
death of birds and beasts (mortibus vescimur) does not he seem to have planted
in this our earth the tree of Death? whereon all the fruits perish, ever they
come to maturity, some in the bud, others in the growth. We pass through so
many deaths to Eternal life: from the womb of the mother, of the world, of the
earth, to heaven. In the midst of life we are in death, and like sentenced
persons, under a reprieve, however we are permitted to live, yet to enjoy no
certainty of life, as not knowing when we may be called forth to execution.
While we walk upon earth, we always tread over our graves, and know not
whether our next step may bring us into it. For our bed is made in the dark,
and our graves lie ready open for us, but as pits covered with snow.

2 Against impatience, or Immoderat sorrow. If sin brings forth death, we are
to consider death as an evil, not so much inflicted by God, as drawn upon our
selves by our own deserts, and as it were our own choice; and therefore with
more patience to be endured, Wisd. c. 1.13, 16. God made not death ( adeo non
est creatione, sed ordinatione aut ultione in poenam peccati, he framed it not,
he meant it not for a creature, but ordained it for a punishment of his
disobedient creature) for then should the great workman have destroyed his own
works, which yet he allowed to be good; the Creator should have been the
Abbaddon, (...), the Confounder of his own creature; but death was the creature
of Man's Invention, and as his own brood, makes way for its birth, like the
Viper; by eating through the entrails of the Parent.

3. Against fear of death as well as sorrow, that as other Afflictions, so
death in its self is not simply evil, and therefore not simply to be feared or
mourned, but in reference to sin, the sting of death is sin. Sin alone makes
death deadly, and miseries miserable. Death, like those creatures. which take
their colors from the place to which they cleave (as the Polypus and
Camaeleon) becomes good or evil, as the persons are to whom it happens: It is
the voice from Heaven, could our dull earth be persuaded to hear it, that they
are blessed who die in the Lord, What is it then we mourn for? either our
friends loss? who is more blessed by dying in the Lord ( Rev. 14.13.) who has
exchanged the company of helpless friends, for the society of Angels, the
Valley of Tears for the Regions of Joy; and (in a word) Earth for Heaven: or do
we mourn (which is the truth if we would put off out mourning Veil) our own
loss of a friend? a loss of a content, of an Instrument of Gods Providence,
which still remains the same, and retains the same power and goodness, to
supply as great contents as it has taken away:

Whence will follow the last consideration in this point of moderating our
grief.

4. Having ordered aright out sorrows, the better to moderate them, we are to
learn from David how to dry up our Tears, How to comfort our selves in the
death of friends?

1. From their happy Fate and condition, the hope of a better life, whereof we
receive any signs or assurances at their death. This was David's main comfort
here, I shall go to him, etc. the Child had got the Goal before him. David
that wept so impatiently for Absolon, wept not at all for this his dear infant,
begot indeed in sin, but dying in innocence (David parricidam Absolonem)
mortuum flevit, non Innocentem, fletur sceleratus, non fletur Dilectus, Ambros
de f. Res c. 4.) Now the hopes of salvation are the surest and infallible in
baptized children. They are undoubtedly saved says our Church. And the
Scripture assures by infinite arguments of it, that to little children
belongs the Kingdom of Heaven. For by Baptism having put on Christ, having
past the laver of Regeneration, having drowned the old man in Christ's blood and
death, and raised the new man, washed and cleans'd out of water, as it were to
present Resurrection (seeing God saves by water the new world, as he destroyed
the old, and that none could perish in the Ark) whereof Baptism is the
Antitype, (so St. Peter) how can we doubt but that Christ receives them into
his Arms in Heaven, as well as on Earth? and that they must needs be admitted
into Paradise, who bring that innocence thither, which Adam lost? Next to
Children, our Hopes are most comfortable of those, who have come nearest those
little ones, and passed their days in a Child-like Innocence and simplicity;
having no opinions, no affections of their own; but what their Heavenly Father
directs. These we part with upon the easiest Terms,

(Ut praemissos non amissos) as only gone before, Profectio est quam putas
mortem. cur moderate feras abiisse, quent mox subsequeris [Tert. de pat.]
Brevis vitaeususnec illi multum videtur eripuisse, nec tibi distulisse. [Amb.]
Res. c. 3.
not taken away from us, as one absent and retired to a warmer Clime and
happier Region, not lost, not dead; And why do thou so impatiently bear his
departure, whom thou art ere long to follow? For he whom thou persecutest thus
with sad thoughts, is but divided from thee by a short Isthmas (the breadth of
the Grave) a narrow scantling and space of Time, some fews days or months, or
at most some few years, which are either taken from him, or reserved to thee.
Conceive then the blessed Spirits departed in the Lord, crying out from heaven
to you, Weep not for us, but weep for your selves, who yet live in the Regions
of Death, in the Borders of Sin and misery. Why do ye parents forbid the
Children to come unto Christ? Can ye believe the Mothers embraces softer than
the Arms of their Savior? Are they not much happier in Abrams Bosom, than in
the Parents Lapp? If you have lost a Child on earth, you have brought forth a
Saint now in Heaven. Ubertim fluentes lachrimas reprime, ne grandis pietas in
nepotem apud incredulas mentes desperatio put etur in Deum. Desiderandus est
^ibi, quasi absens, non quasi mortuus, etc. -- Illum expectare, non amisisse
videaris. [Her. Ep. 24. ad Hebrid.]
Why do ye (o Friends) put on Blacks for them, who have put on their white
Robes? Why shed ye tears for them, whose tears are wiped from their eyes? Why
such Groans and Lamentations for the^, whose mouths are filled with songs and
praises, to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever?
This is not kindness, but Envy, or some misapprehension; or misbelief of their
present condition. You grieve not thus for a Friend preferred to another
Kingdom. Jacob turned his Tears into Joy, when he received his Son Joseph as
from the dead; testor'd not to life only, but to a Throne, Genesis 45.27.

2. A secondary Comfort from the state irrevocable, unalterable, remediless,
whereby David rather chides and reproves (violently stifling and suppressing
his grief, as vain and unprofitable) than lenifieth or heals it. Wherefore
should I now fast? Can I bring him again? Can the consuming of my flesh restore
his? Can my prayer lend breath to the deceased? Can my howlings, like the
Lioness, revive the young One? And if I beat my breast, is there any Hopes,
that, as the Pelican by piercing her breast, I may restore to life? How can
tears, that cannot make the strewed flowers grow again, revive the interred
Carcass? No hopes now; the Spirit is returned to God that gave it, and no
wresting it out of his hands; The Plant dies in the ground, and yet through the
scent of the water buds again; but Man dies and wastes away, without hopes of
springing again, till the earth be no more, Jeh 14, 8, 9, 10, etc. He Is gone,
he is gone past recall. No remedy. [VVe came not altogether, we must not go
away together; what cannot be help d, must be endured. These are the Common
Cordials of vulgar Comforters. But what if your grief in the same Impatience
with Augustus, shall reply, as he did to his Daughter Julia, thus comforting
him (Sir, Your Complaints cannot recall, cannot help, but trouble you, all is
past remedy) that is it which grieves chiefly, That there is no remedy, no cure
of the wound, no Recovery of the Loss.

Add then to these uncertain Comforts of Reason, which are as easily confuted
by a more peevish and sullen Reason, that is apt to dispute for its passions,

3. A third comfort, from a Religious submission to God; For, as Reason
commands us to yield to Necessity: So Religion bows us perfectly to stoop with
willingness to this Necessity, as it proceeds from Gods Providence and Mercy,
ordering even out Losses to our good. Here is that forcible Masterer of our
sorrow to a necessary submission to the power of the Almighty, which we
foolishly provoke while we resist.

2. A voluntary Resignation (shall I say to the Providence and merciful
disposing) or even to the holy will of God, now manifestly declared by the
event; for as his other will is revealed in his Word, to be the rule of our
life and actions; so this Ordering; Governing, Overruling Will, revelata
factis, discovers Gods secret purposes, by the visible effects, and issues of
things, to be the rule of our passions and sufferings. Do we daily profess to
God, Thy will be done, and now it appears to be particularly Gods will (seeing
nothing is brought to pass in Heaven or in Earth without the will of him that
rules over all) why do we not give the Lord leave to do what he will in
Heaven and Earth, whom we so often standing profess the Maker of Heaven and
Earth? what Atheism now possesses us, because Gods will crosses ours, to
stick at last to pronounce with good Eli (in as hard a case, as great a loss as
any we can complain of, the utter ruin of his family and Excision from the
Priesthood, the loss of two sons and the Ark of God at once) It is the Lord,
let him do what seems good unto him.

3. There is yet a greater reason of thy Resignation in this Case; in that God
has the propriety and right, the Sovereign Dominion of all, we only the short
use. If God recall but his own Gift, what Injury, what so great cause of
complaint? May not God as well take the Child away from the Mother, to whom it
was committed only to breed up in the fear of God, as the Mother takes it home
from the Nurse? It Is called to a better home, what Relation or Title soever
thou can plead in the dear loss, Whether thy Husband, thy Child thy Father,
Brother, or thy friend (which is as thy own soul) God pleads a nearer claim,
his Creature, his Image, his Member, the price of his redemption, etc. his by
many Titles, his even before he was, and his when he shall not be.

3 Duty or Inquiry, How we are from the present sense of another death, to
prepare for our own.

1. Prepare by a tender and watchful apprehension of all those Memento's and
Remembrances of Mortality, wherewith God and Nature daily allarum us, so that
nothing is more frequently represented, howsoever nothing be less thought on
than death, and we at last complain of a surprisal; Like to the Man in the old
story, who had covenanted with death, that he should before his last stroke
give some warning, with a Finger at least lift up; and yet after many funerals
of his friends, and many parcel-funerals, and decays of his own body and
senses, being to die, required some other Messengers and Forerunners of his
end, and challenged Death for not knocking at the door before he entered, only
because he would not hear the knocks.

Amongst the many Remembrances of death, So the Captain of fifty seeing the
other Captains consumed by str^, foll upon his face, with I pray thee let my
life be precious in thy sight, 2 Kings 1 13.
the most sensible and sharp admonitions toward this preparation, are sounded
to us by the Last groans of our expiring friends, as by the last Trump, that
Grave which buries part of our Souls with their bodies, must needs call some of
our thoughts that way. And how few are there amongst us that have lived half
the age of man, that has not outlived half his Family or Acquaintance. That
continued Felicity of the Grecian Prince, to pass an whole age without the
losss of one Friend, was a glory or boast not to be seconded by many. Now the
first preparative for death, is the premeditation of it. Death, like the
Basilisk, losing its sting and force, being first seen and viewed by us.

2 Prepare, not only by a weariness and contempt of life, and of the world,
wherein you no longer find your Friend, but by a more comfortable Thought of
going to him, and over-taking him. Prepare to follow. If this could so sweeten
Socrates last deadly draught, the Thought of passing to the society of Orpheus,
Homer, and the ancient Sages, How much more should it make us gladly embrace
death, that leads us to the society of Angels, and takes us not away, but
restores us to our Friends, and to the Spirits of Just men, made perfect by the
Vision of the most Holy One? Especially if we consider, that the Friends we go
away to, are much more than those we part from. We are gatherd to our Fathers.

3 Prepare, by casting aside all that makes Death bitter or terrible unto us.
Now we fear death (says the Monk, on Climacus) for one of these two Causes;
either because we love this present Life, or Distrust a better. So Reuben, Gad,
and Manasse, did choose their seat on this side Jordan, because they saw the
ground fit for pasture, Number. 32 5. Some there are unwilling to leave their
Pastures, and Cattle, for all the beasts and houses Divines or Astrologers talk
of in heaven. Some, with St Peter, confounded with the Glories, and bright
Honors of the world, cry out in an Ecstasy, It is good to be here, let us here
fix our Tabernacle; but the Text tells us, He knew not what he said, being
dazzled with the glorious light, Luke 9.33. Others, that with the Apostles
betray a fear of storms, and the danger of death, though Christ be in the storm
with them, deserve Christ's check, O ye of little faith, what are you afraid of?
So that our whole work of Preparation is reduced to these two points, Contempt
of this world,
Faith, hopes of a better.


that we strive to leave the world, its noise, and vanities, before we depart
out of it. Look on the earth, and all his Comforts, as passengers in swift
streams, still fleeting and parting from us, or we from it; and as Sojourners
or Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, never fix our delight in a pleasant
way, or Inn, which is suddenly to be quitted. And seeing no distance can
hinder us, more than the banished Jews, from turning our faces toward the
heavenly Jerusalem, let us (that we may be able with the Martyrs of old, to
refuse Life, in hopes of a better Resurrection) lay hold on Eternal life,
before this life fail us; lay hold by a lively faith on the hands of our
Savior, stretched out to receive us, and lay that sure foundation for the time
to come, of Good Works, that best preparative to a good death, a good life.

Let us not rest, till we have brought our Souls to that temper of the good
Heathen, [Summan, nec metuas diem, nec optes,] neither to fear, nor desire,
over-passionately the day of our change, or rather to this Resolution of St.
Paul, Phil. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. If I live, I shall do well; if I die, I shall do
better. To me to live is Christ, To die is Gain.

And now that we may with David rise from our sorrow, and wash our faces with
tears of Joy, in the thought of this Virgin, who is not lost, but gone before
us to that place, whither we all strive to follow: Let us reflect on that
principal Comfort, the hopes of that life, however lost on earth to us, yet
recovered in heaven being hid with Christ. While your Eyes overflow with tears,
being fixed on the Corpse, on the Mantle here dropped below, send your thoughts
beyond your sight, after the better part, ascended above to the Heavens, as we
have great cause to believe and hope, by the assurances of eternal life in this
Virgin departed? And what greater assurance can there be? If (in the words of
the Church) we are to know for a truth, Preface before the Catechism.
and it is certain by Gods word, that Children being baptized have all things
necessary for their salvation, and are undoubtedly saved. How much more this
child? who was blessed with a Lois, and an Eunice, that gave her a Bible for
the first thing to play withal, and taught her first to lisp the language of
Canaan, before she could speak her Mothers Tongue, who even with her milk
sucked in the sincerer milk of the word. As they write of the blessed Virgin
Mary, that at three years she entered the Temple, offered her self as a living
Sacrisice at the Altar; warmed her hands and her heart at the holy flame, and
made Religion her pastime before the vanities of the world, or the pleasures of
sin could seduce her; so was this Virgin brought by her Parents to the Temple
(as it were after her Saviors steps) to ask of the Doctors the way of life,
even before she could firmly walk in it. She learned Repentance ere she knew
what it was to Sin; She first began the life of Grace, ere she attained the
full life of Nature, and had her Senses exercised in the knowledge of Good and
Evil, before she could distinguish the degree of bravery and Pride. She yielded
her self to be regulated by Religion, before she could be abused by sense or
reason. Her first care was not her Dress, or Looks, but her pensum quotidianum
de flore Scripturarum (as St. Hierom directs, Laetal. l. 2. Ep.) her daily task
out of the choicest Scripture, to sanctify her memory, as well as her
Affections.

Instead of wanton Songs she repeated the Psalms (which was an ability required
to make a Divine in the Primitive times) but was it not strange in those tender
years? she had not only strength and force to hold David's Harp, but to tune it:
when others of her soft age would call for a Companion, she cried out, come
Lord Jesu, come quickly! and I pray thee help thy servant, whom thou have
redeemed with thy most precious blood.

What can we imagine, but that she (who breathed her first air in Devotion, and
her last in Prayers, who was sealed to eternal life by Baptism, and kept in
the assurance and blessed hope thereof by a pious education) had gained the
Love of our Savior, much sooner than the young man, who had observed all that
God commanded even from his youth, though not so perfectly as he conceived. In
sum, she was brought up One of the Order of St. Paul's Virgins, who from her
Infancy only cared for the things of the Lord.

And here, might it be safe to expostulate with the Almighty, I should ask,
Why these Graces that are not to be received in vain by us, or rather Offered
than Given? Why so fair characters, that others might take copies from, thus
immediately blotted out, and dust thrown on them? Why does God delight to crop
such fragrant flowers in the bud, ere they are fully blown?

Is it that the unwholsom Air, or rude Touch might not fully them? Indeed so we
read some hastily snatched out of the world, as out of a Pesthouse, Ne malitia
corrumperet Intellectum, before Malice or Vanity should infect their minds.
Some are taken away out of a special Love and Tenderness of God; because there
is some good Thing in them toward the Lord God: as Jeroboams son, 1 Kings
14.13. Is it to show that we have here no abiding City? that this world is but
our Tyring room, or stage, where some Mute persons are brought in only for
Number or show, merely to pass over the Stage, and so serve to grace it, even
in the Passage, not unlike Angelical apparitions.

Or is it (as a devout pensive Writer observes) that God trains us, as we do
our children, by giving them gay and precious things, but demanding them
immediately again, to try our Submission, whether we could with Abram, yield
up, sacrifice a child at Gods call, and give thanks with Job to God, even when
he resumes his Gifts -- (The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away; Blessed be
the name of the Lord.

Let not this yet discourage Parents from making their Children fit for Heaven
and the society of Angels; But rather shame those careless and indulgent
Parents. (Parents indeed, as the Apostle terms them, afte rthe flesh, as who
had no share in the Soul) who being forward to surrender to God in Baptism, by
a most holy Vow, the Children they received from him, are not yet afraid (with
Ananias and Saphira) to withdraw that they had once devoted to the Lord: and
neglect the teaching them to keep their Vow, as religiously at least as formal
Nuns would. Will they not allow that Diligence that senseless Creatures use
in trayning and practicing their young ones? seeing we bring them forth as
deformed and misshapen in the sight of God, as any ugly Lumps of flesh the Bear
is said to whelp; Shall we deny them the labor of our Tongues, to instruct
them, and to lick them into shape? Having betrayed them to a life of Sin and
Misery, Ought we not in conscience, in Equity, procure them that other life of
grace and glory? Let the Duty or the Shame, the Terror or the Comfort,
answerable to the Education of your Children, move you to express your
Affection in this pious Care of providing a richer stock of manners, then of
Fortunes, and hopes of a more lasting Inheritance. St. Hierom observes from
Ezekiel 18.28. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, nor the
Father the iniquity of the Son. -- That this only frees and secures the Parents
in these Children, that yet arrive not to the use of Reason, that live not on
their own score, that have no proper Motion of their own, but (as the Parents
limbs) what the Parents derive to them: in these the Parents negligence, or
sinful Indulgence makes them (who are said to live again in their Children) to
perish rather in their sinful courses, and to invert the threat of the
Commandment, that the sins of the 3 and 4 Generation shall be visited and
avenged on the Parents, who have propagated those sins, by their loose neglect
or example: On the other side the joy of those shall be redoubled and
multiplied with their seed, who being not more ambitious to enlarge their
Family than the Household of the Faithful, or to propagate their own name more
than Gods, may with boldness present themselves with their righteous seed, at
the Throne of God; Behold us, and the Children that thou have given us. These
are they that may with more comfort lose their Children at Gods Call, than
others enjoy them amidst other frail possessions, and uncertain contents of
this life, seeing children so lost, are not to be accounted lost; Whence (the
Father observes) Job having by his patience merited a double Restitution of all
his other losses, had not his Children redoubled, for they are not taken away,
they are only secured in the hands of God, and sent as pledges before us, to be
more happily recovered and enjoyed for ever, when some shall be gathered to
their Fathers, and others more gloriously gathered to their Children, whom they
are to follow, first in their Innocence, then in their Inheritance and
Happiness; That Kingdom of Heaven which none shall enter that are not like unto
those little Children. To both which God fit us, and then hasten his Kingdom!
Even so, sweet Jesu, come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

