Errata disturbing the sens.
ADvertisement, page 2. l. 6. r. 17, l. 11. r. 2 Timothy, p. 2. l. 36. r. Which
words contain these three Parts, p. 3. l. 11. r. Cleanness, l. 17 r.
Asseveration, l. 19. r. Relativ, p 5. l. 1. r. come, l. 29. r. prudent, l. 37.
r (...), p. 6. l. 8. r. Pythagorean, l. 12. r. Colis, p. 7. l. 2. r. in, l. 9.
r. Adoption, p. 8. l. 20 r. from, l. 38. r. more, p. 9. l. 11. r. (...), and r.
(...), p. 14. l. 17. r. as, p. 15. l. 8. r. put, p. 16. l. 3. r. Intimation, p.
18. l. 6. r. means sufficient p. 19. l. 7. r. scene, l. 34. r. unto, p. 27. l.
24. r. suspicions.

The End of CHRIST'S Advent; A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH OF
NORWICH, ON THE Two and Twentieth of June, 1684.

By ERASMUS WARREN Rector of Worlington in Suffolk.

LONDON.

Printed by H. H. Jun. for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Sold by George Rose Bookseller in Norwich. 1684.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in GOD ANTHONY Lord Bishop OF NORWICH.
My Lord,
WHAT a worthy Pattern of Orthodox steddiness your Lordship has been, in our
infamous times of mobility and mutation, is evident to all: And therefore this
discourse knew not whither so naturally to direct its motion, as to such a
Center. Nor was it sooner determined into that tendency, but it was greatly
confirmed and quickened in the same, by this consideration: That your Lordship
was ever a strenuous Assertor of Really Ancient and Catholic Truth. Yea, when
others durst not give it so much as due countenance; your Lordship afforded it
generous Entertainment, and Honored it with Zealous Vindication and Patronage.
And where Truth in general found such noble Welcome and Protection; the sacred
Verities here contained, presumed themselves entitled to kind reception,
suitable to their respective weight and dignity. This encouraged them to present
themselves to your Lordships hands, when the joint importunity of Friends and
Strangers, temted them from mine.

I could wish, my Lord, that the Sermon held better proportion to its excellent
subject. But so pregnant and vastly fruitful is that; that to discourse it up
to its genuine faecundity, would be a task too great for the Tongues of Angels;
and therefore no wonder if mine faultered in it.

It was grave advice of the wise Porph. in vit.
Pythagoras, (...). Not to carry the Pictures of the Gods in little Rings.
Thereby insinuating how improper it is, to exhibit the DEITY in narrow Symbols,
and pourtray His MAJESTY in slighty semblances; to stamp His Greatness in a
trifling impress, and crowd him into a diminutive and incompetent Character.
This admirable Rule I must own I have violated, nor need any impeach me as
guilty in the case, but my conscious apprehensions. I know I have injured the
Divinest JESUS by striving to magnify Him. But so must the best do as well as
I, that dare venture to describe Him in His lowest Glories: Tho this is
extremely laudative too; as it bespeaks Him exalted above all commendation.

Should any go about to Paint a Voice, to show its sweetness; or to Landscape
Music, to express its harmony: Their endeavors must needs prove insignificant,
because Art affords no Analogous Images or Types so curious as can exemplify
them. And for the same reason, vane must the attemts of all Mortals be, that
would fully account for JESVS'S Perfections. They want expressions to decipher
them, nor can they tell where to find a supply. Were Rhetoric it self
Subpoena'd in, with all the copious variety it has; and set to declare His
inexplicable nature, or indearing favors to the Children of Men; all it could
say, would amount but to florid and decent obloquy; to an elegant Libell, or
Gentiel disparagement.

But then (which is the scope of all this) how happy, my Lord, are we
Christians, that serve a Master, of such ineffable magnificence. A Prince so
incomparably Sweet and Heavenly, that there is no uttering His nature or his
kindness. To attemt to do it, is at once to undertake an impossible work, and
run our selves directly upon most certain frustration.

Pray, my Lord, I most humbly beseech you, to this Illustrious JESUS (the
Glorious, but wronged Argument of my Discourse) that I may serve Him
conscionably in my inferior capacity; and honor Him in imitating that rare
example of vigilance and fidelity; which your Lordship, in your eminent and
deserved station, laudably sets before me. So I shall be sure to approve my
self,

My Lord, Your Lordships ever obedient Son and Servant, Erasmus Warren.

1 Timothy 1.15. CHRIST JESUS came into the World to save Sinners.


TO excite and call forth our best attention to the Words rehearsed, the HOLY
GHOST has prefac'd them in a solemn manner, and graced them with an high and
pompous Introduction. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance.
What more could have been said in so short a Period, to rowze us to serious
animadversion of them?

There are two things that mightily commend a Doctrine or Aphorism, to the
fixed notice and observation of Men. The Verity, and Acceptability thereof. And
both these are eminently combined in the recited sentence: For it is (...), a
faithful or credible saying, and (...), Worthy of all reception or acceptance.
If I can prove the first, the latter will follow of its own accord. If I can
make it out to be True, that CHRIST came into the World to save sinners; the
Position must needs be very Acceptable, because of singular advantage to us.

And that it is a great and notorious Truth, may be argued with powerful and
evictive evidence, from these three Topics.

1. Divine Testimony. 2. The Titles of CHRIST. And 3. The course or tenor of
his Terrestrial Life.
First, This is manifest from inspired Testimonies; which are every where
respersed in the New Testament. And so I pass by all those Types and
Prophecies, of his coming as a SAVIOR, contained in the Old: Which might well
be called in as unexceptionable witnesses to the Proposition. It may serve our
purpose to note, that the Four Evangelists confirm the Article, by their joint
suffrage and attestation. Matt. 18.11.
St. Matthew asserts it in his Gospel; The Son of Man is come to save that
which is lost. St. Mark avers it in his; Mark. 2.17.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to Repentance. St. Luke in his;
The Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's lives, Luke 9.56.
but to save them. And St. John in his; John. 12.47.
I came not to judge the World, but to save the World. And to these in this
case, are Apostles Symphonous and the exactly consentient. But we need not the
concurrence of Parallel Quotations out of their Writings, to settle us in the
belief of so generally a received and approved Principle.

Secondly, It is apparent from the Various denominations that are given to
CHRIST, he is styled a King. And it is the Office of a King to save his
Subjects from the mischiefs and hostilities that their Enemies machinate and
contrive against them. He is called a Shepherd, the Good Shepherd; and it is
the part of a Good Shepherd, to save his Flock from spoil and violence; and
such piteous havoc and dilaniations, as ravenous Wolves and rapacious Vermin
would make amongst them. He is said to be the LIFE: And therefore when he came,
it was (most assuredly) to save us from Death; Or (as himself expresses it)
That we might have life, and that we might have it more abundantly. But what
need we go farther than the venerable Appellative, mentioned in the Text,
JESUS? In this we may read him the Author of our Salvation, in great Letters.
To that sense was the name expounded, when by the Angel it was first imposed:
Thou shall call his name JESUS, St. Matt. 1.21.
for he shall SAVE his People from their sins.

Thirdly, It is Evident from the manner or condition of his Life, in the state
of humiliation, and the days of his flesh. It was little else than a
concatenation or producted series of miseries and sufferings; all which must
have a direct tendency and subservience to the Salvation of sinners. For if
this were not the drift of his Travels and Penances, it will be hard to find
the reason of their Infliction; the nature of God being infinitely good, and
the Providence of Heaven accurately just, and the person of our LORD, not only
immaculate, but of perfect Sanctity. For tho he was called a Samaritan, and
counted a Daemoniac, and reckoned with Transgressors; yet he knew no sin, nor
was there any guile found in his mouth. No, he was harmless, and blameless, and
the SON of GOD without rebuke: Whiter than the Snow, and Purer than the Light,
and Brighter if possible, than Holiness it self. None could charge him with the
shadow of a Trespass against GOD; nor in judicial Process convict him of a
crime, or any thing like it, against Men. He was the most glorious Practist of
all Righteousness that ever lived: And as he came to fulfill his Fathers will,
so he did it in exactest measures. His life was clear from all miscarriages,
and his obedience commensurate to the whole Law, in its fullest Latitude of
injunctions. He was so far from resisting the Heavenly mind, and acting
contrary to the Divine pleasure; that he never violated any Political or Humane
Sanctions, provided they were just in their Constitution, and in their
Observance warrantable.

And hence it follows, that when he was afflicted and strangely abused, it was
not for any personal faults or delinquencies, because he had none. And since he
could not suffer and die as he did, for any obliquities or misdemeanors of his
own, it remains he did so for nobler causes, and to higher and more excellent
ends and purposes. To perform a work of amplest Charity, and an office of Mercy
for the World of sinners. To reconcile them to the DEITY they had Rebelliously
slighted, and prevent the ruin of those precious Souls they had rashly
forfeited; by giving his Blood for the deletery of their Offenses, and his
inestimable life for the price of their Redemption.

And to make it clear that the passive part of his life upon Earth, ministered
to the design of expiating our sins, and redeeming us from the punishments and
torturous severities due unto them; he is said in Scripture, to bear our sins;
to be wounded for our transgressions; to be bruised for our iniquities: and
where there is mention made of his dismal Sufferings, they are referred to us,
and put as it were upon our account. And truly unless by his Sufferings he
saves us from sin; he is falsely styled a SAVIOR and DELIVERER by the
Infallible Writers. For as every one sees, they that are CHRIST'S, are liable
to infelicities, as well as others. To as many fears, and dangers, and
miseries, and deaths as any in the World. Yea, for their being the Servants and
Disciples of JESUS, they are more liable to these, than other Men. So that, if
his sufferings do not rescue them from their sins, he is in no sense a SAVIOR
at all, but rather a betrayer of his people: By engaging them in that Religion,
which exposes them to those evils, that otherwise would fall more seldom, and
less heavy upon them.

The Doctrine then is True, CHRIST JESUS came into the World to save sinners.
But Why he rather than another?

The reason is easy, and soon given; because none besides him was able to do
it. To vanquish death, and deprive it of its sting; to conquer Hell, and disarm
it of its power; to satisfy the Law, and to bear away its curse; to pacify
the wrath of an incensed GOD, by doing right to his offended Justice; and to
redeem a number of captivated Spirits, by expiating the guilt of their horrid
impieties; is a work of no less than insuperable difficulty, to any but him
with whom all things are possible. If the weight and pressure of this ponderous
burden, had been laid upon the shoulders of the strongest Angel, it would have
sunk him immediately into perdition, and there have kept him for ever and ever.
And if the loftiest Angel could not save the World, how much less able is any
Man to do it? The Soul plunged into Hell Five Thousand Years ago, is as far
from satisfying for her own improbities, by what she has endured; as if she
were thrown in but yesterday. And when she has there been excruciated Five
Thousand times as long, her satisfactions will still be as short and imperfect,
as they were the first moment she began to flame. And if a man by suffering the
infernal plagues, cannot make amends for his own enormities; then how much less
for the superabounding wickedness of all the World?

That no Creatures are able to satisfy for our sins, and so to save our Souls;
is demonstrated thus.

This Satisfaction they must effect, either by duties or sufferings: But by
neither of these ways can they do it; and therefore not at all.

1st. Not by Duties. For the best obedience performable by them is due to GOD
as the Author of their beings. And if all their obedience must go to HIM, as
payment of a debt which they owe themselves; how can any of it be employed
toward Satisfaction for others? Yea God is not only the Author of their
beings, but moreover the Donor of that very power, whereby they yield obedience
to himself. And so they are the more obliged to Him still, but have the less
ability to satisfy either for their own, or others immoralities. Nor

2ly. Can they do it in way of punishment. For our sins being perpetrated
against an Infinite Majesty, do so become of an Infinite malignity, and are not
to be expiated but by an Infinite penalty. But creatures, being finite, are
utterly incapable of punishments that are infinite, unless they be so in way of
duration. And should any undertake to suffer punishments always to endure,
thereby to satisfy for the sins of Men; when would this satisfaction (so
making) be finished? How would our Salvation ever be accomplished? And because
none could do this mighty Work, besides that adorable one in the Text,
therefore he was pleased to set his hand to it; CHRIST JESUS came into the
World to save sinners.

But by what means is it done? Why, by entire satisfaction, he made for our
trespasses. Which satisfaction lies chiefly, if not only, in his ruful
sufferings. For being made under the Law, by virtue of his condition, he was
strictly obliged, to yield an Adequate obedience thereunto, on his own account.
Nor does his active Obedience seem to be an ingredient into his satisfaction,
but only as it may be reckoned a piece of his passion; in his free and
voluntary submission to, and meek and lowly susception of, the Obediential
state. And therefore I say, His sufferings are the Matter of his satisfaction.
And these are either corporeal, in regard of which, he is said to bear our sins
in his body: Or else Spiritual; in reference to which, his Soul is said to be
made an offering for sin.

The Efficacy of his Satisfaction results from his transcendent merit. That
merit from the superlative dignity of his Person, That dignity from the
peerless excellence of his Nature; that is, his Divinity. Which in his
miraculous conception, was complicated or connected to our despicable Flesh,
and stooped to an intimate conjunction with humanity. And tho the way of its
union and humble copulation, was ever so mysterious, as to be unintelligible;
yet in reproof and condemnation of daring Haeresiarchs, it is fairly elucidated
by the Council of Calcedon. For there the Fathers (adhering to Decrees of
Antecedent Synods) Orthodoxly defined; that CHRIST is perfect GOD, and real
Man, (...), unconfusedly, unchangedly, individedly, inseparately: Thereby
rightly defending the unity of his Person: Truly maintaining the duplicity of
his Nature: and plainly asserting, and piously indicating, the respective
proprieties of each Nature to be still retained, in their genuine distinctness
and integrity. But not to digress

This Satisfaction Socinus denies, affirming positively, Divinae Justitiae
neque satisfecisse, Disp. par. 1. cap.
neque ut satisfieret, opus fuisse. That CHRIST neither has satisfied the
Divine Justice, nor was it necessary, that it should be satisfied. Yea, which
is worse, he ranks this Doctrine amongst plane nugatoria, mere trifles. And
which is grossest of all, he calls the opinion, Frigidum, Lib. 3. de Servat.
cap. 10.
falsum, absurdum, faede summeque injustum, and horribiliter blasphemum: Cold,
false, absurd, vilely and extremely injust, and horribly blasphemous.

But in confutation of this black, and wild, and pernicious figment; we are
taught from above, that CHRIST died (...), and (...). For us. And that not only
as an Example, but as a REDEEMER. And therefore he is called (...), a price,
and (...), a ransom. And we are farther instructed that he died (...), for our
sins: and was delivered (...), for our offenses: and suffered (...), for our
iniquities. All which phrases (to them that understand the Greek Idiom, and the
sense of the expressions, as commonly used by Masters of that language, and
Writers in it) do clearly signify; that our sins are not only the final, but
impulsive and meritorious cause of CHRIST'S death.

And therefore we are told farther still; that he was a sacrifice for us. Not
only (...), an offering; but (...), a propitiation: Yea, (...), a curse. Which
implies again, and irrefragably proves, that he did not only die, nostro bono,
for our Good; but nostro loco, in our stead. And that his death was really
satisfactory in that sense, which our Church emphatically teaches in her common
Office, He suffered death upon the Cross, for our Redemption, and made there a
full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction, for the
sins of the whole World. And by means of this satisfaction, the displeasure of
ALMIGHTY GOD, who was provoked, is appeased. The Equity of his inexorable
Justice, which was injured; is vindicated. The Authority of his indispensable
Law, which was prevaricated; is fenced and secured. The guilt of the Criminous,
wherewith they were corrupted; is exterminated, and abolished. And the guilty,
most guilty sinners, which must have been condemned; may now be certainly and
eternally saved.

But there is one Query still behind.

Upon what conditions may we through CHRIST obtain Salvation? They are these
two; Faith and Righteousness. And therefore it is said, He that believes shall
be saved: and, The Righteous shall go into life Eternal. But if in this faith
there happens a failure, or an intercision salls out in our Righteousness; then
Repentance comes in as an useful Supplement, and where it is unfeigned, makes
amends for all deficiencies.

Upon this Question another may be grafted; Namely, Whether we are to be saved
by CHRIST'S imputed Righteousness? The judgments of most have leaned to the
affirmative. And tho I must not undertake to determine the Problem; yet I may
venture to assert of this prevailing opinion, that notwithstanding its great
reputation and Authority, it is liable at least to one notable exception; and
meet to be received with one prudent caution.

The Exception is this: It is not so perspicuously laid down in Scripture, as
the Patrons and Propugners of it do pretend. It is said indeed in the 4th of
Romans That Abraham believed GOD, and it was IMPVTED to him for Righteousness.
But the sense of that Text, can only be this. GOD gave Abraham a Promise; and
Abraham gave credit to the Promise he made; as it was fit he should upon the
account of his veracity. And in so doing, he did a righteous act; and for so
doing GOD reckoned him, in that instance, a righteous person. But what is this
to the imputing of CHRIST'S righteousness?

In the same Chapter it is remembered, that David describes the Blessedness of
that man, unto whom GOD imputes righteousness. And his words are these:
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD will not impute sin. So that all the
imputing of Righteousness here, amounts to no more, than a non-imputation of
sin. And therefore this place does planely subvert, rather than support the
controverted Article.

It is said also, 1 Cor. 1.30. That CHRIST is made unto us Righteousness. But
how should this be done, say the favorers of the opinion, unless by
imputation? Yet the whole verse runs thus: But of him are ye in CHRIST JESUS
who of GOD is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption. Now durst any maintain, that CHRIST is our Redemption, by imputing
it to us only? Yet as well they may hold that, as infer from the words, that he
is our righteousness by imputation. For the one is there said to be imputed, as
much as the other. And therefore for ought that is colligible thence, he must
be the one, in the same way and notion, that he is the other. And is he not
both, because he procured both? And for the same reason he is said to be our
peace too; because he purchased and procured it for us.

Again, they allege that of St. Paul. By the obedience of one (that is, CHRIST)
many shall be made Righteous. Romans 5.19.
But can any be made righteous by his obedience, except it be imputed? I
answer; It is probable they may: And these very words seem to incline to
another sense. The same Pen which wrote them, has recorded this of CHRIST
likewise: That He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the CROSS: (...), wherefore, (for which very condescensive obedience
of his) GOD has highly exalted Him, and given him a Name above every Name. Or
(as we read elsewhere) has given Him all power in Heaven and Earth. And so
power to dispense Righteousness unto his People. And so the obedience of
CHRIST, may become instrumental to the making many Righteous, tho it be not
imputed to them, because it was a means to entitle him to, and invest him in, a
power of dispensing Righteousness to men.

These are chief Texts upon which the Doctrine of Imputation has been founded.
And from these it has been as boldly and magisterially taught and recommended,
as if it were there delivered totidem verbis, in express words. But whether
they teach it so clearly, and justify it so fully, and make it so very
necessary to be believed as some imagine; let the intelligent judge. I speak
nothing in a definitive or dogmatical way. Only I find that our Church in her
Articles, says not thus; but that we are accounted righteous, only for the
merit of our LORD.

But those of us that have cordially embraced this opinion, and think we have
reason to adhere to the same; let us always do it with this caution: Never so
re'ly upon the righteousness of CHRIST, as to neglect righteousness in our
selves. For that is the Influence (it is to be feared) which this persuasion has
upon many: While they trust to be justified by their SAVIOR'S righteousness,
they disregard righteousness in themselves: Without which, the righteousness of
CHRIST shall never be imputed, tho the Doctrine in dispute were true. And to
take us off the neglect of Righteousness in our selves, we may consider; there
is nothing more earnestly or frequently urged in the sacred Volume, than our
being actually righteous. Awake to Righteousness: follow after Righteousness:
live unto Righteousness: having on the breast plate of Righteousness: being
filled with the fruits of Righteousness. And not to multiply Quotations, St.
John, let us hear speak once for all, He that does righteousness is righteous.
So that he alone can be the truly righteous man, that is practically so.

And besides; we are required to be Holy as GOD is Holy. But GOD we know is not
imputatively Holy, and therefore neither must we be so only. But as his
holiness is intrinsic, natural, and essential: so ours must be inherent,
proper, and personal. Else it can never symbolize with his, nor come up to a
just resemblance of it; as it ought to do, in conformity to that Apostolical
Precept; Put on the new man, which after GOD, is created in Righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

And the truth is, such actual, solid, and substantial Righteousness as this,
is indispensably needful to qualify us for the happiness of the future state.
For should impious miscreants that are destitute of it, be translated thither;
they would be but as Batts in the Sunshine; and the felicities about them,
would be matter of trouble and uneasiness to them, through want of
righteousness. For the blessedness of a state results from the congruity
betwixt the excellencies in it, and the persons that possess it. Now unless we
be righteous, there is no symmetry or agreement, betwixt our dispositions, and
the Heavenly Beatitudes: and therefore were we placed in Heaven its self
without righteousness, we could not be happy.

And this (by the way) gives a plausible account, and the true reason why God
imposes duties upon us. Not because acting them is beneficial; or omitting
them, any way detrimental to himself: but because thereby we might improve our
righteousness, and acquire such habits of goodness to our selves, as might
elevate our Souls into a meet capacity, of enjoying the Glories of the Eternal
World, and of being beatifi'd in that fruition.

And for this reason CHRIST cannot save sinners, but on terms of righteousness.
Not only because it is otherwise decreed, but because it is impossible; there
being no salvation, no such thing as happiness to be had, without actual
righteousness, even in the presence of GOD himself. An unrighteous Soul is as
incapable of the Beatifie Vision, as a blind Eye is of seeing the light of the
Sun.

And therefore as for Infants, Idiots, and the like, who cannot be endued with
this sort of righteousness; mercy saves them upon another account, and their
happiness may be another thing: consisting not so much in accumulated
pleasures, as in an Anodynous condition, and a state of Indolence. For the
Higher life having several degrees of bliss in it, the lowest of these degrees
(which falls to the lot of the mentioned parties) may lie chiefly in an
exemption or total immunity from all kind of troubles. At least the felicities
cannot be so sweet, and strong, and sublimate; as those of more perfectly
righteous Spirits.

Having made good what the Text asserts, that CHRIST JESUS came into the World
to save Sinners: And resolved three material Questions concerning our
Salvation: The First, touching the Author; the Second, the Means; and the
Third, the Terms and Conditions thereof: Now may such Inferences seasonably
come in, as are most deducible from the words.

The First, This;

If man had not sinned, GOD had not been Incarnate. The very end of his Advent,
or coming in a Body, was to save Sinners: If therefore there had been no
sinners to save, he had never so come into the World. Some have thought and
taught otherwise: and amongst the rest, that noble and renowned Picus of
Mirandula. Who undertook to maintain, that, Si Adam non peccasset, Deus fuisset
incarnatus, sed non crucifixus. If Adam had not sinned, GOD had been incarnate,
but not crucified: Which is highly improbable.

2. What a bitter Lamentation may we justly take up for the unbelieving Jews?
CHRIST is come to save them, and they still expect him. He died for them, he
died amongst them; and yet they think he is not born. Being given up to a
Reprobate mind, and strong delusions; and a spirit of dull and monstrous
incredulity; they will not be persuaded that he assumed our Nature, and
tabernacled amongst us, according to the expression of the HOLY GHOST.

He answered the Quality and character of the Messiah in all points; save only
that he was not a temporal Prince, as they misconceiv'd he should be. Which
gross and unhappy notion of theirs, was indeed the foundation of all theirs
prejudice, and malice against him. He was born when the Regal and Legislative
power was departed from the Jews: His Mother was a Virgin; of the City of
Bethlehem; of the Tribe of Judah; of the House of David. All which was to be.
And, which is more, when he Preached to the Jews, and converted with them, he
attested his Divinity with signs and wonders, with Glorious prodigies and
stupendous Miracles. Which all together prevailed so far, that they entered him
in the public Register of their Priests, by this Title; JESUS the Son of the
living GOD, and of the Virgin Mary. But when all was done, they rejected him at
last; and count him no better to this very day, than a Grand Impostor, and base
and cursed Seducer of their Nation.

O let us pity them, and from our hearts bewail their deplorable condition. We
can hardly bestow our tears better, than upon that blind, and obstinate, and
forsaken People.

3. ' How vast, abounding, and illimited, is CHRIST'S affection toward us? It
is high as the Heavens, unmeasurable as Eternity, infinite as Himself.' It has
far out-acted all Romance, and scorns to be contained within the compass of
Hyperboles. In compare with this, the wildest extravagancies, and most
impossible stories of licentious fiction, may seem both probable and modest
things. That CHRIST JESUS should come, and come into the World, to save
sinners; Lord what a Love was this, and who can Express it! Express it? Alas in
words there is too great penury to do it. Yea thoughts themselves are much too
narrow to conceive it. When they unite with strongest force, and even dilate
their whole capacity, and strive to grasp it in their apprehension; they strain
themselves quite beyond their power, and so dissolve into confused distraction,
leaving the mind in sweet amazement.

Miraculous love! such as none but a GOD could ever have manifested. And so
manifested, as no men upon Earth durst ever have desired. For us once to have
whispered such a thing in the ALMIGHTIES Ear, as his Sons Incarnation for our
Redemption; tho with lips laid in the dust, and spirits clothed with lowest
humility; would have been the highest pitch of Unpardonable Presumption, and a
blasphemy as loud as Thunder. But that monstrous savor which the boldest durst
not ask, GOD freely granted without request: and so much the greater was his
love for that.

'The HOLY GHOST'S description of this matchless love, is strange and unusual,
to make it the more emphatical, Ephesians. 1.18. That ye may be able to comprehend
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of CHRIST'S love. We no where
read of Love described thus. Yet this, I say, is so far from being improper and
absurd, that it is most apt and congruous.' For while he imputes Physical
dimensions to it, he does but illustrate and commend its excellence, making it
even a firm and solid Body of Love; such as for the unparalled perfection and
peculiarity of it, is not to be found but in the Blessed DEITY, which is love
essential. O consider this love and wonder; consider it, I say, and wonder at
it. That GOD the FATHER should send his SON; and GOD the SON should come
himself; and come to such a place, and come in such a way, and come to such an
end; what manner of love was here? What mighty love? What mavelous Love? What
boundless, peerless, passionate Love? Speak O Heavens, and declare O Earth, if
ever ye beheld the like. What shall I say to it? O what shall I say concerning
it? My best way is to hold my peace. I will do therefore as I now directed;
think and wonder, but speak no more; Astonished silence is the fittest Eloquence.

And truly we may well give over speaking, and say no more of this wondrous
Love. For I remember that famous Doctor S. Paul, who (as all must grant) wanted
no Elocution; was remarkably plunged in discoursing about it. He was
egregiously learned and inspired too; yet treating of this incomprehensible
love, he was presently non-plust, and fain to deliver himself at a strange
rate, Ephesians. 3.19. writing no less than contradiction. That ye may be able to
know the Love of CHRIST, that passes knowledge. What a significant
inconsistency? What a sweet and pregnant incongruity is here? Can we measure
that which is boundless? Can we fathom that which is bottomless? Can we know
that love which passes knowledge? But thus we must talk of this surpassing
love, nor can we do it in better terms: To such absurdities it drives our
shallowness, to discourse of its immensity.

But then while they live, let none of CHRIST's sincere and hearty Proselytes,
go about to question the divine love to them. To do that now, will be too
disingenious and unreasonable. For he that contemplates this illustrious act,
of his coming into this World to save it; and fluctuates and staggers in the
belief of JESUS his indulgence to his People: May next dispute, whether the Sun
shines at noonday or no; and doubt if the plainest and most demonstrable
truths, be not fallacious and uncertain things.

Herein he has given us, a stronger argument, a surer token, a clearer
evidence, a larger instance of his love, since man's defection and apostasy;
than ever he did before.

To go a little farther; Since the love and kindness of the SON of God, has
been, and is so ardent to us; let this holy flame warm our Souls with
reciprocal affections to him again. And let the egressions of our love to him,
correspond to his way of expressing love to us. That is, as he has manifested
his love, in actual coming to us; so let us show ours, in passionate desires of
going to him.

Were we exalted to the highest Glories; were we surrounded with bliss, and
incircled with Joy, and crowned with Honor and Immortality: In a word were we
above in the heavenly state; yet were we there without CHRIST, who brought us
thither; methinks we should be impatient even of that sweet condition, and find
a weariness and restlesness in our selves, till we might pass into his wished
presence, wherever it should be. But how much greater cause have we now, of
longing to be where our REDEEMER is; when we are not in Heaven, but on Earth;
in a sinning, suffering, dying state; which were it not that it leads to a
better, would not indeed be worth the having.

Methinks O Christians! As often as our dear and loving SAVIOR comes into our
minds (and sure he can never be long out) our glowing hearts should presently
take fire, and burn with pathetic longings after him; and we should not care,
either what we did, or what we suffered, so we might but ascend unto his
MAJESTY.

Thus it was with that glorious Martyr S. Ignatius, S. John's Disciple, and
Archbishop of Antioch. He professes of himself in his Epistle to the Romans; I
desire nothing, (...). Either of things visible, or invisible, so I may enjoy
JESUS CHRIST. (...), etc. Let fire, and the Cross, and troops of wild Beasts;
let cuttings, and lancings, and rackings of my bones; let tearing of my
members, and the dissolution of my Body, and the chastisement of the Devil come
upon me, so I may possess JESUS CHRIST. (...): It Is good for me to die for
JESUS CHRIST; (...), rather than to reign over the Ends of the Earth. And a
little after he cries out, (...), the LORD I desire, (...), him I seek. Thus
the holy man breathed, and thus his holy Soul panted after JESUS. O that our
desires would rise and run, and at such rate, as they have greatest reason to
do continually.

4. How studious, officious, and laborious should we be, for the good of Men;
though in what we do we debase our selves, and stoop to the most inferior
employments? The SON of GOD came into the World. And to what end? To be sole
and absolute Monarch of the Earth? And to act pompous state, or splendid
greatness, in, or over it? Did he come to wear a Robe, and to sway a Scepter?
To live in Honor, and to rule in Glory? To have Princes for his servants, and
Kings for his attendants, and Puissant Emperors for his companions? Or did he
come to erect his Pavilion in the Clouds, and to make the Skies his spacious
territories? Did he come to be crowned with the Stars, and to be clothed with
the Sun? To have Cherubim for his Guard, and Seraphim for his train? To
threaten with accents as piercing as lightening, and to command with a voice as
dreadful as Thunder; and to receive the homage and prostrate adorations of all
the Inhabitants of the Universe?

This I confess, and a great deal more, would have been but highly befitting
his MAJESTY. But widely different from all this, was the end of JESUS his
coming in the Flesh. It was to save Sinners: Despicable dust and sorry worms.
Then which he could have made a thousand times more, and a thousand times
better creatures with a word. And this was a mean work for him, especially
considering how it was to be done. For he was to save them, by satisfying for
them: And to satisfy, by Suffering. By Suffering shame, by Suffering pain, by
Suffering death, and all that innocence could endure.

BUT less then we cannot learn from hence, than to serve Mankind with a pious
industry; and never to stick at our own diminution, so we may contribute to
their Salvation. An example of this, is the great S. Paul: I will very gladly
spend, and be spent for you. 2. Cor. 12.15.

5. ' How confident may we be of our Souls Immortality? For were not their
Existence lasting, and their Life extended beyond the term of this transitory
state; our blessed LORD need not have come to purchase their Salvation, But
since he was born to ransom them from Hell, and to put them in a capacity of
future happiness; this fully evinceth, that they shall have being, when this
World has none, and live through the longest tracts of Eternity.' This Heathens
saw by their glimmering light. For as the Ingenious Poet sang, Morte carent
animae. -- And another, Sunt aliquid manes, lethum non omnia fiunt. Ghosts are
somewhat upon which the fangs of Death don't fasten.

Our Spirits are not of so mean a make, as at Death to perish with their
concrete bodies. They are privileged with perpetuity a part post as the
Schools speak. Though not (...); simply, absolutely, essentialy, and
independenly; yet per gratiam creationis, by singular favor bestowed on them
in their creation. Those noble Essences, whatever darker minds may wildly
imagine, were not designed for a temporary continuance. Their nature is
Immortal, and runs parallel with the longest line of endless duration. Their
origin is derived from GOD himself, and when his All-powerful goodness formed
them, he never meant that such Glorious lights, should only twinkle a little,
and then go out: Glitter a while upon the stage of being, and so be thrust down
into the black abyss of nonexistence.

Indeed at Death he Suffers them to set in a Cloud, and lets them go down in
the Horizon of time: But then it is that they may rise in the Hemisphaere of
Eternity, and shine in the vertical of a future life without declension. Death
is so far from extinguishing the life of Souls, that it excites it, and makes
it more energetical; raising them to an higher degree of vivacity, than any
here possessed. It only cuts the cord of vital union, which ties them up in
these rags of Flesh, and strips them of those sordid clothes of dust, which
dress them for Mortality. It only pricks the bladder of the Body, and refunds
that (...) (as Nazianzen calls the Soul) breath of the Immense mind, GOD, back
unto Himself. O let us live like those that have Souls, that have such Immortal
Souls to be sowed.

6. What a vindication of Providence is here as to the Eternal perdition of the
Ungodly? Dismal things occur in Scripture, touching the final state of Souls.
We read there, that CHRIST's Church is a little Flock: That the Gate of Life is
straight and narrow: And that there are few that shall be Saved. And many
Father the event upon GOD, his Sovereign Power, and irrespective Decree: And
talk reflectingly against his MAJESTY, as if he had arbitrarily condemned the
greatest part of Men, by irrevocable Sentence; to the most extreme and
interminable Miseries. But is this likely? Or can this be? When his own SON,
his only Son, came into the World to save Sinners; all S^nners that will be
saved?

Much might be said against this rigid, sour, ill-natured Opinion, (which
strikes so directly at the GOODNESS of GOD, that central and radical perfection
of his; and derogates from his kind and gracious Philanthropy with mighty
disparagement and defamation.) But it will not do well in confuting an Error to
confront Authority. Yet this I will add, and I wish the whole World could hear
it at once; and glad I am, that I speak it this day in so celebrious an
Assembly, because it does right to the GOD of Heaven.

There is nothing less grateful, nothing more grievous to his Sacred MAJESTY,
than the ruin of those Souls which his hands have made.

And O that none of Mankind might Perish! But they that do so by absolute
Decree. Then all the Posterity of fallen Adam, would be sure to be Children of
the Living GOD, and to triumph together in the Peace, and Joys, and Glories of
his presence, for evermore.

7. ' Let no Persons that repent truly of Sin, ever despair of their Salvation.
I know it is the commune fault of Men, rather to presume than despond of
Happiness. But though the many amongst us be addicted to presumption; yet some
may be in danger of the opposite Evil; and through the sense and sting of their
own Guilt, and the cursed instigations of malicious Spirits, strongly inclined
to desperation. And to such the comfortable Doctrine of this Text, does next
apply it self.

It bids them lift up their drooping Heads, and behold their kind and
compassionate REDEEMER. It bids them look and see how he hasts and flies most
swiftly toward them, with extended Arms of tender Mercy ready to embrace them.
A sight able to revive their gasping hopes, and buoy up their heavy, pensive
Hearts, though immersed in greatest depths of sorrow. What! can we see the Son
of GOD clothed with our Flesh, and joined to our nature, and yet conclude our
own adoption a thing impossible? Can we see the high and mighty JESUS, come
into the World to save Sinners; and yet think we cannot be saved by Him? They
are sunk into a low condition indeed, whom he cannot advance to Pardon and
Felicity. He is able to save (...) Heb. 7.25. to the uttermost. And no Sinners
(relying on his merits, and Faithfully discharging their own duties) ever
miscarried or fell short of Heaven, through deficiency in him, or any inability
to conveigh them thither.

'But we are apt to question his will therefore, rather than his Power, to save
us. But I assure you we have little cause to do it. Does He not freely invite
us to Salvation? Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden. Does he
not promise to receive us if we come? Him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out. Does he not complain, because we will not come? Ye will not come
to me that ye might have Life. Yea did he not grieve and weep to see Men's
backwardness? So he did over the famous City: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. And
when CHRIST thus importunes us to come and be saved; promises to receive us, if
we come; complains, and grieves, and weeps, because we do not come: Can we
think he is unwilling to save us?

Should we take our Bibles, and turn over the History of his blessed
Incarnation, his holy Life, his bitter and his bloody passion; we could no
where discover or find out any thing, that looks like the least unwillingness
in CHRIST to save Sinners. If he were unwilling to do it, why did he come into
the World on purpose? As the Text informs he did. Or when he had been a while
here, and had felt in some measure, the weight and pungency of his direful
Sufferings; if he had not been willing to save Sinners, why did he not shrink
and draw back, and refuse to go through them, but meekly submit to the
tolleration of them? We know what he once said: He could have prayed his
FATHER, and he would have sent him more than twelve Legions of Angels. A
sufficient Power to have rescued him from a few silly and abusive Worms. But he
never put up this petition; and was he then unwilling to save us? O do not
think so! Do not wrong him with such a thought. Once indeed he prayed, that if
it were possible, the Cup of his affliction might pass from him. But therein he
did not so much show any reluctance or unwillingness to drink it off, as the
exceeding bitterness and acerbity of it. For at the same instant, he resigned
himself wholly to GOD's disposal, and desired to Die if he so pleased. Not my
will, but thine be done.

But if CHRIST be thus willing to save Sinners, then how comes it about, that
the day of Grace should ever be past with any in this Life? And that Men should
grow up to such an height of Sin, as here to be debarred from the Mercy of
Pardon, and even to anticipate their final Sentence, by being condemned before
the Judgment?

And To this I Answer, First: it is a great Question whether the day of Grace
can be past so long as the day of Life continues. For the lewdest Persons while
they dwelt upon Earth, are no where said to be fallen into so Ruful a Condition.

Cain was a Man unmeasurably Sinful: and so was Esau: and so was Simon Magus:
and so was Judas. Yet concerning the worst of these, it was never pronounced,
that their Day of Grace was over in this World.

It Is true, Cain was thrown out of GODs presence with a Curse, But (so have
many Excommunicated Persons been) and if he had returned and sought it by
Obedience, he should certainly have found Readmission to his Favor.

And of Esau it is recorded, that he found no Place for Repentance, though he
sought it carefully with Tears. But then what Repentance was that which he
sought so mournfully? He did not seek to Repent of his Sins; but besought his
Father to Repent of his Blessing, that so he might have recovered the Right of
Primogeniture, which he profanely alien'd to his Brother. This the sight of his
loss, not the sense of his Sins, made him weep and cry out with exceeding
bitterness, ( Genesis 27.) not to GOD, to have his Trespasses remitted; (then he
had been happy;) but to Isaac, to have his Blessing reversed. But because
Isaac's Benediction was irrevocable, therefore was Esau's Lamentation bootless.

And touching Simon Magus we Read, that though he was in the gall of
bitterness, and the bond of iniquity, soaked in the virulence and venom of Sin,
and a perfect captive to the Devil; yet St. Peter advised him to Repent of his
Wickedness, and to pray to GOD, if peradventure the thoughts of his Heart might
be forgiven him. He was gone very far, when he was come to this. But though his
Case was hazardous, it was not hopeless. For the Apostle would never have set
him to work, if he had thought his Labor would have been in vain.

And for Judas, it is believed, that though his crime was of a monstrous
nature, and prodigiously aggravated by most horrid Circumstances; yet
Repentance would have brought him under the line of Mercy, and within the
compass of Pardon. So St. Austin concludes in his Tractate de util. Paenit.
Judam Traditorem, non tam scelus quod commisit, quam indulgentiae desperatio,
fecit penitus interire. It was not so much the Villainy he committed, as despair
of Mercy, that made the Traitor Judas to Perish.

Now if the Day of Grace were not past with these so notorious Offenders, why
should it be past with any while alive.

Secondly, to the Quaere I Answer: If the day of Grace, may in this Life be
past with us; this is consistent enough with CHRIST's willingness to save us.
For it is not long of him, but our selves, that the unhappiness befalls us.
While our LORD endeavors to reclaim us from our Sins, and Reduce us to
himself: and we resist the strivings of his SPIRIT, and defeat the workings of
his Providence, and elude the Methods of his Wisdom, and frustrate the
Contrivances of his Love and Kindness, destined to our good: we may hereby
arrive at such a pitch of Malice, as to be incapable of Salvation in some
respect: at such a pitch of Malice that the Ordinary influence and concurrence
of Divine Grace, which is sufficient to other Men's Salvation, will not be
effective of ours. Nor is God obliged then to exert his Grace in mightier
efforts and a Power irresistible. No, rather (considering how we have despised
his former Goodness) it is but just with him to withdraw the Commune Effluxes
of it, leaving us (as he did that stubborn Pharaoh) to our selves. And then our
Hearts, which would not be intenerated and mollifi'd by his Grace, will grow
more obstinate and inflexible.

When we are come into these Circumstances, we may well suspect that our Day of
Grace is past indeed. For then we are unlike to get to Heaven, unless by
extraordinary Dispensations, which GOD has promised to none, and very seldom
affords to any. But then who is to blame for this? Not CHRIST, for he is
willing to save us still: but our selves alone, who have sunk so deep into the
Gulf of Sin, as to render our Emergency into a State of Righteousness extremely
difficult, and in the Course of GODs usual dealings with Men, utterly
impossible. And when by our vile and licentious practices, we thus straiten and
block up our way to Heaven, and shut and bolt the Gate of Paradise against our
selves; we cannot complain that we are kept out, because CHRIST is unwilling to
let us in. No, amongst all the outcries of Perishing Souls, that pierce the
horrible Regions of Darkness, and echo in the dismal Caverns of Hell, I dare
boldly say, there is none like this: That they Languish and die in endless
misery, for CHRIST's being loath to save them from it.

But then (may some dissolute Miscreants say) if the Case stands thus: if none
may despair, if all may be saved; then what good news is here for us? we may
then continue where we are, and lay down and rest in our old delights, and go
on with confidence in our Sinful Pleasure, and yet do well enough at last.

But to them that talk at this extravagant rate, I reply in short; My design
was not to encourage the sinful, but to support the sorrowful. Not to harden
the presumptuous, but to relieve the penitent. To build a Sanctuary for the
contrite, not a refuge for the careless. And if they will snatch the Doctrine
out of my mouth, and make it minister to evil purposes; be it known unto them,
they do great disservice to their own Interests. If like Pharaohs Magicians,
they will turn a staff into a serpent; or change an antidote to deadly poison:
if they will burn by that fire, which was kindled to warm them; and surfeit of
that food which was prepared to nourish them; who can help it? Themselves must
answer for their wilful ruin; and by inverting the use of such wholesome
remedies, shall perish like fools, and none shall pity them.

For albeit CHRIST is willing to save us, yet save us he will, on his own
terms, and in his own way. And how is that? The Scripture certifies.

GOD sent his SON to bless us, in turning every one of us from our Iniquities.
And CHRIST gave himself for us, that he might REDEEM us from all Iniquity. So
that first he saves us from sin, and then from misery. That Is the progressive
method or order, which he has fixed and prescribed to himself, in carrying on
and completing the work of our Salvation. First he rescues us from the reign,
and power, and practice of Sin: and then from the guilt, and curse, and
punishment of it. If therefore we mean to persist in Sin, it behooves us to seek
out for another SAVIOR, if in the end we would be happy. And we cannot but
remember, that this Inference, counsels none against despairing of Salvation,
but such as repent, and repent truly of Sin.

8. How little cause have we to distrust Providence, as to our temporal
maintenance! GOD that honored us with so great a blessing as JESUS's Advent,
will not deny us those that are less. It Is the Apostles Inference from the same
Doctrine. He that spared not his SON, but delivered him up for us all; How
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? He that paid such a vast
price for our Souls, will not neglect them while they dwell in these Bodies. He
will certainly vouchsafe us as much as we need; though perhaps not so much as
we wish. What the Psalmist asserted, we may boldly believe; they that fear the
LORD, shall lack no manner of thing that is good. They may lack many things
good in themselves, but nothing that is good for them. He that fed Elijah by
the ministry of Ravens, and the Sereptan Widow by miraculous augmentation of
her exhausted provisions; will find out ways for our competent subsistence, in
our greatest destitution of necessary supplies: and will take care that we
shall never want, what it were better for us to enjoy.

Lastly, Since CHRIST JESUS came into the World to save sinners, how should we
laud him for that signal Mercy? It is the highest and most glorious favor,
that ever we received at his hands: And therefore for it, we should exceed in
gratitude. And therefore our Church in a deep sense of this incumbent Duty, has
appointed the Benedictus, that most admirable Hymn or Song of Blessing for our
Savior's Incarnation, to be offered up to GOD in her Morning Devotions: and
mentions it also in the General Thanksgiving; and good reason. For had he given
us leave to ask what we would; and a promise to obtain whatever we asked; we
could not have requested any thing so great: yet this he imparted, undesired.
Yea, if GOD had studied and cast about with himself to all Eternity, he could
not have invented or projected for us, a more noble kindness. O that Men would
therefore praise the LORD, for this his GOODNESS. But Men alone cannot do it
enough: let the whole Creation make one Quire, and join in consort to celebrate
his Name with solemn Praises. Let the Saints and Angels praise him. Let the
Heavens and the Earth praise him. Let the World, let both the Worlds, and all
that is therein praise him. But above all, let every sincere Penitent rouse up
himself, as the good Man did; Praise thou the LORD, O my Soul. Methinks we
should wish we had a Thousand Tongues to sing forth thankful Anthems to his
MAJESTY: And that our selves were turned all into Harmony, that so we might
extol him with the sweetest Melody. But being sure we are unable to praise him
sufficiently here upon Earth, let us resolve to do what we can, and let the
rest alone till we get to Heaven. Where our faint, and flat, and low
magnificats, shall rise up to Divine and lofty Hallelujahs, and run out in most
high and Eternal Doxologies.

I now conclude with this one Corollary. Such is the sweetness, such the
usefulness of the Text before us, that it ought never to be forgotten by us.
Let us set it therefore continually in our sight. Let us fix it in our minds,
and Print it in our memories, and every day revolve it in our cogitations. It
is as choice, as pathetick a place, as any in the Bible. CHRIST JESUS came into
the World to save sinners: what a strange gratification drops and distills,
from the affecting words? They are more fragrant than Perfumes; more savory
than Banquets: more precious than Jewels; more powerful than Rhetoric: more
cordial than Wine; more healing than Balm: more taking than Beauty; more
ravishing than Love. I know not what to say, to express my own Sentiments of
them; much less to set forth their native Excellence. They are more valuable
than all the World, to repenting Sinners. And all the felicities in the World,
cannot lift them up to such a degree of rapturous Joy, as that which spreads
and flows through their Souls, upon the serious contemplation of this most
faithful, acceptable saying, CHRIST JESUS came into the World to save Sinners.
To whom be all Glory, Love, and Obedience, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

