Preparation to Conversion; Or, Faith's Harbinger.
In a rare Epistle, writ by a Person of Quality before his death, to his
surviving Friends. Showing, That Satan prevails most by deception of our
Reason: That the beauty of Holiness and true Wisdom is unseen to the World:
That ungrateful persons are as witless as wicked: Why most men hear the Gospel
year after year, and are never the better: With wholesome instruction, to prevent
destruction. All richly fraught with choice and pithy Sentences, Similitudes,
Examples, Metaphors, Rhetorical and pointed Expressions. Which being thought by
many worth the Transcribing at no small charge, is now committed to the Press
by R. Young of Roxwel in Essex.

Much Respected,
IF you ask, Why I take this pains? Turn to Levit. 19.17. Heb 3.13. and you
have there both my answer and warrant; for I do but supply with my pen, what I
was bound to perform with my tongue. If for a President? Take that of Photian;
who, when a Friend of his would have cast himself away, suffered him not,
saying, I was made thy Friend to this purpose. And he that loves not such a
Friend, hates himself. If, why I have been silent so long? These are the only
reasons: Want of courage, fear to displease; and left you should think me to
have had more Zeal then Wit, and more Religion then Discretion: A case too
common; which makes me fear, that what our Savior says Mar. 8.38. Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me, etc. will prove a dreadful Text to a great many: For
who almost does not make a very Idol of Discretion; and more fear the censures
of men, then the displeasure of God? Men owe God some good will, but (like
those Rulers, Joh. 12.42.) they dare not show it. They would please him, yet so
as they might not displease others, nor themselves: Never considering, that he
who bears with his Friends vices, makes them his own.

Now in case you shall (with those Gentiles Rom 10.20.) receive more good by it
then you desire, admire the providence and free grace of God, who will show
mercy to whom he will show mercy, Exodus 33 19. Romans 9.15. That little which
Croesus learnt of Solon, saved his life: And had Pilate taken that fair warning
his wife gave him, it might have saved his soul. Nor am I without hope to
prevail with some of you; since Nathan wrought more upon David by one private
particular Admonition, then all the Lectures of the Law could do for three
quarters of a year together. However it were happy for millions, were they so
plainly dealt withal.

Wherefore be persuaded to hearken a while unto me, as you would have Christ
another day hearken unto you. Which that you may do, I will even refer the
point to your selves to determine. As let me propound your case in the person
of another, as the disguised Prophet dealt with Ahab, 1 King. 20. v. 39. to 43.
Or as Christ dealt with the Priests, Scribes and Elders, Luke 20. v. 1, to 20.
The case is this.

2 God in great love sent Sampson to deliver the men of Judah from the slavish
thraldom of their enemies; but they in requital bind him (in whom all their
hope of deliverance lay) and deliver him up to those enemies that kept them
under; to the end they might slay him, and still make slaves of them, Judge. 15.
Again after this, God sent unto their successors the Jews, his only Son; to
the end he might heal their diseases, feed their bodies, inlighten their
minds, and save their souls: And they in requital of all, hate, revile,
scourge and crucify him; though in killing him, they did their utmost to split
or sink the only ship that could save them. Two rare and remarkable Examples!

Now tell me what you think of these blockish Jews: Were they more wicked, or
witless, or ungrateful? I know you will answer me, You cannot tell; as the
Priests, Scribes and Elders did our Savior, when the conscience of their own
guiltiness had stopped their mouths, Luke 20.1, to 8. Or if you do make a
satisfying answer, it shall be like David's answer to Nathan's parable, wherein
he pronounced sentence of death against himself, 2 Samuel 12 1, to 8. For it is
your very Case, if you had but eyes, or the wit to see it. I mean all you, who
any way misuse, or are ungrateful to your Ministers; whom God out of his
infinite love has sent to be your Deliverers from the grievous slavery and
thraldom you are in, under Sin, Satan and Hell. I know you think your selves
wise men, and Christians good enough; yea, what but your high thoughts and good
opinion of your selves, has brought you to become scorners of your Teachers
and Instructors, and more of their godly instruction? As proud men are wont to
admire their own actions, but to abate the value and derogate from the esteem
of others; every whit as basely to vilify other men's doings, as they
over-highly prise their own, as Julian observes.

But consider it rightly, and this alone (could you be taxed with nothing but
this) not only shows you to be foolish and frantic, but so ungrateful and
wicked withal, as if your wickedness and unthankfulness did strive with Gods
goodness for the victory; as Absalom strove with David, whether the Father
should be more kind to the son, or the son more unkind to the Father.

As what can you allege for your selves, or against your Pastors? Are they
any other to you, then those three Messengers-were to Lot, that came to fetch
him out of Sodom, that he might not feel the fire and brimstone which followed?
Gen 19. Or then the Angel was to Peter, that opened the iron-gates, loosed his
bands, brought him out of prison, and delivered him from the thraldom of his
enemies? Acts 12.

3 What wrong do they do you? They beg and dig, they dig and beg; as that good
Vine-dresser did, whose Mattock kept off the Masters Ax, Luke 13.8, 9. They
beat their brains, they spend their spirits, pour out their prayers, plot and
contrive all they can to save your precious souls, (were you but willing to be
saved:) They bring you the glad tidings of salvation; would furnish and endow
you with the spiritual, invaluable, and lasting riches of grace and glory: They
are content to waste themselves (like a candle) that they may give light unto,
and bring others to Heaven, 1 Cor. 9.19. 2 Cor. 12.15. And do you, instead of
honoring, respecting and rewarding them, hate, traduce and persecute them? This
is not for want of ignorance: For you show just as much reason in it, as if
those blind, deaf, diseased, possessed, distracted or dead persons spoken of
in the Gospel, should have railed upon our Savior for offering to cure,
restore, dispossess, recover and raise them again: And had not they great
reason so to do? For shame think upon it: For did you know and rightly
consider, that you cannot be nourished unto eternal life, but by the milk of
the Word; you would rather wish your bodies might be without souls, then your
Churches without Preachers: You would not, like so many Mules, suck their milk,
and then kick them with your heels.

But this most plainly shows, that you are so far from knowing the necessity
and worth of the Word of life, that you do not know you have souls; which makes
you as little care for them, as you know them. Otherwise, how could you make
such a mighty difference between your bodies and souls? As had any of you but a
leg or an arm putrified and corrupt, you would even give money, and think your
selves beholding too, to have them cut off; Because it is the only way and
means to preserve the whole body. And if so, what love and thanks can be too
much, that is expressed to them, who would (would we give them leave) pluck our
Souls out of Satan's clutches, and bring us to eternal life? Nor can he ever be
thankful to God, who is not thankful to the instrument or means by whom God
does, or would do him good. Yea more, That man (I dare boldly affirm) cannot
possibly have any interest is Christ's blood, who is not forced with Admiration
to say, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace,
bring glad tidings of good things, and publish salvation! Romans 10.15. Isa.
52.7. But to prove and clear this, see both Examples, and Testimonies.

4. First, Examples. The Galatians are said to have received them as Angels of
God, yea, even as Christ Jesus; and that to pleasure them, they would, if it
had been possible, have plucked out their own eyes, and have given the same
unto them, Gal. 4.14, 15. and thought it their duty, to communicate unto them
in all their goods, Gal. 6.6. And likewise the Romans, Romans 15.27. Yea, by the
Apostles testimony, we that are converted do owe even our own selves unto our
spiritual Pastors, Phil. 19. and the like of other Churches: Insomuch that
Luther (speaking of the Primitive times, and of Christians in general) says
that so soon as the Gospel took root in men's hearts, the glad tidings of
salvation by Christ was so sweet to them, that in comparison thereof riches had
no relish. And Acts 2.44, 45. and 4.34, 35. do sufficiently confirm the same.
And indeed, who ever knew what Conversion and Regeneration was; who has tasted
of the powers of the world to come, and enjoyed the joy of the Holy Ghost, and
that peace of conscience which passes all understanding? but would rather have
their bodies want food, and the Firmament want light, then that their souls
should want that light and spiritual food of the Gospel, by which they are
nourished and do live? For, far better be unborn, then untaught, as Alexander a
mere Heathen could say.

That this is the one only thing necessary, and which Believers prize above
all, you may see by what holy David says of it, Ps. 27.4. and 84.1, to 11. and
119.1403. One thing have I desired, etc. Oh how sweet is thy word unto me, etc.
As turn but to the places, and see how he expresses himself; for I may but
touch upon things. And the like of wise Solomon, Pro. 8.10. True, to you that
are strangers to, and utterly unacquainted with these soul-ravishing
enjoyments, these things will appear impossible; as the like did to Nicodemus
touching Regeneration, Joh. 3.4. and to that multitude of Jews touching
Stephens vision, when he told them how he saw the heavens opened, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God in glory: Which they were so far from
believing, that it made their hearts brast for madness, to gnash their teeth,
stop their ears, cast him out of the city, and stone him to death, Acts 7.54,
to 60. They could not possibly-believe, that he should see what was hid to
every one of them.

But this I can assure you, (even you my friends) beyond all exceptions; That
if ever the mask of prejudice be taken from before your sight, or if your eyes
shall be opened before you drop into Hell, you will have other thoughts of
these things, and so of the Publishers of them, and be clean of another mind;
yea, you will loath what you now love, and love what you now loath. Yea, I dare
refer my self in this case to the very damned in hell: For what else made
Dives, being in those torments, desire Abraham, that one might be sent unto his
brethren from the dead, to give them warning, and to acquaint them with his
success, but the alteration of his judgment? And you, know how that Reprobate
Balaam wished to die the death of the righteous; though for the present he
preferred and loved riches and honor before and above his soul. But,

5 Secondly, see precepts and testimonies to confirm it. Are we not commanded
by the Holy Ghost to have them in singular love, and count them worthy of
double honor for their works sake? 1 These. 5.13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Yea, the Apostles
words are not only, Let them that labor in the word and doctrine be accounted
worthy of double honor; but he adds, He who preaches the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.7, to 15. saying also, Let him that is taught in the
word, communicate unto him that teaches in all his goods, Gal. 6.6. Yea, if
any man (says he) does not communicate, and communicate in all his goods, God
is not mocked, v. 7. So it falls, and I fear it falls heavy on many amongst us.
Again says the same Apostle, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a
great thing if we reap your carnal things? 1 Cor. 9.11. Do ye not know, that
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and
they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar, etc. v. 13, 14.
Again, does he not say, that our debt and duty (he terms it not benevolence) to
our Spiritual Pastors is such, as that we owe unto them even our own selves,
Phil. 19. with a great deal more of the like, that he may meet with men's carnal
reasonings in this case, which are not a few, 1 Cor. 9. All which is New
Testament too, if obstinacy would permit men to take notice of it.

Thus you see how you ought to esteem and reward your Ministers; and how
Believers do, and have done. Whereas you, (as if you were Antipathites to all
wisdom and goodness) hate, revile, slight, rob and persecute them. Are you not
ashamed of it? does it not make you tremble? yea, is it not enough to make you
despair of ever finding mercy at the Throne of Grace, or of having Christ your
Redeemer and Advocate? to whom, and for whose sake you do it, as I shall
suddenly show.

But you will say (for want of acquaintance with the Word of God, and your own
hearts; as every Natural man is as great a stranger to his own heart, as Hazael
was, who could not be persuaded by the Prophet that he should commit such
abominable wickedness, as a while after it fell out;) That you neither hate,
nor persecute any one of them.

To which I answer: What then makes you so spightful, in spitting out your
spleen against them, when you but hear a Minister mentioned? What makes you so
frequent in slighting, scorning, and scoffing at them where ever you come, and
in all companies? What makes you pick so many holes in their coats, find so
many faults with them, raise so many objections (if not lies) against them;
that nothing they either do, or deliver, can please you? As how many of your
cavils and exceptions could I reckon up, that I have heard from your own
mouths, if I would foul Paper with them? Yea, I could give you a large List of
instances, and in your own expressions: But they are so trivial, barbarous and
base, that I am ashamed, to nominate them; and no less unwilling, lest I should
arm other mad men with your weapons.

Now do but lay aside dissimulation, and speak the naked truth; and then say,
whether all this proceeds nor from an heart full fraught with enmity and malice
against the Ministry, even for the very graces of Gods Spirit that shines in
them? As it fared with that Council of Priests, Scribes and Elders touching
Steven, Acts 6.15. and 7.54. Do but examine your Consciences well, and you will
not deny it.

6 Again, what makes you that are so civil in other cases, so uncivil, as not
to afford them of all other men the common Title of [ Master such an one] which
you will not deny to a very Cobbler? Can you tell me? No, I dare challenge the
strongest brained Achitophel, or the most fluent Tertullus amongst you, to
yield a wise reason thereof: except that which God has set down, Genesis 3, 15. I
will put enmity between the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman.

But further to convince you, answer me another question: What makes you to
detain their dues from them, and not pay them a penny except you be forced to
it? Or if you do for your peace or credit sake, any thing is thought too much
for your Minister; and what you part with, is drawn from you as so much blood
from the heart. And then also you will basely asperse him; at least you will
allege one thing or other to save your purses; as, He had not my voice nor
consent when he was chosen; or, I hear at other Churches, and come not at him;
or, I like not his preaching, or the like: As any thing shall serve, to save
your silver, and to forestal you with prejudice, and make you resolve against
your own Conversion: For what is this, but to pick straws, as it were, to put
out your own eyes withal?

Yea, many they be, that will pretend conscience (forsooth) that they may rob
their Minister; and allege, That he has taken Degrees, is Ordained, He is a
Black-coat: Or rather which is the same in effect, He is a conscientious
Pastor, or Sheperd of Christ's sending, and not an Intruder.

But left what has been said should not prove sufficient; how basely will you
calumniate him that but takes his Dues, especially of a poor body? Ministers,
more then all the world besides, must take a restern for a shilling. And not he
alone shall suffer, but all these Churchmen (say you) are so covetous, that
they never think they have enough: when they have scarce enough to fill the
bellies of their own families. All which not only argues you as brainless as
beasts, but proves you to be as full of the serpents enmity, as the egg of a
Cockatrice is full of poison.

Thus every, or any thing shall serve their turns, that study quarrels: Even as
a crocked stick shall serve to beat a dog, when a straight one cannot be found.

Now lay all together, and tell me whether this argues not hatred? if not, what
can? For love (as the Apostle witnesses) suffers long, it is kind,
charitable, envieth not, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own,
is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, bears
all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. Yea, love is so far from finding
faults where are none, that (as wise Solomon has it) it covers or passes
over all sins, and will not see them, Prove. 10.12. So that if you loved the
Ministers, as you will pretend you do, you would deal by them, as the people
did by Ulysses; whom they so applauded for the acuteness of an ingenious mind,
that they spared to object unto him his bodily deformities; Or if any one did
show the least malignity toward him, that person was branded for a notorious
wicked man, as Homer relates. And to speak rightly, we need say no more of a
man, then -- He is an Enemy to his faithful Pastor; that is enough to brand
him: Nor can there be a greater argument of his being of the brood of Cain,
Haman, Eliah, Michol, Doeg, Shimei, Ahab, Rabshekah, Tobiah, Sanballar, Pashur,
Zedekiah, Elymus, Herodias, and their fellows, then the hatred of good
Ministers. For such men would do the same to Christ himself, were he their
Minister. There was never any so innocent or virtuous, to whom such Belialists
took not exceptions; because they are as deeply in love with vice, as others
are with virtue. Yea, whom all men commend, you have some Thersites will take
occasion to blast. I Will give you an ear-mark to know such a one by: whereas one
of the modester fort will allege, his Minister is a Presbyterian, or an
Independent, or a Royalist; this overgrown Tead will object, that he is a
Roundhead; the meaning whereof is, a Religious, Godly, Conscientious man.

7 But perhaps this is not your case. Suppose it be not; yet what I have before
convicted you of, is sufficient to prove you a soldier belonging to that great
Red Dragon, that fights against Michael and his Angels, Rev. 12. Who, when
his hands are bound, casts a flood of reproaches out of his mouth against the
Church, and the remnant of her seed which keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ, v. 15, 16, 17. But you are not at all
versed in Scripture; therefore we'll come to Reason, and therein answer me a
few questions.

Do you do by the Ministers as you ought, or as you would be done by? Would
you, when you have discharged your duty and conscience to the utmost of your
endeavor, have ill constructions made of your best actions and intentions? be
rewarded with the greatest evil, for the greatest good; and the greatest
hatred, for the most superlative love? (For, love to the soul, is the very soul
of love.) Is this an evidence that you have them in singular respect for their
works sake? Is this to receive them as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus?
Is this to make them partakers of all your goods, and to be willing to pluck
out your own eyes, and to give them if need were, as God commands, and as the
godly have been willing to do? I think not.

Indeed, if you may be your own Judges, you will (during the time of this your
prejudice) think all but little or nothing. But if the Word of God be consulted
with, it will be found persecution in the highest degree: Like that of Ahab and
Jesabel to Elias; or that of Herod and Herodias to John Baptist; or that of the
Jews, Scribes and Pharisees against our Savior: for they did but express their
utmost spite to Gods Messengers that came to save them; and so do you. And
this is a sure rule: He that now under the Gospel shows a spightfull and a
malicious mind to a godly zealous Minister; if he had lived in Christ's days,
he would have been ready to have driven the first nail into his body, and
rather have been for Barrabas then Jesus. And God measures what we do, by what
we would do, whether in good or evil. Thoughts and Desires, in Gods account,
are good and evil works: Neither does he punish or reward any thing but the
Will.

Again, whereas you think not Tongue-taunts to be persecution; you shall one
day (if you go on) hear it pronounced so, in your Bill of Indictment. Ishmael
did but flout Isaac, yet S. Paul says he persecuted him, Gal. 4.29. God calls
the scorning of his servants by no better a name then persecution. Cham did but
scoff at Noah, yet that scoff brought his fathers curse upon him, and Gods upon
that. Even the serpents hissing betrays his malice. Those two and forty little
children (though but children) were devoured of wild Bears, for only scoffing
at the Prophets bald head, 2 King. 2.24. A small matter, if Sensualists may be
Judge. But whatever you conceive of it, let all, even heart and
tongue-persecution be as far from my soul, as my soul from hell. For assuredly,
God will one day laugh you to scorn, for laughing his to scorn; and at last
despise you, that have despised him in his Ambassadors.

8 Again, you think it nothing, or no great matter to detain the Ministers
maintenance. But look narrowly into it, and you shall find it to be theft,
sacrilege, murder, yea soul-murder, and that in the highest degree: For you
rob the Minister of what is as due to him, as any land of inheritance is to the
owner. You rob God of his Tithes, offering, etc. which he accounts most
abominable; as you may gather from the many complaints and threatenings which
God throughout all the Old Testament utters touching it. For which see only
Mal. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. and 1. 7, 8, 13, 14. Hag. 1 and 2 chap. Hereby you make
your selves guilty of murder: First of murdering your Pastors body and whole
family; for if all should be of your minds, they should starve. Secondly of
your own, and all the peoples souls, as much as in you lies: For how should
your Pastor feed your souls, if you feed not his body? how should the lamp
burn, if you take away the holy oil that should maintain it? and in case it
burn not, there will be but a dark house. Men would have fire kept in the
Sanctuary, but allow no fuel; they would have the lamp burn, but without oil.
But how do they serve Christ and themselves, in so serving their Ministers? To
take away the Provante from the Army, is to betray it to the Enemy.

And indeed, if you might have your wills, or if others were of your mind and
temper, there should be no Preaching at all, no souls saved, all go to hell.
For, to expect that Ministers should preach without maintenance, yea good
maintenance, (for to furnish themselves with Books only will cost more then a
little) is as if you should shut a Bird into a cage, give her no meat, and yet
bid her sing. It amazes me to think how unreasonable and base most men be: They
will bestow more upon their very Hair in a month, or upon the Smoke of a
needless Indian wanton Weed in a week, then upon God and their sculs in a whole
year. And were it not most just with God to take away our faithful Ministers
from us, when we so ill entreat them, and so unworthily reward them? yea, since
we love darkness more then light, may not God justly leave us in the dark? and
bring upon us a famine of Preaching, who would bring a famine upon the
Preachers, by purloining the maintenance of his Ministers? It is but just with
God to take away the lamp from that Nation, which has taken away the holy oil
that should maintain it. But it is a true observation, Sacrilege is the
greatest theft, yet of it men make the least conscience.

But lastly, You make your selves not only guilty of persecution, theft,
sacrilege, of murdering bodies and souls, of provoking God to send a famine of
his Word, and the like, but you become by it guilty of high treason against
God, in thus using his Ambassadors, and against Christ and all his members. For
besides that all the disgraces and wrongs that are done to Christ's Ministers,
redound to him; and he that traduceth, or any way wrongs a Minister for the
discharge of his place, his envy strikes at the Image of God in him, as a world
of places prove: So the very root or spring of this their spite and enmity
against the Ministry, is an inbred enmity and hatred against God himself. As
when Satan flew Jobs sons and servants, his malice was against Job; Or as when
Saul darted a spear at Jonathan, his spite was against David.

And accordingly, God takes what is done to his messengers, as done to himself;
as in that case of David sending his Ambassadors to the King of Ammon, 2 Samuel
10.6, 7. They have not cast thee away, says God to Samuel, but they have cast
me away, that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7. You are gathered
together against the Lord; and what is Aaron, that ye murmr against him?
Numb. 16.11. and the like Exodus 16.7, 8. Luke 10.16. Joh. 15.23, 24. Joh. 7.7.
He that despises you, despises me, 1 Samuel 17.45. Isa. 37.23. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. Rev. 16.9.11. Psalm. 89.23.

9 Which being so, how does it behove you to look to your selves, and bewail
this sin, this horrible and desperate sin! Was there ever any that was stout
against the Lord and prospered, as Job speaks, Job 9.4. When the Pitcher
contends with the Rock, straw with the fire, it is easy to judge who will come
by the worst. And certainly, if most men were not both blind and mad, they
would more respect the Ministry: For if I understand any thing of the Word of
God, or know what rectified reason is, there is not a sin in the Nation that so
hinders the blessings, or pulls down the judgments of God upon us, as does this
very sin. And yet it is not more provoking, then it is a common sin. How it
will be answered to their Lord and master at the great day, I tremble to think:
Can you answer it then with flashes of wit, or carnal reasons, as you do now? I
beseech you look to it. Nor is our love, or hatred to God any way better known,
then by our respect to, and usage of his Ambassadors. Lip-love is but lying
love. If you love me, keep my commandments, says our Savior, Job. 14.15.
Wherefore let my counsel be acceptable: Break off your sins by repentance, kick
no more against the pricks; Refrain your selves from these men and let them
alone, lest ye be found even fighters against God, Acts 5.38, 39. Nor will it
ever repent you, if you come in Heaven, that you were stopped in this your way to
destruction. Yea, let the consideration of what you have already done, make you
sink down with shame, and tremble for astonishment to think, that
notwithstanding you have been so many years in arms against your Maker and
Redeemer, and most spightfully and maliciously persecured his Ambassadors that
came to rescue you from the subtlery and slavery of Satan, that bloody
devouring Dragon, and vowed enemy of all mankind: yet God has no taken the
advantage of casting you into Hell, but of his never enough admired mercy has
spared you to this hour! whereas he might most justly have prevented all, in
sending you body and soul into everlasting torments, when you were but a span
long. For know this, that we need no more to condemn us, then what we brought
into the world with us. Yea, we were condemned, so soon as conceived: And that
you and I are not at this present frying in Hell-flames, never to be freed, no
reason can be alleged, but O the depth!

Wherefore take heed in time, and as you tender the good of your own souls,
defer not a minute; but study and bestir your selves how you may make your
peace with God. Yea, do it while the yerning bowels, the bleeding wounds, and
compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive you* whiles ye have
health, and life, and means, and time to repent, and make your peace with God.
As you tender, I say, the everlasting happiness and welfare of your almost lost
and drowned souls: As you expect or hope for grace, or mercy, for joy and
comfort, for heaven and salvation, for endless bliss and glory at the last: As
you would escape the direful wrath of God, the bitter doom and sentence of
Christ, the never dying sting and worm of conscience, the tormenting and
soul-scorching flames of Hell, and everlasting separation from Gods blissfull
presence, abjure and utterly renounce this accursed sin. Oh, get an interest in
Christ! For till we become members of his mystical body by regeneration and a
lively faith; we (even the best of us) are as Traitors condemned to suffer
eternal torments in Hellfire, being only reprieved for a time. O bless God
all the days you live, yea, to eternity, that the gate of mercy yet stands
open!

10 But withal take hold of the opportunity before the Drawbridge be taken up,
left you never have the like again. Do not dally with God and your own souls;
for if this warning be slighted, never look for the like: For warning (such a
warning) not taking, is a certain prefage of destruction, Pro. 29.1. and 1.24,
25, 26. The sons of Eli would not hearken unto, nor obey the voice of their
Father: why? because (says the Text) the Lord was determined to destroy them,
1 Samuel 2.25. I know, says the Prophet to Amaziah, the Lord has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25.16, 20. Whereas contrarily the Ninevites by harkening to Jonah; and
those very murderers of the Lord of life, by listening to Peter, were
converted and saved, Acts 2.36, 37.

O take heed of proferring your own carnal reason before the written word of
God: And that what is spoken of Babel, may not be verified in you; We would
have cured him, but he would not be cured: lest you be given up to destruction,
as she was. What says our Savior? This is the condemnation (none like this)
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil, John 3.19, 20. Indeed, if you will rather believe
Satan, or his solicitor the Flesh, or be led by the persuasions of your own
flattering heart, which is deceitful above all things, and most desperately
evil, Jer. 17.9. No marvel you should be deaf to all has been said, as
thinking your selves already good enough, and then farwell all hope of being
better: For the opinion of men's being wise, and good enough, is the sole and
only cause of their being no wiser, nor better. Yea, therefore are millions
Christians in name only, because they think themselves Christians indeed. And
who is there in all this Nation, that thinks not himself a Christian? though
they are able to yield no reason except this; They are neither Turks nor Jews,
nor (which is worse then either, as they suppose) Roundheads. A strong
argument, I promise you, able to move the gentlest spleen alive to laughter!
for the Devil can make as good a confession of his faith as this. Yet all the
reasonings of Carnal men are thus weighty: As let me give you a few instances.

11 They will say, they love and fear God as they ought: when what he commands,
they do the contrary; are flint unto God, wax to Satan; have their ears always
open to the Temper, shut to their Maker and Redeemer; when they are Traitors to
him, and take up arms against him. A good sign they serve God and Christ, when
Satan, the World and the Flesh have more command of them: When they are so far
from loving and serving him, that they hate those that do it, and that for
their so doing; and from fearing him, that they more fear the worlds scorns,
then his anger. They will in like manner pretend they love Christ that died for
them, when they hate all that resemble him in holiness. They are Christians in
name, when they will scoff at a Christian in deed, and are enemies to the cross
of Christ: Love a form of godliness, but hate the power of it. They will do
what God forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what he threatens: will do the
Devils works, yet look for Christ's wages: Expect that Heaven should meet them
at their last hour, when all their life-long they have gallopped in the beaten
road toward Hell: Expect to have Christ their Redeemer and Advocate, when
their consciences tell them that they seldom remember him but to blaspheme him,
and more often name him in their oaths and curses then in their prayers: Will
persecute honest and orthodox Christians, and say they mean base and
dissembling Hipocrites; think they do God good service in killing his servants,
Joh. 16.2. as Paul touching Stephen, and the Jews touching Christ: Boast of a
strong faith, and yet fall short of the Devils in believing, Jam. 2.19. These
are some of their syllogisms or arguings; I could even tire your ears with the
like. But what doting, blockish and brainsick Bedlam- Positions are these?
Could rational men ever argue in this manner, had not the God of this world
blinded their eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should
not shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2 These. 2.9, 10. Did not their deceitful
hearts damnably delude them, as in that case of Leah, Genesis 30.18. and of Saul,
1 Samuel 23.7.21. and of Micah, Judge. 17.13. Turn to the places, for they are
rare to this purpose. If this be Reason, it is Reason frighted out of its wits:
Yet this is every wilful sinners case, yea of every unregenerate man in some
measure: As I Will but give you one instance more to clear it.

You shall have them maintain with incredible impudence, accompanied with
invincible ignorance; That if a man make scruple of small matters, or of those
sins or sinful customs which they allow of, and will not do as they do, That
he is over-precise: Though they may as soon find Paradise in Hell, as any Text
in the Bible that makes for looseness, or against circumspect walking. Yea, who
would dream that so gross blockishness should find harbor in any reasonable
soul, as to think that God should like a man the worse for his being the
better, or for having a tender conscience; or look for less fear, reverence,
and obedience from his servants, then we do from our servants? And yet the same
men will grant, that a servant can never be too punctual in his obedience to
his masters lawful commands. But you see the reason; Natural men are blind to
spiritual objects, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 1.18.20. and 2.14 and so no
more fit to judge of them, then blind men are fit to judge of colors. And
hence it is, that they have the basest thoughts of the best men, making ill
constructions of whatsoever they speak or do; as the Scribes and Pharisees
dealt by our Savior. Until we are born again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew
not what it was to be born again, John 3.4. Until we become zealous our selves,
we are like Festus, who thought zeal madness, Acts 26.24. Until we be humble
our selves, we are like Michal, who mocked David for his humility, and thought
him a fool for dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16. For, to carnal-minded men,
all Religion seems foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18. It faring between the Sensual and
Spiritual, as it does between Youth and Age: For as Young men think Old men to
be fools, but Old men know the Young to be fools; so Worldlings think the
Religious fools, but the Religious know them to be fools, because they have had
the experience of both conditions; as the old have been young, but the other
are utterly unacquainted with what they see and know. Besides, the one make the
Word their rule in every thing; for they live, and believe, and hear, and
invocate, and hope, and fear, and love, and worship God in such manner as his
Word prescribes: The other do all as the flesh leads them, and according to the
customs and rudiments of the world.

12 Now lay all together, and you will think it no whit strange, that
notwithstanding their condition is so miserable, they should yet be so jocund,
confident and secure, that they should neither be sensible of their present
condition, nor afraid of future Judgment. Security makes worldlings merry; and
therefore are they secure and merry, because they are ignorant. A Dunce (we
know) seldom makes doubts; yea, a Fool (says Solomon) boasts and is
confident, Pro. 14.16. Ignorance is a veil or curtain to hide away their sins.
Our knowledge, says one of the Learned, does but show us our ignorance: And
Wisdom (says another) is but one of man's greatest miseries, unless it be as
well able to conquer, as to discern. The next thing from being free from
miseries, is, not to be sensible of them. Erasmus could spy out a great
privilege in a blockish condition; Fools (says he) being free from ambition,
envy, shame and fear, are neither troubled in conscience, nor macerated with
cares. And Beasts, we see, are not ashamed of their deeds. Where is no reason
at all, there is no sin; where no use of reason, no apprehension of sin; and
where no apprehension of sin, there can be no shame. Blind men never blush;
neither are Worldlings ashamed, or afraid of any thing; because for want of
bringing their lives to the rule of Gods word, they perceive not when they do
well, when ill. The Timber not brought to the Rule, may easily appear straight,
when yet it is not. Whereas every small sin, to a holy and regenerate man that
weighs his sin by the balance of the Sanctuary, is very grievous, and
disturbeth his conscience exceedingly.

Besides, the Regenerate know, that the very end for which they were created
and redeemed, was, that they might honor, love and serve their Creator and
Redeemer. They remember also, that they bound themselves by vow and promise in
their baptism so to do. Whereas these brainless and brutish men never once
consider what they came into the world for, nor what will become of them when
they depart hence: Only their care is, that they may eat, drink, play, sleep
and be merry: Whereupon they spend their days in mirth, and suddenly they go
down into hell, as Job speaks, Job 21.13. For, like men sleeping in a Boat,
they are carried down the stream of this World, until they arrive at their
Graves-end Death; without once waking to bethink themselves whither they are
going, to Heaven or Hell.

I grant, that in their long sleep they have many pleasant dreams. As for
instance: They slumber, and suppose themselves good Christians, true
Protestants; they dream they repent them of their sins, and that they believe
in Christ; they dream they have true grace, that they fear, and love, and serve
God as they ought; they dream they shall go to Heaven and be saved: But the
truth is, all their Religion is but a Dream, and so is their assurance of
salvation. They have Regeneration in conceit, Repentance and Righteousness in
conceit; they serve God well in conceit, and they shall go to Heaven only in
conceit, or in a dream; and never awake, until they feel themselves in a bed of
unquenchable flames. Neither did pure and naked Supposals, ever bring any man
to eternal life.

13 Which being so, and that with the greatest part of the World: How does it
concern every one of you to try and examine your selves, whether it fares not
so with you; and to mistrust the worst of your selves, as all wise and
sound-hearted Christians do; as you may see by the Apostles, Matthew. 26.22. even
every of them was jealous of himself, and examined his own heart, though but
one of them was guilty of that soul sin which Christ spoke of.

Now if you would examine your selves but by those marks I have already given
you, you may easily see whether you are the men guilty of what I have laid to
your charge. If you would be further informed, ask your selves only these three
questions. Whether you are of that small number, whom Christ has chosen out of
the world? Whether you are Regenerate? Whether you have true and saving faith?
For otherwise all your hopes and persuasions are but vain presumptions and
delusions.

First, Are you of that small number? For, the greatest number, whether of men,
or great men, or great Scholars, go the broad way to destruction; and but a few
of either, the narrow way which leads unto life; as appears by many clear
testimonies and examples; for which see those known places, Mat. 7.13, 14. 1 John 5.19. Rev. 20.8. Christ's flock, that believe the Gospel, are but a little
flock, Luke 12.32. and but few in number, Isa. 10.22. and 53.1. Romans 9.27. and
10.16. Rev. 3.4. 2 Cor. 4.4. Mat. 8.34. and 27.22. Acts 28.22. Rev. 13.16.

Yea, of all the CCLXXXVIII several Opinions which Philosophers held touching
the Chief good; never any was (...) to think the way to attain to it, was by
doing as the most do. Yea, they all concluded, that Number was the best note of
the worst way. And we even see by experience, that the basest things are ever
most plentiful. And therefore it amazes me to think, how men should be so
blockish as they are in this particular: for if you mark it, most men walk in
the broadway, and yet every man thinks to enter in at the strait gate: which
could never be, if they were not fools, or frenzy. Again take notice, that
many seekers fall short of heaven, Luke 13.24. Do you strive? The righteous
shall scarcely be saved; what then shall become of the unrighteous? 1 Pet. 4.18.

14 Secondly, Are you regenerate and born anew? For Christ's words to Nicodemus
(a knowing, honest, moral man) are express; yea, and he binds it with an oath:
Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye be born again ye can in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

Now if you be regenerate, it will appear by this: Regeneration or newbirth, is
a creation of new qualities in the soul, as being by nature only
evil-disposed. In all that are born anew, is a change, both in the Judgment
from error to truth, and in the Will from evil to good; and in the Affections
from loving evil, and hating good, to love good, and hate evil; in the whole
man from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Is this
change wrought in you? For without it there is no going to heaven, no being
saved. Then --

Thirdly, Have you a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ? For there is no
coming to Christ but by faith, Heb. 11.6. By faith we receive the forgiveness
of our sins, Luke 7.47, 50. By faith we are justified, Romans 3.26, 28, 30. Gal.
3.8. By faith through grace we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Luke 18.42. By faith
through the power of God we are kept and preserved to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Nothing but faith can assure us of Gods favor, Eccles. 9.1.2.3. By faith we
obtain whatsoever we ask, Mat. 21.22. By faith we are blessed, Gal. 3.14. By
faith we know God, 1 John 4.7. Psalm. 9.10. Without faith we cannot profit by
hearing the Word, Heb. 4.2. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, be they never so glorious
performances, Romans 14.23. and 10.14.

Now you shall know whether you have faith, by this: Faith comes by bearing the
Word preached, Romans 10.17. And the Spirits powerful working with it, Ioh. 3.3.
5.8. Faith purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. works by love, Gal. 5.6. and
sanctifies the whole man throughout, Act. 26.18. Faith is known by its works,
Iam. 2.17. 18.22. Faith and holiness are as inseparable as life and motion, the
sun and light, fire and heat. Again, Faith believes the threats of the Word,
together with the promises; and thereupon fears sin, as it fears hell. Again,
if the Image of God by faith be repaired in you, you cannot but love them that
love God, 1 Ioh. 3.10.

Besides, this is a sure rule: That that persuasion only which follows found
humiliation, is Faith; That which goes before it, is Presumption. And as
Ambrose speaks; No man can repent of sin, but he that believes the pardon of
sin; nor none can believe his sins are pardoned, except he has repented.
Lastly, how easy a matter soever men think it is to believe; he that goes
about it, shall find it as hard a work to believe the Gospel, as to keep the
Law: And only God must enable to both.

Now if upon trial you evidently find that you are of Christ's little flock,
that you are regenerate, and that you have this precious grace of Faith wrought
in your heart, you may comfortably assure your self that you shall be saved.
Otherwise the Devil and your own heart do but delude you, in promising you the
least benefit by the blood of Christ: Yea, it had been better for you, that
there had been no Christ come into the world: For, even the mercy of God,
(which you have contemned) and the means of grace, and the offer of salvation,
shall but inhance your damnation. Yea, Christ himself that only Summum bonum,
who is a Savior to all Believers, shall be a just Revenger to you, if you go
on; and bid you Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. Matthew. 25.41.

15 And so much, for the discharge of my conscience and duty; and to make a
supply of that, which I should have some way performed long since.

Yet least I should imitate those, who kindle a fire under greenwood, and leave
it so soon as it begins to flame; (for I take it for granted, that some of you
will lay to heart what has been said) I have sent you three Books (writ by an
impartial Author, not a Party) which I hold exceeding profitable for you to
peruse. The one speaking more home and full to this matter. The second showing
how it comes to pass, that so many are deceived, who hope to be saved. The
third setting out to the life, the very thoughts, words, and actions of all
natural men; insomuch that no glass can more lively represent your faces, then
it does your hearts. Therefore that you may not be disappointed of your end, by
mistaking your way; that you may become as true friends to God, and the
Ministry, as you have been bitter enemies; and so have your part and portion
with them at Gods right hand, where are pleasures for evermore: Be persuaded to
read them, with as much observation and circumspection, as you would do the
Evidences of your Inheritance. Neither count it as a thing indifferent, that
may either be done, or dispensed with; except you are indifferent whether you
be saved or damned. Yea, so mind what you read, as if it were an Epistle writ
from Heaven, and sent to each of you in particular. Expect not that Christ
Jesus himself from Heaven should call to you severally by name, as he did to
Saul, and say, Ho Ishmael! such a one; or Ho Elymas! such a one; why do thou
persecute me? I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Acts 9.4, 5. Which yet, if he
should, it were no more in effect then he has often done; nor would you be any
more warned, or reclaimed by it. As is evident by the example of Hazael, 2
Kings 8.12, 13, etc. And by what Abraham told Dives, Luke 16.31. If you will
not believe Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles in his Word;
neither would he be persuaded, though one should be sent unto you from the
damned in hell, or from the glorified spirits in heaven. Wherefore hearken unto
Conscience; and what concerns you, apply it not to others, as the most do. Do
not like a Child, that beholding his own face in a glass, thinks he sees
another childs face, and not his own. Want of Application makes all Means
ineffectual. Yea, there are very few men that make not the whole Bible and all
the Sermons they hear, yea the checks of their own Consciences, and the motions
of Gods Spirit utterly ineffectual, for want of wit and grace to apply the same
to themselves. Whereas if they would rightly and ingenuously apply but one Text
or two unto their own souls, as they can unto others, (being better able to
discern others moats, then their own beams) they might be everlastingly happy.

16 But it is now a just plague upon our so much Formality and Profaneness,
under our so much means of Grace; that because we (many of us) have heard the
Word, and enjoyed the means for thirty, forty, fifty years together, and are
never the better, bring forth no fruits thereof; that Christ should say unto
such, as he did to the fruitless Fig Tree, Mar. 11.13, 14. Never fruit grow on
thee henceforward. And the truth is, if you observe it, you shall very rarely
hear of an old Formalist, or Protestant at large, that ever is converted, (but
young ones, as Ministers can sufficiently inform you:) Perhaps they may turn to
be Antinomians, Ranters, Quakers, or the like, and embrace Error; but they turn
not to the Truth. Or if so, it is a greater miracle then was the creating of
the whole world. For, in making such a one a New creature, must be a number of
miracles: A blind man is restored to sight, a deaf man to hearing, a man
possessed with many devils dispossessed; yea, one not only dead in sin, but buried
in the grave of long custom, with a gravestone laid upon him, raised from the
dead; and in every one, a stone turned into flesh. In all which God meets with
nothing but opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

Thus I have been large: But as John could only baptize with water, so I can
but teach you with words; And when God withholds his contemned grace, Paul
himself cannot move a soul. If the Holy Ghost shall set it home to your hearts,
that you may so meditate on what has been spoken, and so practice what has
been prescribed; that God in Christ may be pacified, your sins by free grace
pardoned, and your souls eternally saved: That while you are here, you may
enjoy the peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. and when you
depart hence, you may arrive at the Haven of all happiness in Heaven, where is
fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore; Blessed and happy are ye, Psalm.
16.11. Which is my prayer and hope, and should be my joy.

FINIS.
London, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, and are to be sold by James Crump in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard, and Henry Cripps in Popes-Alley. 1658.


