Armor of proof, or A Sovereign Antidote, against the contagion of evil
company. Together with the skill, will, and industry of lewd ones; in tempting
to sin, and drawing to perdition. Being subjects of concernment for the younger
sort.

THE SECOND PART.

By R. Young of Roxwel in Essex, Florilegus.

My son, if sinners entise thee, consent thou not: walk thou not in the Way
with them; refrain thy foot from their path.

Prove. 1, 10. 15. ^^NDON, Printed by I. M. for James Crump, in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard, 1655.

TO AL YOUNG STUDIENTS, IN THE UNIVERSITIES AND INN'S OF COURT APPRENTISES OF
LONDON, SONS AND SERVANTS IN THE WHOLE NATION.

R. Y.

Dedicates this small piece of his Labors, and wishes increase of all grace
and happiness.

Armor of proof, against evil Society, etc.
The second part.
Sect. 24.
AND so much of the first part, touching the many advantages, that Satants
instruments have above Gods servants, in winning, and keeping, and improving
there converts: What men ought to do, that would not be overcome by there
aluerments: and that of all the rest, we must refrayn the company of wicked
men, and not dispute with them; if we mean not to be infected by them, partake
of there sins, nor be infeoffed in there punishments: Together with the
Lawfulness of shunning all familier Society, and converse with such. And now
least what has been said, should not be sufficient: See in this Second part,
some Reasons to inforse men there unto; which the Godly wise propound to
themselves, when they bid adue to there old associates in the broad way, and
purpose to pledge them no more, in there wicked customs.

Reasons of breaking off Society, with our vicious Consorts.
The reasons are principally 5. and they are weighty. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Because
their company would bereave us of comfort, which otherwise we should enjoy,
being alone.
That They may come to the sight of their errors. we may not be Infected by
them, nor partake of their sins. Infeoffed in their punishments. So far as
is possible we may be at peace with all men.

FIrst, that thereby they may come to the sight of their errors, and
consequently be reclaimed, S. Paul when he commands the Corinthians to shut the
incestuous person out of thelr society and fellowship, give this reason, that
his Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Corintb. 5. 5. Again, when
he writ to Timothy, that he had done the same ^ouching Hymeneus and Alexander,
he yields this to be the reason, that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1
Timothy 1. 20. And in another place* If any man obey not our saying, note him
by a letter, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 3.
14.

It was the practice of the primitive Church, in her first love, that she might
shine in beauty and fairness above all other Synagogues, not to admit any
scandalous person, or open offender into the Communion of Saints; until their
foul spots were carefully washed off, and taken away by the tears of
repentance. The bread of the children was not given unto dogs; neither, by an
equal bounty, to the godly and the wicked, was there an equal encouragement to
godliness and iniquity, but a separation was made between the sick and the
whole; and this separation had no other intent, but edification; even an
edification of the spirir, by the destruction of the flesh: so that men could
find no fault with the dispensers of this power, having nothing to complain of,
but that their lives thereby were sought to be amended, and their souls to be
saved. I confess, that was a separation of a higher nature, the power of the
keys being added, they were delivered up to Satan, shut out of Heaven; herein
it is not so, but this serves to the same end, and is done only in cases of
like fact.

The cause was weighty, for which the gates of Heaven, were to be locked;
great, in the thing done; or great, in the wilfulness of the doer; and this not
without reason: for the doom was heavy, and fit for the back of a strong and
mighty evil: it was a short damnation, a temporal hell, a shutting out of
Heaven upon earth, yea, Heaven in Heaven, even the joys, and comforts of the
spirit of consolation. Neither could it be but an excellent remedy, for,
besides that it was Gods institution, the remedy was fitted to the disease: a
degree of presumption, was encountered with a degree of despair; the Scorpion
was made a medicine, against the sting of the Scorpion; Satan was set on work,
to take him down by terror unto salvation; whom before he animated and puffed
up to destruction; he, that said at first, sin boldly, for ye shall not dye at
all; now he changes his voice, and says, thy sin is greater then can be
forgiven thee. But the wisdom of dispensation suffered this roaring Lion no
longer to terrify, but ^^til his terror did mollify: he aimed indeed at
despair and destruction; but the Church aimed at humiliation, and conversion,
yea, at consolation and salvation. And indeed humiliation for sin, is the only
way to conversion from sin; conversion from sin, the only way to the
consolations of tht Spirit; and the comfortable spirit is both the guide and
the way to life eternal: therefore, when the man is humbled, Satan is
casheired; the horseleech is taken away, when he has sufficiently abated the
vicious and superfluous blood.

Thus were men healed, by wounding; exalted by humbling: O admirable use and
command of Satan! he is an enemy to God, and yet does him ^^^ice; he is an
adversary to man, and yet helps him. A strange thing, that Satan should help
the incestuous Corinthian, to the destruction of his flesh, his concupiscense,
and the edification of his soul. A strange thing that Satan should teach
Hymeneus and Alexander not to blaspheme: he is the author of blasphemies, and
yet he teaches not to blaspheme.

But is Satan contrary to himself, and is his Kingdom divided in it self? no
surely: but one that is stronger then he both in wisdom and power, manageth
both his craft and malice, to ends, which himself intends not. The devil is
one and the same still, even purely malicious; but God suffers him to go on in
his temptations, just so far as temptation is profitable, and no further:
therefore while Satan is driving the offender to despair, God stops his
course, when the sinner is come to due humiliation: and then, as it was with
Christ in the wilderness, so is it with the humbled sinner, Satan is
dismissed, and the Angels come an^ minister unto him.

This was the nature, manner, and end of public excommunication: private has
relation to it; both touching canse and end. First, public had respect to the
cause; that it was to be used, only in case of scandalous, open, and notorious
impiety: so has the private; we do not break off society with any for
weaknesses, and sins of infirmity. Secondly, that did only aim at their
amendment, conversion, and salvation: so does this; we desire only to have them
look into themselves, where the fault lies, and seek to amend their course: and
certainly nothing will sooner make the adulteress or drunkard bethink
themselves, then when they see, all that are honest and sober, even their
neighbors and old associates, shun their company and despise them, as if they
were not worthy of humane society: and if they have the least desire to be
reputed honest and sober again, and admitted their familiar converse, (without
which, they are, as it were, banished into exile) they will do what possibly
lies in them to redeem their credit, and merit their good opinion, by a more
sober, honest, and holy demeanor: the disparity lies only in the power and
severity of the agents; we cannot, we dot not, we desire not to deliver them up
to Satan; but heartily pray that they may be delivered from him, and all evil.

. 25.
SEcondly, That we may not be infected by them, nor partake of their sins. It
is a true Proverb, Evil company corrupts good manners: and He that will not
evil do, must keep from all that longs thereto. To be safe from evil works, is
to avoid the occasions; especially, he that will keep himself from iniquity,
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, must have no
fellowship with wicked persons, the workers of darkness: Joseph thought no
weapon comparable, for the beating off his Mistresses assaults, to running away.

The first thing that God did, after he created Heaven and Earth, was, to
separate light from darkness; probably to show, that the good should first of
all separate from the evil, if they mean not again to become evil. It is not
more hard to find virtue in evil company, then to miss vice. They were mingled
among the heathen (says the Psalmist) and what follows? they learned their
works, Ps. 106. 35. Peter had never denied and forsworn his Master if he had
not been in company with Christ's enemies: but then how soon was he changed?
Now, says one, If such a Ce^ar fell, how shall I stand? I will not therefore
hazard the frail potsheard (my fleth) upon the rock of evil company for any
thing. David had never dissembled, if he had not been among the Philistines:
which made him after (that he might wisely shun that occasion) say, depart from
m^ all y^ workers of iniquity, for I will keep the comman lements of my God,
Psalm. 119. 115. intimating, that he could not otherwise: nay, how many
thousands have confessed at the Gallows, I had never come to this but for evil
company, which drew me to these courses? yea, the truth is, we can not come
amongst these vipers, and not be stung by them; for even to hear them speak,
will make us either angry, or guilty; and not to be imtempe^ate with them for
company, is a great discourtesie, if not a quarrel. Many a man had been good,
that is not, if he had but kept good company.

There is a pliable disposition in all men naturally to evil; we follow it, as
Iron does the Loadstone, by a natural and hidden propensity: our corrupt nature
is like fire, which, if there be any infection in the room, draws it straight
to it self: or like Jet, which omits all precious objects, and attracts nothing
but straws and dust: or, if a man has both good and bad in his nature, either
of them will fortify, as they meet with their like; or decline as they find a
contrary: as Sampson did in his strength, who, at first being hard enough for
all the Princes of the Philistines, at last, by keeping Dalilah company, they
set a boy to lead him.

Yea, suppose a man stands indifferent; his company, whether good or evil, will
work him into a new nature; and by continuance, he shall grow up to the same
height with them, as the Hop grows to the end of the pole, be it never so
high, and he himself shall do the like to others; as one piece of Iron, being
rubbed with the Loadstone, will draw another piece, even as if it were the
Loadstone it self.

A good man in ill company is like a precious pearl, fallen into the mud; which
the longer it lies, the deeper still it sinks into it: for, if the force of
custom, simple and separate be great; the force of custom, copulate, and
conjoined, and collegiate, is far greater; for their example teaches, company
comfort, emulation quickneth, glory raises: so as in such places the force
of custom, is in her exaltation: which made the mother of Alexander, the
twenty sixth Emperor of Rome, fo careful of her sons education, that she kept
continually a guard of men to take heed, that no vicious persons came unto him,
to corrupt him in ev^l.

It was a good conceit of Themistocles, and not trivial, when he set up a bill
of an house, which he had to let, that he added, aye, and there be good
neighbors too: for it shall go hard, but neighborhood will somewhat mould the
whole family into better or worse, as themselves are. The sore eye, we know,
in^ecteth the son: and they that sleep with dogs shall swarm with fleacs:
yea, a man's posterity after him, shall gain, or loose by the bargain. It were
happy, (...) the injury of a wicked man could be consined to his own bosom;
that he (...) fare the worse for his sins; that it were but self do, self have:
but as his lewdness, like some odious ^ent, is diffused through the whole room,
or place where he is, and reaches to the times, upon which he is unhappily
fallen: so after generations are the worse by means of him. An ill president, is
like Goodwin Sands, which not only swallowed up his patrimony, but still
continues a dangerous place, where too many have miscarried* He is a very mean^
person, that draws not some Clyents after him: even Thewdas and Judas had
their four hundreds to accompany them. One man may kindle such a fire, as
thousands are not able to quench: one plague sore may infect a whole nation:
and all the venom of sin is not spent in the act.

Sin among men, like the Murrain in Cattle, or scab among Sheep, is of a
catching and infectious quality: and like the Plague or L^prosie, will run
along from one to another: our corrupt nature is like tinder, which is kindled
with the least spark: wherefore it behooves us to avoid all provoking objects:
as a man that has Gunpowder in his house, keeps it ^afe from fire: and well
were it for us, if lewd ones were forced to cry, as the Leper in Israel, I am
unclean, I am un^lean.

Every thing labors to make the thing it meets with, like it self; fire,
converts all to fire; air, exiccates and draws to it self; water, moistens
and resolves what it meets witha^; earth, changes all that we commit to it,
to her own nature. Every man will be busy in dispending that quality which is
pr^dominant in him: we can converse with nothing, but will work upon us, and by
the unperceived stealth of time, assimilate us to it self: one rotten Aple will
infect a whole floor: one putrid grape corrupts the whole sound cluster. The
choice therefore of a man's company, is one of the most weighty actions of our
lives; for our future well or ill being, depends on that election: if we choose
ill, every day inclines us to worse, we have a perpetual weight hanging on us,
that is ever sinking us down to vice.

Antisthenes wondered at those which were curious in buying but an earthen dish,
to see that it had no cracks, nor inconveniences, and yet would be careless in
the choice of friends, and take them with the flawes of vice. What was the
reason (think we) that our Savior would not suffer his weak Disciple, in the
Gospel, to go and bury his dead father? Luke 9. 60. It was not any averseness
to civil, much less filial respect and duty to Parents; yea, he preferred
mercy before sacrifice; but he well knew, that when he once met with his carnal
friends at the funeral, they would pervert him again, and quickly flout him out
of his new Masters service, and that the Gospel should soon loose a Preacher of
him. The reason why the Raven returned not into Noah's Arc, as the Dove did, is
given by some, because it met with a dead carkase by the way.

A wise man will be wary, not only to shun sin in the action, but in the very
occasion. How many, that meant not to sin, are won only by the opportunity? for
occasion and our nature are like two inordinate lovers, they seldom meet* but
they sin together, and every act of sin, ties a new knot: if we keep them
asunder, the harm is prevented: and it is easier to deny a guest at first, then
to turn him out, having stayed a while: it is easier to keep fire from flax,
then to quench it after it is on fire: a man may spit out a spark, but when
once kindled, there is hardly any quenching of it. Why do we pray, deliver us
from evil, but that we imply, besides all other mischiefs, that there is an
infectious power in it, to make us evil? Let us therefore do what we pray, and
pray that we may do it: yea, O Lord, free us both from speech and sight of
these bauds and panders of vice, so far as is possible; if not, at least from
joining in league, or dwelling in house with, or having dependency on such.

O how many are there, that, like the Pine Tree, with their very shadow, hinder
all other plants from growing under them: or, like the great mountain Radish,
which, if it be planted near the Vine, causes it to starve and wither away?
Alas! it is nothing to be godly in Abraham's house: but for a man to dwell in
the tents of Kedar, or to live in the Court of Sardanapalus; and yet to keep
himself upright, is a matter of great difficulty, especially, for him that is
not well rooted by time and experience. A sore new skind will fret off again,
with the least rubbing; yea, the very sight of evil is dangerous, to such an
one; lusting, for the most part, follows looking; as we see in Eve, Genesis 3.
6. and David 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3. which makes Solomon speaking of a strange woman,
advise us to keep far from her, and not once come near the door of her house,
Prove. 5. 8. It is a hard matter for that soul, not to fall into those vices,
unto which the eyes and the ears are enured, not out of love, but custom, we
fall into some offenses.

We read that Persina, that Ethiopian Queen, in Heliodorus, by seeing a fair
picture of Perseus and Andromeda, was brought to ^ed of a fair white child;
whereas Pope Nicholas the third's Concubine, by seeing of a Bear, was brought
to bed of a Monster. I am sure this is true in the moral of it; which should
make us equally love good company, and hate evil. I know there be in every
place whole troops of evil persons; and where there are many pots boiling,
there cannot but be much scum: so that a man shall find it, either impossible,
or hard, never to be amongst them, or shift off their solicitations. Wherefore
if at any time (as no fly is more importunate) they ^hrust themselves into thy
conversation, do as those which must necessarily pass by a carrion in the
way; hold thy breath, be alone in a multitude, abhor to participate with them
in their vices, and hasten to be out of their air, as P^ter did out of the
high Priests hall, so soon as Christ looked upon him: and if they yet follow
thee, turn back to them, with the Angels ^arewel, increpet (...) Dominus. And
lastly, if by chance, with Peter, thou have taken the least soil, or infection
from these poisoned and pitchy Links, be sure to scrape or brush it off thy
soul again, by prayer, examination, and humiliation: as they that come out of
infected houses, air, or wash their garments, for the more safety, Thus did
Peter, not without cause, not without benefit and commodity.

. 26.
IT is true, they will persuade us; that instead of being infected, we may gain
by their company; and tell us, that true Crystal may touch the Toade without
being poisoned; that the Diamond will lie in the fire, witho^t being consumed;
that fish may live in salt waters, and yet retain a fresh taste; that though
rust will fret into the hardest steel, yet it does not eat into the Eme^al^;
that though the Lodestone draws Iron after it, yet it cannot stir Gold, nor
the Jet steel, though it does straw; that though the Sun hardens clay* yet it
so tens wax; that if a Ship has a sure A^c^or, it may lie safe any where*
neither is it absolutely unlawful for us to keep them company, seeing Christ
kept company with Publicans and sinners of all sorts.

Answ. Here are good words, but no security; which therefore an experi^nced man
gives the hearing of, but stands (the while) upon his own guard. No charity
binds us to a trust of those whom we have found faithl^sse. Credu^ity upon weak
grounds, after palpable disappointments, is the daughter of fol^. He that has
once broken his faith, will not easily be t^usted. I know Physicians may
converse with Leprous persons, uninfected; but then they must have stronger
Antidotes, then their natures give them, or else themselves shall stand in the
same need, and of Physicians become Patients, and need Physic: ^o that may be
lawful, in a sage and stayed person, which is unfit for an ungoverned eye once
to look upon. We read, Genesis 19. 17. that Lot and his wife, were forbidden to
look back at the destruction of So^om; when to Abraham it was left at large,
and without restraint, he being a man of better ru^ed affections. Again. I know
the Devil cannot hurt me, so long as God is with me: as the best Lodestone
cannot draw Iron unto it, if the Diamond be by: yea, ^he very fear of God, and
thought that he looks on, as one spoke of grave Cato, will keep a man from
yiedling to their temptations, as it did Joseph, touching his Mistrisses
allurements: and that faith, as it is no coward, so it is ever victorious: what
then? Though faith be confident, yet it is not impudent; it knows a guard of
Angels will keep us in all our ways, but not in our wanderings: though it may
be lawful to come among them, yet wisdom forbears some lawful things, because
they may be occasions of things unlawful. He that abstaines from nothing that
is l^wful, will soon be brought to ^lo that which is unlawful. The note which
comes too near in the Ma^gent, will skip into the Text, at the next impression.
He that will go as ne^r the ditch as he can, will at some time or other fall
in. He that will do all that he may, will sometimes do what he ought not. It is
hard for the b^st man to say ^how far he will be tempted. If a man will put
himself among Philistines, he cannot promise to come forth innocent; or if he
do, that soul which lives among thorns, shall hardly thrive in Grace. How many
have fallen into a fa^hion of swearing, scoffing, drinking, out of the usual
practice of others: as those that live in an ill air, are infected with
disea^es? A man may pass through Ethiopia unchanged, but he cannot dwell
there, and not be di^colou^ed. When once a man gives himself over to be the
companion of vice, in the and he becomes the very slave of vice. The Ox being
tied to the Fig Tree, ^ooseth his strength. Many strokes overthrow the
strongest Oak. Many drops of rain, though never so soft, pierce the hardest
Marble, yea, even the slint ^one. And let graces be never so well fixed in a
man's heart, yet ^e may ^oon ^ave them consumed and wasted this way, if he take
not heed: as S^ow and Ice cannot be so hard congealed, but they will melt, if
they come to the fire. And ^ttle do our peremptory resolvers in this case know,
or conside, (...) the insi^^^ative power of evil, or the treachery of t^^ir own
hearts, in receiving it, or (...) importunity of wicked deceivers, in ob^uding
it: they are the worse (...)

An Egg covered with salt (as Philosophers teach) has the meat of it deleli
consumed, whilst the shell is whole. And we read of many Towns, which hav^^ in
time been undermined, even with the most impotent and weak Creatures^ as one
in Spain, with Con^yes; in Thessalia with Moles; in France wit^ Frogs; in
Africa with Flies.

Many an one receives poison, and knows not when he took it. Many breat^ in
this world, like men sleeping in a boat, are carried down the stream, even
(...) ^their (...), without waking, to think where they are.

No man proves extremely evil on the sudden: through many insensible d^
^clinations do we fall from virtue. Sathan's agents are still scattering his
(...) darts, among the Army of Israel; and when they light upon wood, they
kindle; when upon fl^x, they flam^; when upon gunpowder, they blow up all They
therefore that lov^ such intricate and perplexed walks, had need of ^ron shoes.

True it is, that Christ conve^sed and kept company with Publicans and sinners
(as the Physician with the sick) to heal their souls: neither did the^ make
him worse, but he made them better: but as true it is, that he was with^out the
level or temptation; and so is no gene^al war^nt. I will therefore no^ only
shun evil, but the means to come to i^; an^ to avoid hurt, I will (...) my selt
out of ^hot: neither will I presume, being but a man, to follow my master in
that which he did as God. Indeed, many are so presumptuous of their strength,
that they think they can come in any company, and yet come of clear: but he
which comes to save one drowning, must be stronger then the other, or else he
will be drowned himself.

Pliny reports, that a Family near Rome would go upon live coals without being
burnt: had it hereupon been necessary for others to put the same in practice?
no, neither is it necessary for us to do that herein which our Savior did Our
min^s have not that ballast in them, which his ^ad, and so are sooner
endangered, by the floods of wickedness.

Secondly, wher^as they object: that we may gain by their company: I confess
it possible, for even the most venomous and ^a^nous things that are* have their
commodi^es, as well as their annoyances: And the Cock by scraping in a
dungnill, did once find a Jewel: Virgil from Enniu's dunge did Gold extract:
and Apoth^caries of Vipe s flesh can make an An^idote against poison: an
Harlots tace may suggest (...): and a s^^ul sureset may prove an Antidore for
sin: yea, as external cold kindles the heat or the stomach: so we find it
reco^ded in holy Writ, that some, by a spiritual Ant p^^ist^ ^sis, have grown
horter in their z^ale, by being encompassed with the outward cold o^ Wicked and
irreligious company: like Roses and Lillies, which flourish the more for being
beset with T^^nes: and Violets, which are the sweeter and more od^ri^erous* for
being beset with Garlic and Onie^s; for as much as they suck and draw all the
ill ^avours of the ground unto them. Thus it fa^^ with Lot, who served God
better among the beastly Sod^^tes, then when he was separated ^^om them. And
some others there are no doubt, who, as they owe not this ^^ to themselves, so
they are more for wonder, then imitation. For (...) found a guard in the Lions
Den, shall another thrust himself t^^reinto for ^^elter? And if Peter walked
upon the pavement of the water, did the rest of t^^ ^^sciples step forth and
follow him? No.

Ob. But say some. By keeping them company we may win them, and hap^ily
convert their souls.

Answ. I answer. Hope not so much to convert them; as fear that they will
^ervert thee, for virtue is not so alluring as vice: the one spreads it self,
like ^oyson in a vessel; the other is not half so dispersive. Sin, and Hagar,
are more ^ruitful then virtue and Sara^: fal^hood, more successeful then truth.
The ^ore eye infecteth the sound: the sound will not mend the sore. Vinegar
will ^ar w^ne; wine will not mend vinegar, Infection is sp^eading and catching:
^ealth is not so. An hund^ed sound persons shall sooner catch the plague, from
one infected person; then he receive his h^alth from them.

Solomon that wonder of Wisdom, might think by joining in affinity with his
neighbor Princes, and marrying their Daughters, to win those Heathens to the
Kingdom of God: but he was deceived, for he could do no good upon them; they
wrought him too much evil. And does not experience teach us, that the good are
sooner perverted by the bad, then the bad converted by the good? even as a
tainted air does more easily infect a sound body, then an wholesome can clear
the sick.

We read of certain Magnetical, or Adamantine Rocks, in the Isles of Moni^le,
which draw all ships unto them, that have any Iron pinnes, holding them so
fast, that they are not able to sti^: evil society, are such Rocks; holy men,
the ships; natural and inbred corruption, the Iron pinnes: he that will be
safe, let him ke^p far enough from such Rocks.

A good man, joined in l^ague with one that is wicked; is like a living man,
bound to a dead corpse, which will sooner suffocate him, then he revive that:
or, like an I sickle, can endure the rough northern wind of persecution well
enough, but melts wi^^ the heat of the S^n, swee^ allurements of the world,
and the flesh. The children of God are, as it were, dead (...) l^sts; but if
they should tempt God, by a too familiar society with the vicious; who knows,
but as live coals will kindle dead ones; so their evil speeches and actions may
kindle and inflame them with the love and liking of (...)? Indeed, as one said
to his suppliant, make me a Diviner, and I will make thee rich: so may a good
man say to a vicious; make me Angelical, that is, incapable of being seduced,
and I Will do my best to make thee a Convert.

. 27.
THirdly. Our entirenesse with wicked men ^^osses us, not only in their sins,
but oftentimes in their punishments also; as it fared with the 36. men which
were slain before Aye, for Achan's sake, Joshua 7. where we see the innocence
of so many thousand Israchtes was not so prevalent, to expiate his one sin; as
his one sin was, to taint and bring judgment upon all Israel. If the Stork be
taken damagefeceant with the Cranes, ^he is enwrapped in the same net, and
cannot complain that she is surprised. He that walks with the wise (says
Solomon) shall be wise; but a companion of fools, shall be afflicted, Pro. 13.
20. This Augustine well observes, speaking of the religious, taken amongst the
rest of the Goths, Iure amara^ vitam sentire, quia ^^cantibus amari esse
nolu^runt. And hereupon Moses separates Israel from ^orah, Dathan, and Abiram,
saying, depart from the Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs;
least ye perish with them; Number. 16. 26. And does not God himself say to his
people, touching Babylon, Go out of her, my people, that ye be not partaker of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues? Rev. 18. 4. Where sin is let
in, punishment will not be kept out. Yea, if Lot had stayed in Sodom, he had
been destroyed: if his Sons would have gone out, they had every man escaped.

Indeed, we cannot be too far off from such company; and it were happy if they
were kept by themselves; for so long as the infected person is shut up, his
plague does not spread. And besides the benefit of our safety, wickedness would
soon be ashamed of it self, if it were not for the encouragement of companions.
Solitariness is the fittest Antidote for spiritual infection. It were happy for
the wicked man, if he would be separated from himself. Antisthenes would often
say, It was a great oversight, sithence they purged their Wheat from Darnel,
and their wars from cowardly Soldiers, that they purged not their common
wealth from lewd and wicked people.

Or if our persons escape scot-free, yet we may suffer in our estates, and be
crossed in our most weighty designs and determinations, only for joining in
league or friendship with Gods enemies. Because thou have joined thy self with
Abaziah (says Eleazar to Iehosaphat) the Lord has broken thy works, and the
Ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish, 2 Chro. 20. 37.

But admit they can not infeoffe us, eitheir in their sin or punishment: yet
their society will be a shrewd vexation to us. As let a religious man fall into
their company, as an honest man may fall into the hands of thieves, they will
conspire how to afflict his eyes, with unchaste visions; his ears, with fearful
oaths, his unwilling appetite, with drunken healths; which even a civilized
Pagan would abhor. We read that Clitemachus the wrestler (though a great
company keeper, yet) if he had heard but one filthy word, would presently
depart. How was just Lot vexed with the uncleanly conversation of his wicked
neighbou^s? Sodom was worse then a Jaile to his righteous soul: and report
lies, if our Jailes be not much like to Sodom, the very dens of mischief, the
Schools of wickedness: a Malefactor learns more vilany there, then ever he
knew before: drunkenness and blasphemy, usurp the place of mortification and
humility.

Or lastly, if their society be not a vexation to our minds; at least it will
be a great disparagement to our names: every one will conclude, almost
infallibly, such as our company is, such is our disposition. The common Proverb
is, like will to like. And, Birds of a feather, will flock together. When
Iephthah was himself in banishment, there gathered to him idle follows, such as
himself, Judges 11. 3. When David was in trouble, and vexed in mind himself,
their flockt unto him all those that were in trouble, vexed in mind, or that
were in debt, even four hundred of them, to the Cave of Adullam, 1 Sa. 22. 2.
Yea, our Savior meets no less then ten Lepers in one knot. Fellowship is that
we all naturally affect, though it be in Leprosy; even Lepers will flock to
their fellows. where shall we find one spiritual leper alone? drunkards,
prophene persons, heretics, will be sure to consort with their matches. And
hereupon the Lacedaemonians, when they would certainly be informed, what the
disposition and behavior of any one was, would vvisely inquire with what
persons, they were linked in fellowship. And indeed, he that makes himself a
companion of all, sells his reputation very cheap: it being as great an
indecorum, for a holy Christian to be in the company of graceless persons, as
it is for a reverend Divine to sit upon the Stage in a public Threator; or an
old man to dance with little children in the streets.

Base company (says one) kills both our fame, and our souls: it gives us
wounds, which will never admit of healing. How many have irrecoverably lost
their good names, by keeping company with suspected persons? and whether the
report be true or false, it is no easy thing to disprove a slander, for like
an unruly spirit once raised, it is hard to conjure down again. A man's good name
is much easier kept, then recovered.

And thus you see, that evil company endangers our souls: or could our souls
be free, yet our persons are in danger; or could our souls and persons both be
safe, yet our estates are in jeobardy, or could our souls, bodies and estates
be secure, yet our fame would suffer, and our good name lie at the stake.
Wherefore, etc.

. 28.
FOurthly. But admit we could keep them company without harm; yet this
inconvenience would ensue, their company would bereave us of much good, which
otherwise we should enjoy, being alone; it faring with the godly wise, as with
Saint Ambrose, who was wont to say, I am never less alone, then when I am all
alone, for then I can enjoy the presence of my God without interruption. They
are able to say, as Dubartus, and (before him) Scipio, I have never better
company, then when I have no company, for then can I freely entertain my own
thoughts, and converse with all the learned, which have been in former ages.

Antisthenes being asked what fruit he had reaped of all his study? made
answer, I have learned by it, both to live, and walk with my self. And
Alphonsus King of Arragon being demanded, what company he liked best? replied,
Books, for these (says he) without fear, or flattery, or any reward, tell me
faithfully all that I desire to know. Cicero was, and I am of his mind, and
though I be no Hermit, to sit away my days in a dull Cell, yet will I choose,
rather to have no companion then a bad one.

When Cato Utican, in vacation times, and at his best leisure, went to recreate
himself in the country, he used to carry with him the best Philosophers, and
choicest books. Algerius an Italian Martyr said, He had rather be in prison
with Cato, then with Caesar in the Senate house: so was it more comfortable, to
be with Philpot in his Cole-house, then with Bonner in the Palace: Boner's
conscience made his Palace a Cole-house, and a dungeon; whiles Philpot's made
the Cole-house a Palace. The state of grace is Heaven upon earth; and he that
knows the sweetness of Gods presence, will deem it more tolerable to be ever
alone, then never able to be so.

When I read of Hiero the Tyrant of Syracusa, and other such, that gave over
their Kingdoms, to live a solitary life, I somewhat wonder: I should not, to
hear of a religious and Christian King that did so. It is impossible for the
natural man to be so merry, in company; as the believer alone; yea, says S.
Augustine, the tears of those that pray, are sweeter then the joy s of the
Theater. Indeed, a witty j^st may make a man laugh more, and louder: b^t he who
has an inheritance fallen to him, feels a more solid joy within: so he that
enjoyes his Savior, and has the a^^ir^ance of Heaven, is truly merry at the
heart, and keeps Hilary ^earme all his life. And indeed, nothing in the world
is worth envy, besides the condition of a true Ch^istian.

But to what end do I tell a blind man, how glorious and bright a creature the
Sun is? or a poor man, what sums of money are in the Kin^s Exchequers? To so
many as are unrenewed I speak in Parabl^s, Revel. 2. 17. Yea, this seems to
them a Paradox, that the people of God should be a merry people: for
contrariwise, they dream of nothing but solitarin^^^^, and melancholy: as the
common people thought Tulli to be most idle, when he stadied most: or as the
Husbandman in AEsope objected idleness to the Poe^: b^t as he replied, I am
never so idle as in thy company, so may the religious, we are ever so solitary,
never so melancholy; as when in society with you that are vicious. This was
David's case, which makes him cry out, Woe is me, that I must remain in Meseck,
and dwell in the Tents of Kedar: he found it a heavy yoke to be yoked with
irreligious companions.

And a double reason may be given of it, though we fear not to saffer either in
our persons, goods, or good names (as before you have it.) For first, the soul
that lives among thorns, shall hardly thrive, they are such Backbva^^es to a
godly life, that they will do what they can, to hinder our goodness to Heaven,
and the goodness of Heaven to us; they will wither all our good pa^^s and
qualities which are in us; like an evil North Wind, they blow upon the buds of
our graces, and nip them.

2. Secondly, It would make a man's heart to bleed, to hear and consider, how
swearing, blaspheming, cursed speaking, railing, slandering, quarrelling,
contending, jesting, mocking, scoffing, flattering, lying, dissembling, vain,
corrupt, and filthy scolding, scurrilous, loose and idle talking, does overflow
with them in all places: so that such as fear God, had better be any where then
in the company of most men. Now I were mad if I should so affect company, as to
live voluntarily where vexations shall daily salute me.

Indeed, a man is not rightly said to live, until he has abandoned wicked
society. Similis having lived seven years apart from the World, after a long
time spent in a military life, he left this Epitaph behind him, Here lies old
Similis, yet one that lived but seeven years, This made Frederick the third,
Elector Palatine, when some such friends of his desired his company, to answer,
I have lived enough to you; let me now live to my self, and with my Lord
Christ, Yea, Saint Augustine, ten days before he dyed, desired none might come
to him, that so, in that time, he might the better fit himself for God. And
indeed that soul can never enjoy God, that is not sometimes retired.

O that we could, in any reasonable time; give a stop to our madding and
^traying fancies: that we could, after so long time spent in the lusts of the
flesh, and pride of life, bring home our cogitations and intentions unto our
selves, ^nake off these violent hold-fasts, bid our companions farewell, which
have too ^ong engaged our souls, and estranged us from our selves.

But when we are so we^ded, combined, and glewed to the world, it is no easy
matter to make a safe retreat: it is a fleaing to some to be sundred; thereby
you pal away some (...) of themselves.

In this case, what we cannot do all at once, let us gain upon our selves by
degrees; go back step by step; first, block up one passage, then another. Will
you know what course Demostheness took in this case? He, to the end that his
(...) and nearest friends might not (by carrying him abroad, according to their
custom) withdraw him from his study and books, caused the hair of his head to
(...); and after took an order, that they should not peep out, (...) he had
shook off his consorts, by continually making them loose their (...). It were
happy for our young stu^^ents, if they would a little imitate him; if they were
not overmuch affected and addicted to company keeping; if they would but
consider, that friends are the thieves of time, the most precious jewel they
can part withal.

. 29.
BUt here it will be objected. That we are melancholy persons, strayers from
the drove of mankind, and whereas nature has made us sociable creatures, in
making us men, religion has altered to a crazied disposition, whereby we are
mispleasing to all, as all to us.

To this is answered. Suppose it were true (but I shall in place more
convenient prove, that the religious only enjoy true mirth, and that worldly
mirth is more talked of then felt, spiritual joy more felt then talked of,
though I may appeal to any man's conscience, that has been softened with the
unction of grace, and truly tasted the powers of the world to come) yet they
think it is better being a good Christian, then a good fellow; and hold it far
better, in good sadness to be saved with a few, as Noa^ was in the A^ke, then
in good fellowship, with the multitude, to be drowned in sin, and damned for
company.

We are content ( says one) to pass, through somewhat more unsociably, into
happiness; it suffi^^^th we shall meet with good company, at our journeys end,
in the Kingdom of Heaven, even an innumerable company of Saints and Angels.

The men of the World practice, what once a Jester spoke, who, when a great
Lord asked him, whether he would go to Heaven or Hell? Answered, to hell, for
there (quoth he) I shall be sure to meet your Lordship, and the greatest part
of mine acquaintance. But it is not so with the true Christian: he little loves
Christ, that will not follow him without company: and his zeal is cold to
Heaven, whom the example of numbers can turn another way. Wherefore let us say,
as much as Peter said; and do more, then Peter did; though all men should
forsake thee, yet will I not leave thee, O Savior: neither magnitude of
Princes, nor multitude of people, shall prevail with me.

But the world wrongs religion, when they accuse it to be an enemy to
good-fellowship: for she has not a follower, which does not say with David,
Psa. 119. 63. I am a companion to all them that fear thee, and keep thy
precepts for the godly man's chief delight is in the Saints, and such as excel
in virtue Psa. 16. 3. Yea, and their fellowship is so good, profitable, and
delectable, tha^ as Synesius was of opinion, that King Hieron got more by
Simonides acquaintance, then Siminides did by his; and as we read that Pharaoh,
Saul, and Nebuchadnezzar were more pleasured by Joseph, David, and Daniel, then
Daniel, David, and Joseph were by them: so I persuade my self, great persons
would find themselves more then requited, if they would vouchsafe the company
of some poor Saints: for a wise and holy Christian (like his Lord and Master)
wheresoever he goes, makes better cheer then he finds, in an happy exchange of
spiritual repast for bodily. Yea, as Plato accounted it one of the four great
privilidges, for which he was especially bound to nature, that he lived in the
time of Socrates: so they should think it none of the least favors, for which
they were bound to bless God, that they enjoyed so religious and holy society.

It is true indeed, there is supposed good fellowship, to which religion is an
enemy; because it is an enemy to this holy fellowship of the Saints: and good
reason, the one are to the other, as Wolves are to the Lambs: now is it any
marvail if the Lambs care not greatly for the company of the Wolves? the Lamb
would not willingly be alone; yet it is far bette^ when solitary, then in a
Wolvish society.

Generons minds will associate with their matches and equals, or none: as David
being a King, when he was expulsed his own Country, resorts to none but Kings:
for first he goes to Achis, King of Gath; then to the King of Moab, 1 Samuel 21.
10. and 1 Samuel 22. 3.

Neither are our ding-thirsts, who lavish out their estates, and throw the
house out at windows (as we use to say) good fellows, though they call
themselves so: for good fellows and evil men are incompatible; ike Simeon and
Levi, sworn brothers, but brethren in evil; which is too evil a brotherhood,
for an honest man to make one in, or (indeed) a wise man: for is not he a
fool, that will sell Heaven for company, as a great many true drunkards do?
For my own part, if I have good company, I will cherish them as Lot did his
Angels, which were sent for guardians: if I have any bad, I will study to
loose them, least by keeping them, I loose my self in the end.

. 30.
Fifthly. Another reason why we should separate our selves from their society
is, that according to the Apostles rule, so far as is possible, we may have
peace with all men, which is no way obtainable, but by a separation. A wicked
man (says Solomon) is abomination to the just: and he that is upright in his
way, is abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29 27. if so, either no communion, or
no peace.

Believers, and such as are enemies to the Cross of Christ, can never be
reconciled, at least in heart. What communion can righteousness have with
unrighteousness? You may as well tie a sure knot between a Cobweb and a Cable
as a true and fast love-knot, between the child of God and a wicked man. These
two yoked together, agree like the Harp and the Harrow: they are as suitable,
as a wooden Leg, and a Thigh of flesh: which makes the Apostle Romans 12. 18. ^n
enjoining us to have peace with all men, to add, if it be possible: and in
another place to say, be not unequally yoked with infidels, for as we should
not be yoked with infidels; so we should not be yoked with common drunkards,
and swearers, nor with Atheists, which are no better then infidels; for that
also is to be unequally yoked, unless we be Atheists too.

As the Jews might not consort with the Canaanites: so we may not consort with
them, which are like Canaanites. Wise Solomon charge us from God, that we
should not keep company with gluttons and drunkards, Proverbs 23. 20. and the
Apostle enjoyneth us, not to have any fellowship, nor so much as eat with a
runkar^, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and that we should have no fellowship with these
unfruitful works of darkness, or, if unwittingly and unwillingly we be thrust
into any such society, we must not imitate, but reprove them, Ephesians 5. 11.
and we profess our selves the servants of God: new they are bad servants, who
will keep company with their masters enemies, especially, after he has
straightly charged them to the contrary.

Alas! what should we do in the presence of base persons, when even our seber
ignorance, in ill courses, is more then di^teemed of the world? Yea, when it is
not enough for them to be bad themselves, except they (...) at the good? When
if there be one in a company, that abhors impious language, they will blaspheme
on purpose to vex him? When they will think themselves slighted, if they be not
sent away drunk? When to depart sober, is (...) incivility? And we cannot talk
idly enough, nor do lewdly enough, to bear the^ company; we can neither say as
they say, no^ be silent when we see and hear (...) ba^eness. As whom would it
not stir, to hear oaths (...) for number, with words; scoffs, with oaths; vain
speeches, with both? we love neither to bite, nor fawn (...) we can not forbear
to speak the naked truth; which i^ we do, will breed a quarrel. As for
instance; one j^sts (...) with his Maker; another, makes himself sport with
Sc^ip^ure; a third, sils his mouth with oaths of sound; a fourth, (...) at the
religious; one, speaks vi^lany; another, laughs at it; a third, de^ends it;
one, makes hims^l^ a swine, another, a devil, Now who, that is not all earth,
can endu^e it? Yea, who, having grace, can hear such wickedness, and ^eeleth
not some sp^rk of holy in^ignation arise in him, while he thinks of it? O who
having no^ lost his spiritual (...), can endure the ^avour of such noisome and
^^^king breath, as their rotten lungs send ^orth. Well born children a^e
touched to the quick, with the injuries of (...) Parents: and not thus to be
moved, is to confess our s^lves bastards. Indeed, men of steel stomachs can
digest any discou^s^, though never so cours^; but the g^acious know, that as
they must render an ^c^ount for every idle wo^^, so likewise for their idle
silence; for in this case not to reprove them either by word, or gest^re, is to
do the same things in judgment and conscience, which the other does act^ally.
Every evil we see does either v^x, or infect us. The very sight of sin makes a
man either sad, or guilty: if we see it, and be not sorrowful, we are sinful.
If Lot had not been vexed with the beastly So^omites, God had been vexed with
him: yea, in such a case not to be very angry, is to make God very angry. Ely
heard of his sons impiety, no doubt with grief enough, but not with anger
enough; therefore he is punished with hearing of their destruction, that was
too remiss in hearing of their transgression. It is easy to be guilty of
another wickedness, even our very permission appropriates crimes to us: we
need no more guiltine^s of any sin, then our willing tolleration. All sins
which we give allowance to, being committed, or not hind^^^d by us, if we may,
are ours, as if we committed them: fu^rt, Commanders; 2. Abbettors; 3.
Counselors; 4. Consenters; 5. Commenders; 6. Connivers; 7. Concealers; 8. not
hinderers; each of these will be found guilty before Gods T^^bunal. What says
the Prophet to King Ichosaphat, would thou help the wicked, and not only so,
but would thou love them that have the Lord? therefore for this thing the
wrath of the Lord is upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. We need do no more to bring the
wrath of God upon us, then even to love and favor these which hate him.

How much better then to oppose thy friend by rep^^ving him, then that God
should reprove thee for being at one with him.

But this is no friendly part: yes, the Scripture affirms, that not to tell
one^ Brother plainly of his fault, at least, if there be pr^bability of doing
good, is to hate him in his heart, Levit. 19. 17. And Philosophy tells us, that
is truly perfect love, which, to profit and do good, f^areth not to hurt or
offend; that admonitions and corrections are the chiefest offices of
friendship. Diogenes when they called him Dog, for his sharp kind of rebuking,
would answer, That other Dogs used to bite their (...), but he his friends, for
their greater good. And S^ipio, the elder, when his f^iends, for so doing,
turned his enemies, was able to ^ay, I have given mine enemies as much cause to
l^ve me, as my friends.

Ph^cion when a friend of his would have cast himself away, would not suffer
him, saying, I was made thy friend for this purpose: and to King Antipater,
thou can not have me both for thy friend and flatter. Indeed, a flattering
friend is a bitter enemy, yea (as one swee^ly) no enemy can be so mortal, as
these officious Clyents, whose flattery sothes a man up in wickedness! for they
are traitors to the soul, and by a pleasing violence kill the best part
eternally. Whence Euripides exhorts men to get such friends, as would not spare
to disple^se them, saying, friends are like wines, those that being new are
hard and harsh, prove best; the most pleasing, are least lasting: and indeed,
he that loves not such a friend, hates himself.

A wise man will say to his friend, love heartily, and then speak what thou will. And for a man not to chide his f^iend, least he should offend him, is as
if (when he were ready to be drowned) he should fear to catch him by the hair
of the head, lest he should loose a few of them. Wherefore either let them
abide thee no f^iend to their faults, or no friend to themselves.

And what if admonition and reproof be as unwelcome to thy friend, as water
into a Ship? What if it sound no better to him, then music out of tune; or
taste no sweeter, then bitt^r pills, which sick men take with an unwilling
willingness? Will thou neglect the office of a friend, to avoid the suspicion
of an enemy?

Indeed, if thou meet with a contentious fool, thou shall do wisely, in not
answering whatsoever he objects: for it is more policy and discretion to gain a
f^i^nd without trouble, then a foe with it: and our Savior says, give ye not
that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast ye your pearl before Swine; least they
tread them under their feet, and turning again all to rent you, Matthew. 7. 6.

Again, as in Gods and their own behalf we are bound to reprove them: so in our
neighbors also, to whom, in this case, we owe a duty: for, admit we are in
company when, and where our brothers good name is taken away by false report;
it is our duty to defend the truth, in his behalf: we must neither backbite
others, nor be willing to give ear unto backbiters of others. It was an honest
speech of one; as I will be my present friends self, so I Will be my absent
friends deputy, to say for him what he would, and cannot speak for himself.

But thou will ask me. What need men trouble themselves with that which so
little concerns them?

My answer shall be such another question. What needed Moses to have afflicted
himself with the afflictions of others, that he might work their deliverance,
when himself was at ease and pleasure in the court of Pharaoh? what needed
Jonathan have purchased his fathers displeasure, and brought his own life in
jeopardy, that he might justify David in his uprightness, and save his life?
What needed Calvin, in the year 1556, when Perin had conspired against the
estate of Geneva, have run into the midst of their naked swords, to appease the
tumult? what needs the hand cast it self betwixt a blow and the head, though it
be cut off by this mean? What needs the eye serve more to the use of the other
members, in being watchful rightly to direct them, then for it self? A good
heart cannot abide to be happy alone; which is a religious answer, to a
reasonable question unreasonably moved. Yea, admit it were not a duty for one
member to seek the good of another, or of the whole, and that God had not
enjoined us so to do: I am sure it is a pardonable fault, to do less good to
our selves, that we may do more good to, and for others.

But suppose we offend them not this way; yet we shall another, if we keep them
company. The natural man conceits of himself, far beyond what another esteems
him: and in ^ase he finds he is undervalued, will fly in your face, and
perhaps do you more mischief, then can easily be repaired: as that was done in
one quarter of an hour by our first Parents, which tended to the ruin of them,
and all mankind. It is usual with drunkards to kiss when they meet, and kill
when they part. D^unken Alexander killed Clytus, for whom sober Alexander would
have killed himself. The Danes and Norwayes once purposing for England, fell
drunk on shipboard, and so slasht one another, that there was an end of their
voyage. Out of their gallant disposition, you shall have one kill another, upon
the interpretation of a word; a manifest confession, that their life is not
much worth, since they will sell it so good cheap: yea, there are not wanting of
them that resemble Fimbria of Rome, who meeting a Citizen that he hated, gave
him a deadly thrust into the body with his sword, and the next day entered an
action against him, that he had received but part of his blad into his body and
not all, as he meant it.

Yea, perhaps they may make you to do that which you never dreamt of: like
Herod, who cut off John Baptist's head, only to answer the expectation of the
standers by, Matthew. 14. 9. As for flattery it never wants welcome, while
self-love, is at home: but the plain dealing man cannot live among these
Vipers, and not be stung by them: yea, he lives most in trouble, that most
seeks to have peace with them by a familiarity.

Well then, if they are so offensive to the stomach of our company, that they
will not let us be at peace; our best way will be to spew them out, to deal
with our old vicious con^orts, as the Fox in the Fable did by his Flees: who
wading backward into the water, by degre^s, drew them all into a lock of Wool,
which he ^ad in his mouth, and then left it swimming; even leave them, without
taking leave of them; or if you like not to tear friendship asunder upon the
sudden, you may unsow it by little and little. He that would not continue a
friend, may (...) neglect him, and have his aim.

. 31.
O^. But I hear none boast so much of peace, as the ungodly; nor none (...)
with contention, as the religious.

(...). B^ast of it they may, but it is apparent that the way of peace they
have not so much as known: indeed, they have some kind of agreement among (...)
so have Serpents, and Bears, and Wolves: it is a rare thing, to see one Wolf
devour, or fight with another: yea, they have made a covenant with death, and
are at agreement with Hell, Isai. 28. 15. and yet: as ther^ is no peace to the
wicked, Isa. 57. 21. so there is no peace among the (...), for every
combination in evil, is rebellion, and not peace; rather a conspira^y, (...) a
concord; like the agreement of Absalom and A^hitophel, (...) against David; or
of Herod and Pilate, conspiring against Apostles, plotting against Paul, so
meeting in malice to do (...) dissension is better then such a wicke^ peace.

Neither can any wonder, that wicked men do so conspire in evil, that there is
such (...) in the broachers and abbettors of it; if he but take notice of those
(...), which b^ing many in substance, were yet one in name, action, habitation,
even a wh^le Legion in one man, Mark, 5. 9. all the praise of concord is in the
(...); if that be holy, the consent is angelical; if sinful, develish; true
(...) with God, war with our lusts, Romans 5. 1. and 7. 22. 23. (...) with (...),
war with vice: whereas they have peace and are at league with (...) but are at
war wit^ G^d, and good men all at once: but a just war is a (...) better, then
such an ill conditioned peace; yea, it no way deserves the name of peace,
except we be at enmity with the Serpent, at unity (...) so to be at peace with
men, as that we do not war with God and his graces: peace must be followed with
holiness, Heb* 12. 14 Wherefore (...) joyneth ^aith, peace, and truth
together, Zach. 8. 16. and St. Paul, peace and righteousness, peace and
edification, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. 19. 20. etc. Thus
the Scripture sets us our bounds for peace, which we may not pass; and shows
that ungodly men are not guilty o^ this grace; that they do but talk of peace,
not practice it.

But suppose we could enjoy peace in their company; ye^ we can never expect to
have (...) loves: for d^unkards only love drunkards, and one wicked man
another; but care not a rush for any that are good: being like Phalaris the
Tyrant, who would never grant any request, except it were to a dissolute woman,
but such he never denied. Likeness we know is the cause of love, and lov^ the
cause of likeness; whereas the believer and the unbeliever are altogether
unlike; the one being crucified and dead to the world, Gal. 6. 14. but mad^
alive in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 22. The other being spiritnally dead, even while
they alive. 1 Timothy 5. 6.

We seldom see different dispositions entirely loving: for hence grows the
height of friendship, when two similary souls do blend in their commixions, and
hence it is, that two friends are said to come into Vulcan's shop, to beg this
boon of him: that he would either beat them on his Anvile, or melt them in his
Furnace both into one, the which he granted. I'ts likeness that makes the true
love knot of friendship: when we find another of our own disposition, it
appears the same soul in a divided body. Nature that makes us love our selves,
makes us, with the same reason, love those that are like us. A friend is a more
sacred name, then a Brother, Pro. 18. 24. For what availes it to have the
bodies from the same original, when the souls within them differ?

And yet some (R^hoboam-like) passing over the religious, will join themselves
with ungodly persons; like as some put away honest wives, and go to harlots:
wherein they deal as wisely, as if a man should cast away his fleshly leg, and
set on another of wood. Causa patrocinio non bona pejor crit.

Or admit thou should enjoy a wicked man's love; it is but mercenary, base,
and inconstant, and so not worth the having. Indeed, there was never such
abject and servile prostitutions of presentations, as life, soul, devotion,
adoration, servant, slave, etc. as there is now amongst our drunkards and
roarers, and what love they express to one, they profess to all; every one
they know, or salute, is their friend: but friendship so distracted, like as
the River Ganges was by Cyrus, into 365. brooks, both looses her name and
nature: a lover of so many, never loves any.

Or, admit a drunkard do love thee: either he loves thee for his own sake,
because he has some pleasure, or profit, or credit by thee, (as prosperity
procures friends, no less then adversity proves them) which is, with
Craterus, to love the King, rather, then with Ephaestion, to l^ve Alexander:
now I do not hold him worthy thanks, that profes^eth me kindness for his own
ends.

Or secondly, he loves only thy body or natural parts, which is but the worst
piece of thee; and love to the body, is but the body of love; the soul of
love, is the love of the soul.

Neither does he truly love, that loves the body more then the mind and soul,
or common gifts before saving graces; this love as it is never long lived, so
it is of: but feigned; as you shall have drunkards and dissembling politicians
salute one another, with God save you, at their meeting; and wish one another
hanged, at their parting; Italian-like, they will be glorious and complemental
in their invitations, but if you accept of their offer, they will hate you for
it ever after. A drinking f^iendship, is but a drunken friendship: and believe
it, thou will find those friends firmest, that thy virtues purchase thee: these
will love thee, when thy wealth is gone: whereas those that be won without
desert, will also be lost without a cause: you need but be an Arbitrator
between two such friends to make them both your enemies: things that differ in
their end, will surely part in their way: now thy end, is to gain him; his end,
to make a gain of thee: for let the passage of profit be stopped, his love is
likewise at a stand: (...) you deserved never so well from him, the denial of
one favor, nay, a^ health, shall drown the memory of many fore-performed ones:
which is all on^ as if for the abortion of one child, a man should kill all the
former issue whereas the good man's thanks for old favors, lives even in the
blows of injury or can you not feed these vermin as you have done, away they
go; like a Su^ Dial, you shall be no longer regarded, then you are shined on by
prosperity yea, Rats run not faster away from an house on fire; nor lice from a
dead body then they from poverty: and if ever it be your misery to stand in
need of them look for no other requital, then Job had of his friends, whom he
compares to a deceitful Brook, which in winter is hard frozen with cold, in
Summer dried up with heat; between winter and Summer passing away, always
deceitful, never of use, Job 6. 14. to 19.

Yea, a man may say of such friends, as a learned Antiquary said of Rumn^^
Marsh, bad in Winter, hurtful in Summer, never good: nay, this comparison
falls short, for thou have sped well, if such friends prove not dangerously
hurtful, as well as helpless. Have I not known some of them resemble the
Snake, which when a kind Husbandman had taken out of the cold, and cherished in
his bosom, and she had recovered her lively heat, and was grown lusty,
singled out him ungratfully to try her first sting upon? or a Promotor, that
in Lent eats flesh at your table, and yet is the first that accuses thee to
the Magistrate. If Ziba be waxed great under Mophiboseth, he will give him a
lift for ^ll he has. A promoted Beggar has not seldom renounced his advancer.

And what else can be looked for from them? They cannot make conscience of
civil duties, who make none of divine. If a man have cast off his God, he will
easily cast off his friend. They that have broken their faith with him, will
keep no faith with us, When Religion is once gone, humanity will not stay long
after.

I take leave of this point, with a caution. Reveal to such men no secrets; for
he that now loves thee dearly, may come to hate thee deadly: nor believe a word
that they say; for they are like Antigones, who never denied any suit, that was
asked; but withal, never performed any thing that he granted; for what they
promise when they are drunk, they forget when they are sober; or like Saul, who
being persuaded of David's worth and loyalty, swears, as the Lord lives he
shall not die, 1 Samuel 19. 6. yet within four verses, for all his oath, he darts
a Spear at him, intending to nail him to the wall; and in the next verse, he
sends messengers to his house to kill him; or like the Council of Constance,
who made promise to John Husse of a conduct and safe return; yet, like forsworn
persecuters, put him to death.

. 32.
OB. But here some of them will reply. That we lay the saddle upon the wrong
horse, when we tax them for want of peace, love, and friendship; in that the
religious only show inconstancy, by bidding farewell to their old friends and
acquaintance, so soon as they embrace religion.

Answ. To this is answered. First that constancy, except it be in the truth and
in a good cause, is impudency: change in the vicious is as great a virtue, as
constancy in the virtuous. The Almaines were praised for changing their
^^stomes, which were found to be but bad before, as Tacitus affirms.
Constan^^^ in things ill, is so far from b^ing a virtue, that it is an abs^lute
vice. Of ^ings imperfect, change is the way to per^ect them. The Gentiles
became be^^evers, the Jews In^idels, Zach^us turns from the world, Demas
turns to ^e world, Paul turns an Apostl^, Judas an Apostate: I would fain know,
whether change in the Gentiles, Zacheus and Paul, was not as great a virtue,
(...) it was a vice in the Jews, Demas, and Judas?

Saint Paul was in constant indeed; for to day (as it were) he breathed out
^reatnings and slaughter against the Disciples of Christ and to morrow he
^reacheth Christ in the Synagogue: what then? Will any (not debauc^ed) cen^ure
him of ficklenes^e for it? nay, will not all wise men think it a great honor to
^im, and commend him forshaking hands with the high Priests, and his fellow
^ursevants, when once he heard that voice from Heaven? Act. 9. 4.

There is not any so near unto us, but i^ he fall from God, we may fall from
^im. It merits the name of wilfulness, when we will not admit of a lawful
^hang to the better.

As Philocrates sported with D^m^sthenes: you may not marvel Atheni^ns, that
D^mosthenes and I do differ, for he drinks water, and I drink wine: ^ some
laugh at us for being sober with Rhenis; and we as much pity them, or being
drunk with Canary. Again, they censure us of inconstancy; we them ^f Impudency.
Now in this case ^hen that is reputed ridiculous by one, which ^s accounted
sage by another as wise; what shall we do, but make Gods Word ^he umpier?
Wherefore, in all changes, I will have regard to these three things, God's
approbation, mine own bene^^t, and the not harming of my neighbor; and then
where the change is not a fault, I will never think it a disgrace, though ^he
great exchange, the World, should judge it so.

Even modesty, in some, is a vi^e; when out of a weak flexibility of nature,
man has not courage enough, to deny the request of a seeming friend.

If a man never abandoneth evil, until he abandoneth evil company, it is ^igh
time to take courage: yea, the longer we have been with them, the more need
have we to hasten out of them. If this satisfy not, as the Emperor Frade^ick
said to certain of his Minions, that we^e importunate to get into their ^ands
the ancient demeasn of the Empire, that he would rather be accounted of small
liberallity, then p^rjured! even so had we, in this case rather be ac^ounted
inconstant, then b^ unconscionable.

To the second part of the objection, I answer. That true love and friend^hip
is only among good men. The wicked may talk of it, and one drunkard ^ay
profess to another that he loves him as well as himself; and therein speak
truth, for, says Augustine most elegantly, to such an one, thou lov^st thy
self, so as thou will destroy thy self; and thou will destroy him whom thou
love as ^hy self; yea, better then themselves; for you shall have one Russian
salute another, with, God save you Sir, but after some strange attestations,
swear away himself with, God damn me Sir: now how can any wise man think him a
friend, that is his own enemy? he that is evil to himself, to whom will he be
good?

But see the depth of such a man's love, and whether it be not to damn thy bo^y
and soul everlastingly. S. Ambrose tells us of one, who solicited a godly woman
to incontinency, saying, he infinitely loved her: she answers, if you lov^ me
so well as you seem, put one of your fingers into the flame, till your fles^ be
burnt off: he rep^ys, that was no part of love in her to require it: yes* said
she, if yours be love, to cause both my body and soul to be burnt in he^^fire,
for ever, which by consequence will follow, if I yield to your request, and
take your counsel. Oh that thou had the wit to answer the drunkard, when he
tempts thee, thus.

Indeed there is a kind of agreement, which is st^engthened by sin it self: as
if one ^ee the keeper of a wench, his secrecy is bought for ever. But all this
while, if one call another, friend, it is but to give him a nickname, whereof
he is not guilty: for true friendship is so sacred, holy, and pure, that it
will not be used in evil: which made Pericles, when he was desired by a friend
of his, to aid him with false witness, answe^, that he would b^friend him as
far as the Altar, meaning so far, as stood with piety and religion, or his duty
to God, but no further; and Phocion refuse to help his son in law Cariles in
judgment, being accused for bribery, saying withal, that he had made him his
frien^ and alli^ in just and reasonable matters, and in them only; and this
likewise made Papini^ an, a Pagan, (being commanded by the Empe^or Car^^alla,
whose Steward and familiar he was) refuse to defend an unjust cause, (as
Marcellinus records) and thus it fares with all that are truly religious. There
is not any one (quoth the sincere Christian) either in blood, or otherwise so
near unto me, but if he fall from God, I will fall from him: why? our Savior
Christ has taught me, both by precept and example, that I should acknowledge
none (so as to be led by them) for my brother, sister, or mother, but such as
do the will of my Father, which is in Heaven, Matthew. 12. 46. to 51.

Whereas on the contrary, in things lawful, nothing rivits hearts so close, ^s
religion: it unites them together as gl^ws does (...) together: it makes a
knot, even between such as never saw one another face, that Alexander can not
cut: yea, Tyrants will sooner want invention for torments, then they with
tortures be made treacherous. How many have chosen rather to embrace the flams,
then to reveal their companions, and brethren in Christ? There is no friendship
like the friendship of faith. There is Amor, among Beasts; Dilectio, among Men;
Charitas, among Christians, that is their peculiar: nature, makes husband and
wi^^ but one flesh; grace makes them even one spirit: and it is a question,
w^ether natural Parents are to be^loved above spiritual: we know that Christ
preferred his spiritua^ kindred, to that of the flesh: and m^jor est connexio
(...) qua^ sanginum, says Beza, Why should we love them more, that brought us
into this sinful and miserable world; then those, that b^ing us into a better
world, where is neither sin, nor misery? Why them, that live with us on earth
but a while; equal to them, that shall live with us in H^aven for ever?

But to go on. Surely, as grace in her self is far above nature: so is she
likewise in her effects; and consequently, unites in a far more ^urable bond.
Christians hearts are joined one to another, with so fast a gl^w, that no by
respects can s^ver them: as you may see in that pair of friends, Jonathan and
David: non^ had so much cause to disaffect David, as Jonathan; no^e in a^l
Israel, should be such a looser by David's success, as he; Saul was sure
enough settled for hi^ time, only his successor should forgo all that which
David should gain; so a^ none but David stands in Ionathan's way to the Crown;
and yet all this can, not abate one dram of his love. As also in Ruth and
Naomy, whom nothing, but death, could part, Ruth. 1. If you will see other
examples, look Romans 1. 10 11. 1 These. 2. 17, 19. 20. Galathians 4. 18, 19. Act.
20. 37, 38. and 16. 15. Luke 4. 42. 2 Kings 2. 4. 9. and 4. 9, 10. As grace is
the greatest attractive of love; so is it the surest bond; it is like varnish,
that makes ^eelings not only ^hine, but last. Where God uniteth hearts, carnal
respects are too weak to dis^ever them; since that which breaks off affection,
must needs be stronger then that which conjoyneth it, and why does S. John use
these words, once to the elect Lady, 2 John 1. 2. and again to Gajus, 3 John 1.
whom I love in the truth, but to show, that to love in the truth, is the only
true love? Indeed, religion is the surest cement of all societies: the loser
joints of all natural and civil relations, are compacted and confirmed by the
sinews of grace and religion: and such a lose joynted friendship cannot hold
long, which wants the nerves of religion. Wherefore give me any foe, rather
then a resolved Christian: no friend unless a man truly honest

. 33.
BUt here it will be objected. That we hate and contemn all, who are not like
our selves: that we remember them so much to be sinners, that, in the mean
time, we forget them to be men and brethren.

I answer. This were to dash the first Table against the second; whereas they
are conscious of both alike. A charitable heart, even where it hates, there it
wishes that it might have cause to love: his anger and indignation against
sin, is always joined with love and commiseration toward the sinner, as is
lively set out, Mark. 3. 5. and Philippians 3. 18. where S. Paul tells us of
them (weeping) tha^ are enemies to the cross of Christ: and Mar. 3. 5. That
our Savior, while he looked upon the Pharisees angerly, mourned for the
hardness of their hearts. Zeal is a compounded affection of love and anger.
When Moses was angry with the Israelites and chid them sharply; at the same
time he prayed for them heartily. And Ionothan, when he was angry with his
Father, for vowing David's death; did still retain the duty and love, both of a
S^n to his Father, and of a subject to his Sovereign. A good man cannot speak
of them without passion, and compassion: yea, they weep not so much for their
own sins, as we do, (according to S. Chrysostom's example) O that our prayers
and tea^es could but recover them.

Those that are truly gracious, know how to receive the blessings of God,
without contempt of them who want; and have learned to be thankful, without
overliness; knowing themselves have been, or may be, as wretched and
^ndeserving, as S. Augustine speaks. A true Christian can distinguish be^ween
persons and vices; offenders, and offenses; and have no peace with the ^ne,
while he has true peace with the other; love them, as men, hate them, ^s evil
men; love, what they are, not what they do; as God made them, not ^s they have
made themselves; not so hate, as to be a foe to goodness; not so love, as to
foster iniquity. It is a question, whether is worst of the two, to be vices
friend, or virtues enemy. Now says Augustine, He is not angry with his
brother, that is angry with the sin of his brother: yea, if we hate the vices
of a wicked man, and love his person; as the Physician, hates the dis^ase, but
loves the person of the diseased; there is nothing more praise worthy, as
says the same Father. And another, It is the honest man's commendation to
contemn a vile person. And another, I know no grea^er argument of goodness,
then the hatred of wickedness, in whomsoever it resides: yea, David makes it a
note of his integrity, Psalm. 31. 6. and 139. 21. 22. and 26. 4. 5. and in Psa.
15. He is bold to ask the Lord this question; Who s^al dwell in thy tabernacle,
who shall rest in t^y holy mountain? the answer he receives is this, 1. He that
walks uprightly, and works rightousness. 2. And speaks the truth from his
heart. 3. He that s^andereth not with his tongu^, nor does evil to his
neighbor, nor receives a false report against his neighbor. But the fourth
is, He, in whose eyes a vile person is contemne^, while he honors them
that fear the Lord: and he cannot be sincere who does not honor virtue in
rags, and loath (...), though in a robe of State. So that, as the Prophet asked
Ichosophat 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. would thou help the wicked, and love them that
hate the Lord? it may be deman^ed; should Christians be friends with them who
are enemies to the Cross of Christ? no, no. And yet to the men, separate from
their manners, we have no quarrel, but with them better, then they either wish
to us, or to themselves.

Indeed, it we should contemn them, as they think we do; it were but a just
recomp^nce of their folly and wickedness: for as one speaking of the poverty
of the pu^se, says, that poverty is justly contemptible, which is purchased by
following of vice: so may I, of the poverty of the mind; that poverty of wit
and grace is justly contemptible, which is purchased by a wilful rebellion
against God, and the great means of knowledge and grace which we enjoy. To
concl^^e this point, we think it is better to leave them, and be thought proud,
wrong^ully; then stay with them, and be known bad, certainly.

. 34.
AG^in, some will alledg, we giv^ offense to them that are without, which is
contrary to the Apostles precept, who says, Give none of^ence, neither to the
Jews, nor to the G^ecians, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. as they
will make a crooked staff serve to beat a Dog, when a straight (...) ^^nnot be
^ound.

Nothing but ignorance is guilty of this scruple: for the offense is only
taken, (...) given: and herein they pervert the Apostles words, touching
offenses, as Pharaoh's se^vants did the same word, when they said unto their
Master conc^^ning Moses, How long shall he be an offense unto us? Exodus. 10.
7. for (...) mean^th in that place, only such offenses as are contrary to the
doctrine of the Gosp^l, as he has expounded his own meaning, Romans 16. 17. And
if nothing might be done, whereat wicked men are offended, then the word of God
must not be preached, nor his holy and divine precepts walked in, yea, Christ
must not have come into the world to redeem it, for he was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 23. But all which God
has commanded must be done; and all which he has left, indifferent, may be
done, and none may, or ought to censure the doing of it. The precept is plain,
one believes that he may ^at of all things; and another which is weak ^ateth
herbs, says the Apostle, and what follows? let not him that ^ateth, despise
him that ^ateth not; an^ let not him that eats not, condemn him that eats;
for God has received him, Romans 14. 2. 3.

If I know the thing to be good, and that I do it to a good end, what care I
for their idle misconstruction? morally good actions must not be suspended,
upon danger of causeless scandal: in things indifferent and arbitrary, it is
fit to be ove^-ruled by fear of offense: but if men will stumble in the plain
ground of good; let them fall without our regard, not without their own pe^ill.

Now that the Cuckoe may acknowledge this for her own egg, notwithstanding the
has laid it in the Doves nest; let the men of the world know, that it is not
an offense given by us, but taken by them; yea, they first give an offense to
us by their ungodliness, and after take the just reward of the same, namely, to
be excluded our society for an offense,: wherein they imitate Athanagoras, who
(as Tully reports) would always complain of his punishment, but of his fault
he would say nothing: or Adam, who was ashamed of his nakedness, but not of
his sin: wicked men are neither sensible of doing injury, nor patient in
suffering for it. It Is a rule of justice, that what men deserve, they should
suffer: yea, in this particular case, Gods rule is, if thou take away the
precious from the vile, thou shall be according to my word, Icr. 15. 19. And we
would have them suffer this exclusion no longer, then till they deserve it no
more: let them return unto us, (do as Themisto^les, who being in his youth
vicious and d^boyst, afterward made the world amends, by his brave exploits)
and we will return unto them, keep them company, account them true friends,
good men: otherwise we have an absolute prohibition from God himself, Ier. 15.
19, let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. And good reason
there is for it, in a musical instrument, the strings that be out of tune, are
set up, or set down to the rest; but the strings that be in tune, are never
stirred, nor meddled with: though indeed I might have stopped their mouths with
this very question, whether is better to obey God, or humor sensual men? As
our Savior Christ stopped the high Priests mouths, when they asked him, by what
authority he cu^sed the fruitless Fig Tree; cast the buyers and sellers out of
the Temple, etc. by demanding of them, whether John's baptism was from Heaven,
or of men, Mar. 11. 29.

But in case they will not return unto us, we had rather offend each of them
once, then our selves every day. It is pity that ever the water of baptism was
spilt upon his face, that cares more to discontent the world, then to wrong
God. They are unjust and over partial, that will go about to exact from us,
that which we owe not, with more rigor then they will exact from themselves,
that which they owe.

And so I have given you the reasons, why such as are, or desire to be
conscionable and religious, break off company with them; and vindicated the
most usual exceptions against it. I will now make some use of the point; and so
leave it for them to chew upon.

. 35.
1. TO sum up all in a word, or lay all these grounds and motives together If
we endanger our selves, our lives, our estates, loose our credit, our peace,
our time, by frequent associating with ungodly men, and can no way expect their
love and friendship; be sure you come not (or at least stay not) in their
company. It is not safe venturing among them, in confidence of our own streng^;
no more then it is to consort with cheaters, in hope that they will not cozen
us. Dead fire, we know, being stird up, will burn a fresh: and (...), like a
candle new put out, is soon kindled again; If Satan but blow upon it, the own
heat is enough to inflame it.

No, venture not thy self, though thou have once, or twice come off clear from
them; Sampson could withstand his wives temptation seven days, but at length,
by her importunity, she prevailed with him, Judge. 14. Over many in this case
are like to sick men, who when they have had a good day, or two, think
themselves presently well again; so they make bold to put off their Kerchifes,
to put on thinner garments, and to venture into the fre^h air; whereupon
follows unrecoverable relapses. Wherefore take heed, or if thou do keep them
company, it is an argument, that thou art sick of their disease, idleness. And
of this (...) so much.

2. If wicked company are so insectious, that they will work a consumption in
any man's virtues, that is daily conversant with them, and waste them from an
(...), to a dram; from a dram, to a scruple, to a grain, to nothing, so that he
may ^ay with Christ in the crowd, who has touched me, for I feel virtue gone
out of me? Let us be (as Seneca advises) more circumspect, with whom we (...)
and drink, then what we eat and drink. He that has money, will beware of
thieves: if you have any grace venture it not among these ri^^ers: (...), art
thou inclined to pray? they will tempt thee to play: would thou go to a
Sermon? by their persuasion, the Tavern or Theater stands in the way. But
alas! if others tempt thee not, thou will tempt others: temptation needs not
stan^ like a Tavern-bush, in thy way, for thou will invite thy self, hunt after
temptation.

3. Is every man busy in dispending that quality, which is predominant in him?
And can we converse with none but will work upon us, and by the unperceived
stealth of time, assimilate us to their own customs? will two friends, like two
brands set each other on fire with good, or ill, when one alone will go out?
will a straight twig, if it be tied to a crooked bough, become crooked; or a
crooked twigh, become straight, if it be tied to a straight rule: as Peter
denied his Master amongst the Jews, whom he con^est among the Apostles? Then
keep company, but let it be with such as may make thee better; fly evil
society, least their kind words so work upon thy yielding nature, that thou
know not how to deny: they are such as have taken the Davils oath of
Allegiance; and thou have small hope to prevail with them to good.

A certain King (as St. Augustine reports) being hard favored, and fearing
least his Queen should bring forth children like himself; got many fair and
beautiful pictures, which he caused her steadfastly to behold every day: go
thou and do likewise, be conversant with good men, and in good things, and thou
shall do that unbidden, which others can scarce do compelled by the Law, as
Aristotle speaks of the study of Philosophy. O what an happy thing it is to
converse with the virtuous! their gracious words, or holy examples, will be
sure to stir up the gifts of God in us; they will either add something to our
zeal, or something to our knowledge: the society of Prophets, is able to make
even a Saul prophecy. The sight of others falling heartily to their meat,
brings on our stomachs: yea, if we have no gifts to stir up, their communion
cannot but leave some tincture behind it, if not of Piety, yet, at least, of a
good profession, and some inclinableness. If Saul* had not had a good and
discreet companion, when he went to seek his Fathers Asses, he had returned
back as wise as he came: but now he is drawn into counsel with the Man of God,
and hears more then he hoped for, 1 Samuel 9. 6. The messengers of the same
Saul, when they lived in the Court, were (as is likely) carried away with the
swinge of the times, and did apply themselves to their Masters ungodly
practices, as appears in their going to apprehend David, that Saul might kill
him: yet were they no sooner in company with the Prophets, in Nayoth, but their
minds were changed, and they likewise prophesied, 1 Samuel 19. 20.

Ob. But say some of Bacchus his fools. I keep company with brave fellows,
that are generous, free, bountiful, etc.

Answ. Alas! thou do but slander him with these titles. He is a pround,
ignorant, inconsiderate Ass, that fears he is not loved, unless he be lose
and scattering; that strives so to be like a god in bounty, that he throws
himself into the lowest estate of man. He that gives to, and spends upon all
abundantly (which is for none to do, but him that has all) he that had rather
keep company with the dregs of men, then not be the best man: he that ravels
our a spacious fortune upon flatterers; he that out of vain glory will be
worshiped and kneed, to the spending of a fair inheritance, and then ends his
days in lewdness and contempt (as what is it, that ambition will not practice,
rather then let her port decline) he is a foolish Steward, that thus showers
away in one year, what his ancestors have been gathering twenty: yea, he is a
mad man, that makes his kindness to others, prove cruelty to himself, and all
his posterity.

Ob. Again, others are all for mirth, they keep company at the Tavern, with
none but curious and quaint wits, eloquent Poets and Orators; now ask them, as
Manoah did Sampson, Is there never a companion for thee among thy Brethren, the
people of God, that thou must associate thy self with these of uncircumcised
hearts and tongues? They will answer. Give me only these for my companions, for
they please me.

Answ. Can none please thee, but such as displease God? do thou not know,
that who so will be a friend to such, makes himself the enemy of God? James, 4.
4. or art thou ignorant, that pleasant wits, viciated in accustomed lewdness,
with sweet tunes entise men to destruction; as is morald in that fiction of the
Sirens, they delight the sense, but slay the soul: and will any man poison his
body, to please his taste? or go into an infected house, to fetch out a rich
suite? Or put his finger into a fiery Crusible, to take out gold: It Is true,
like Jugglers and such as play tricks of Legerdim^in, they will deceive us
with a kind of pleasure and delight: but is it any privilege for a man to be
tickled to death, that so he may dye laughing? Their discourse may be resembled
to the fruit that undid us all, which was fair in sight, smooth, in handling,
sweet in ^aste, but deadly in effect: or to the Clarian water, which made men
eloquent, but withal ^hort lived: or the gifts, which those Elses called
Lamiae, used to present unto children which made so many as accepted of them
loose their comeliness for ever after. And he that much affects their company
(being an honest man) is just like that free Citizen, that so doted on a ^emale
slave, that he would needs marry her; though by that match, he were sure, ^y
the Law, to become a slave with her. He overvalues the drunken and reeling love
of these men, that buys it with the ruin of himself, his estate, and family.
Wherefore, as in Meats, we do not only stand upon pleasantness, but
wholesomnesse: so let us regard wholesomnesse as well as pleasantness, in our
discourse and company. A good man can lend nothing to the increase of mirth in
wicked company: and he that will not lend, let him take heed of borrowing.

. 36.
FO^rthly, If thou would neither be intised nor enforced to pledge them, in
any of their wicked custome^s, divorce thy self from all acquaintance and so,
(...) with the vicious, yea, entertain no parley with them.

(...) are some vices of that nature, that they cannot be vanquished but by
avoiding; such is fornication, fly fornication, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians.
6. 18. that is, fly the company of fornicators; for to be in a lewd woman's
company, says Solomon, and depart innocent; and to take fire in a man's bosom,
and not singe his clothes; or go upon live coals, and his feet not be b^rnt,
are equa^ly possible, Prove. 6. 27. 28. such is the frailty of man's nature, that
if the eye but see, or the ear hear, or the hand but touch a whorish woman, the
heart will go nigh to catch, and take fire, verse 29. And thus it fares with
this sin, bid a man conso^t a while with drunkards, and depart from them
innocent, you may as well put a match to dry powder, and forbid it to take
fire, except he be very well stayed, and of better governd affections then
ordinary. It is not safe to commit a little Wherry to the Seas violence. A
stick that has once been in the fire, much mo^e a Torch newly extinguished,
being forthwith put to the flame, will soon be kindled again. Wherefore keep
out of the reach of thy vicious acquaintance, and if they becken thee one way,
be thou sure to take the contrary, at least ente^tain no parley with them. When
Castles once come to a parley, there is great fear they will yield: and gates
that are always open, will sometimes admit an enemy. No disputing with Satan,
or his deputies: when our first Parents fell to arguing the case with that old
Serpent, though in the state of innocence, when they had wit at will, and
their reason at command, they found him too hard for them: how much more too
weak shall we find our selves, that now are as we are? surely, we are like to
lose all, if once we enter into disputation with that old Sophister, and crafty
Fox, after the experience of six thousand years almost, and when our own flesh
(which is the greatest both deceiver and dissembler in the world) is become his
cunning solicitour.

Alas! he desires no more then to be heard speak; for grant him but this, and
he will persuade thee to believe, even contrary to thine own knowledge: as how
easily did he persuade Eve, by himself: and Adam, by her, (when they gave but
ear to him,) o believe what he spoke, though they had heard God himself say the
contrary, but a little before? Genesis 2. 17. and if in ocency found no means of
resistance, what hope have we so extremely degenerated? And indeed, why do we
pray not to be led into temptation, if we lead our selves into temptation? If
we will not keep our selves from the occasion; God will not keep us from the
sin: and if God do not keep us, we cannot be kept: we cannot, we will not
choose but fall. Wherefore (...) the society of evil men, as Joseph shunned the
society of his Mistress, and leave them that leave God, as Noah did the old
World, and that by Gods commandment, Genesis 7. 1. 7. and Abraham the Cana^ites,
Genesis 12. 1. and (...) the Sodomites, Genesis 19. 17. and Israel the Egyptians,
Exodus 12. 37. 41. and M^ab and Ammon, Numb. 27. 1. 2. 3. 16 17.

. 37.
BUT is it warrantable, may some say, to separate from our old acquaintance,
(being vicious) and other the like company?

Not totally; for then we must go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5. 10. nor from any
in all cases; for then we must separate ^^om the public assemblies: nor in
regard of civil society, and necessary commerce; for this were to unglue the
whole worlds frame, which is cont^xted only by commerce and contracts, there be
certain wise uses to be made of them, for our convenience or necessity, which
need not, yea, must not be forborne: as wherefore serves discretion, but that
(as a glass window) it may let in the light, and keep out the wind?

Neither can wicked men, in this ^ase, be avoided: but so long as we are in
this World, we must converse with men of the World: and we know it is lawful
enough, in terms of civility, to deal with infidels, yea, even the savage
Cannibals may receive an answer of outward courtesy. If a very dog fawn upon
us we stroke him on the head, and clap him on the back, much less is the
common bond of humanity untyed by grace; disparity in spiritual professions, is
no warrant for ingratitude: yet a little friendship with such, is enough; the
less communion with any of Gods enemies, the more safety: and sure I am, that
those who affect a familiar entirenesse with such, bewray either too much
bol^nesse, or to little cosncience.

Yea, we may not only converse with evil men, but communicate with them also
without harm, so it be not in evil things: as in the Sacrament the unworthy
receiver eats and drinks damnation to himself, sibi, non tibi, to himself,
not to thee.

But as touching a familiar entirenesse, and leagues of amity, that they are
unfit, unwarrantable, dangerous, is easy to prove. As what says the Holy
Ghost by S. Paul.? We^ comman^ you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye with draw your selves from every brother that walks
inordinately, and not after the instruction which ye received of us, 2 These. 3.
6. And again, speaking unto the converted Ephesians, touching others among them
who were whoremongers, unclean persons, covetous men, and idolaters, he says,
be not companions with them, Ephesi. 5. 5. ^. And lastly, in that case of the
incestuous Corinthian, he does not only excommunicate him, but makes a rule
upon it, that if any one, which professes himself a Christian, shall live in
any scandalous co^^se, that they shall not afford him so much as civil and
familiar converse, 1 Corinthians. 5. 11. If any man that is called a ^rother, says
he, he a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard,
or an extortioner, with such an on eat not. Mark this all ye swinish drunkards
and beastly livers, that God-dischargeth us your society.

But to proceed. Why was that Law enacted, for the strict avoiding of Leprous
persons? it was not the body only that was herein respected, by the God of
spirits; those that are spiritually contagious must be still and ever avoided,
they must be separated from us, we from them; they from us, by just censures;
or if not, we from them, by a voluntary declination of their familiar
conversation: or if they can join our heart to theirs, they will disjoyn it
from God; to let pass Saint Paul's charge, 2 Corinthians 6. 17. come out from
among them, and separate your selves: And that of the Angel, Revelation 18. 4.
come out of her my people, which especially have relation to Idolaters: see
what has been the practice of Gods people since Noah, Lot, Abraham, and
Israel, which have been alleged already. Does not David say, I have not sat
with vain persons, neither kept company with the dissemblers. I have hated the
assembly of evil doers, and will not company with the wicked, Psalm. 26. 4. 5.
And was not Joseph, whom the Holy Ghost stilleth a just man, fully minded
(before the Angel forbad him) to put away Mary, after he was betrothed unto
her, when he but supposed her to be dishonest? Matthew 1. 19. And was not all
this, to show us what we should do in the like cases?

Wherefore, let us tread in their steps, and say with a worthy Divine, though I
may have many bad acquaintance, yet I will have no ba^ companions: for even the
tame beasts will not keep with the wild; nor the clean dwell with the leprous.
But above all, let us keep no drunkards, nor swearers in our houses, Psalm
101. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. no, nor scoffers, Ismael must be turned out of doors, when
he once falls a jeering of Isaac: and indeed if we do, it is a shrewd suspicion
we are not sincere our selves: for grace, as it is resembled to heat, so like
heat, it gathers together things of one kind, separateth things of a contrary
nature, as dross from Gold.

In fine, if they have forsaken all honesty and good conscience, it is time for
us to forsaken them: if they depart from us, in the foundation of faith and
good works; let us (as justly we may) depart from them, in the building of
brotherly fellowship: they build on the sand, let us build on the rock: yea, if
they forsake the right way, we must forsake them, or Christ will forsake us.

But least all that has been said, should not be sufficient to persuade thee;
behold here the drunkard deliniated, and that will certainly aff^^ght thee from
consorting with a fiend so foul and filthy, so ugly, and loathsome: which if it
do, I hope some good man or other, will stick it upon every post: that all may
be (...) in amored, with this worst then beastly abomination.

(...)e Drun(...)d is a (...)nge Chi(...)a, more (...)gious (...)n any
(...)ster (...)g. in Visage a man, but a Broth^us. Heart, a Swine. Head, a
Cephalus. Tongue, an Aspe. Belly, a Lump. Appetite, a Leech. Sloth, an Ignavus.
a Jer^^e. Goat. Siren. Hyaena. Panther.
for Excessive devouring. Lust. Flattery. Subtilty. Cruelty.
in Envying, a Basiliske. Antipathy to all good, a Lexus. Hindering others from
good, a Remora. Life, a Salamander. Conscience, an Ostrich. Spirit a Devil
1 in surpassing 2 in tempting 3 in drawing
others in Sin. to Sin. to Perdition.
even the most despicable piece of all humanity, and not worthy to be reckoned
among the Creatures which God made.

And so much for defense against what they do, which may be avoided.

If you would have as much against what they say. which must be endured.

(...)ade a late Treatise, called, THE VICTORY OF PATIENCE.

Or if any would have the foregoing part of this Soverain Antedote: let (...)m
inquire for Sin Stigmatized, or The Drunkards Character with which it
(...)ound, and in a larger letter. Likewise at James Crumps, in Little
Bartho(...)ewes Well-yard: they may have several pieces, of sundry the most
needful (...)ects, composed for the common good by the same Author.

FINIS

