ENGLANDS Unthankfulness striving with Gods Goodness, for the Victory: as
Abaslom strove with David, whether the father should be more kind to the son;
or the son more unkind to the father. Or, Enough (being well weighed) to melt
an heart of Adamant.

By R. Young, Florilegus.

In reference to Leviticus 19. 17. and Isaiah 58. 1.

In reading whereof, reflect upon your selves; hearken to conscience; and what
concerns you, apply it not to others, as David did Nathans Parable, 2 Samuel 12.
1, to 8. And Ahab the Prophets, 1 King. 20. 39, to 43. Want of application
makes all means ineffectual; and therefore are we Christians in name only,
because we think our selves Christians indeed, and already good enough.

The fourth Impression.

Imprimatur,

Thomas Gataker.

CHAP. 1.
1 A Wise man (says Solomon) foreseeth the evil, and preventeth it: but fools
go on; and are punished, Prove. 22. 3. An argument that most men; yea, almost
all men are stark fools, as will fully appear, if we observe but these three,
things.

The Precepts of the Gospel. Predictions Testimonies

First, Observe but how strict, holy, just, and good the Precepts or Rules ^re,
by which we ought to walk.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, Mark 12. 30.

Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. 31.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even the same do you unto
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7. 12.

Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly tell
him of his faults; and suffer him not to sin, Levit. 19. 17.

And then consider, how few there are amongst us; and how rare (only here and
there one) like rich men, among the multitude, or jewels among other stuff,
that either do, or care to walk by this golden Rule; Yea, that instead thereof,
make not the World only their God; and Pleasure, or Profit alone their
Religion.

2. Secondly, Observe (o that we had the grace seriously to observe and mind!)
but the Predictions; touching the paucity and fewness of those that shall be
saved. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many will seek to enter, and
shall not be able; because strait is the gate, and narrow the way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it: But wide is the gate, and broad the
way, that leads to destruction; and many there be that go in thereat, Matthew.
7. 13, 14. Luke 13. 23, 24. Again, Many are called (viz. by the outward
Ministry of the Word) but few chosen, Mat. 20. 16. and 22. 24. Yea, St. John
affirms, that the whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. And that the
number of those, whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the Sea, Revel.
20. 8. and 13. 15, 16, 17. Esa. 1^. 22. Romans 9. 27.

And we find it too true, by sad experience; for what eyes can but run over to
see, for the most part, how ignorant and erroneous men are, and what lives they
lead? for scarce one of a hundred, whose knowledge, belief, and life, is in any
degree answerable to the Gospel, or the Title that they bear; for Christians
they are called, but no otherwise then the Heathen Images are called Gods:
because he that is a Christian indeed, will strive to imitate Christ, and
square his life in some measure, according to the rule of Gods Word.

3. Thirdly, Observe but the Testimonies manifesting how they must be
qualified, who mean to be saved. O that we would but believe them; for God
expressly tells us, That no ^righteous person shall ever inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven; but that such shall have their part and portion in that lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Gal. 5. 21. Rev. 21. 8. And that without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12. 14. And that except our righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: (who yet excelled our formal Hypocrites, and civil
Iusticiaries) we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. ^0. And that
he will recompense every man according to his works, be they (...) evil, Psalm.
62. 12. Rev. 20. 13. and 22. 12. Romans 2. 6. Jer. 25. 14. and 32. 19. and 50.
29. and 51. 56. Ezekiel. 7. 4, 8, 9. and 9. 10. and 11. 21. and 16. 43. And that
we shall give an account at the day of Judgment, for every idle word we speak,
Mat. 12. 36. And that Christ will come the second time in flaming fire, to
render vengeance unto them that know him not, and that obey not his Gospel, 2
These. 1. 7, 8. Psalm. 11. 6. Yea, the Lord tells us expressly, that he will not be
merciful to such as flatter themselvos in an evil way, but that his wrath and
jealousy shall smoke against them; and every curse that is written in his
book, shall light upon them, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. And that if we will not
regard, nor hearken unto him when he calls upon us for repentance^ he will not
hear nor regard us, when in our distress and anguish, we shall call upon him
for mercy, but even laugh at our destruction, and mock when our fear comes,
Prove. 1. 24, to 33. See other places to this purpose, Hebr. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4.
24. Mat. 25. 30, 41, to 46. and 3. 10.

4 Nor can it indeed consist with his justice to pardon such as continue in an
evil course of life; neither was it ever heard, that any ascended into heaven
without going up the stairs of new obedience: that any have attained unto
everlasting life, without faith, repentance, and sanctification of Spirit: For
even the Thief upon the Cross believed in Christ, and showed the fruits of his
faith, in acknowledging his own sin, in reproving his fellow, in confessing his
Savior, even when all denied and forsook him, in calling upon his Name, and
desiring by his means and merits everlasting life. Besides we read not, that
ever he was outwardly called, until this very hour. Secondly, though there was
one saved at the last hour, that none might despair: yet there was but one,
that none should presume. Thirdly, the Thiefs conversion was one of the
miracles, with the glory whereof our Savior would honor the ignominy of his
Cross. Fourthly, he was saved at the very instant of time, when our Savior
triumphed on the Cross, took his leave of the world, and entered into his
glory: And it is usual with Princes to save some heinous Malefactors at their
Coronation, when they enter upon their Kingdoms in triumph, which they are
never known to do afterward. Nor was his sudden conversion ever intended in
Gods purpose for an encouragement to Procrastinators; And therefore no cause
have we to expect that he should deal after a new and extraordinary way with
us, then he has with all others, and so breas^ the course of his so just, and
so long continued proceedings: Yea, he binds it with an Oath, that whomsoevr he
redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, they shall worship him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives, Luke 1. 73, 74,
75. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Which Scriptures sufficiently show, that they who in life will
yield no obedience to the Law, shall in death have no benefit by the Gospel.
Nor ought any indeed, to profess Christ, or once to name him wit^ their mouths,
except they depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

5. The which Scriptures, if they be true, (and they fall short of the Devils
that deny it, Iam. 2. 19.) what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy
conversation and godliness? as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 11. And yet most
men live as if the Gospel were quite contrary to the rule of the Law, as if God
were neither to be feared nor cared for, as if they were neither beholding to
him, nor stood in aw^ of him, both out of his debt and danger; yea, as if there
were no God to judge, nor Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward.

And (which mightily aggravates their sin, and will add to their torment) let
some Boanerges be sent unto them, with a message from God, it fares with them
as with the Adder, no charming can charm them. The strongest commands, the
loudest denunciations of judgments, the shrillest and sweetest promulgations
of mercies, will do no good upon them: For while they are in Dal^lahs lap, and
lie sleeping like Drones by the hearth of hell, they think themselves as safe,
as if they were in Abraham's bosom: Their Adamantine hearts will neither yield
to the fire, nor to the hammer, admit of no impression; yea, let them hear of
never so many judgments, they tremble and rele^t no more then the seats they
sit on, or the stones they tread on: Even the declaration of sins, denunciation
of judgments, description of torments, and the like, no more stir them, then a
tale moves one in a dream; their sup^ne stupidity is no more capable of
excitation, then the Sea Rocks are of moti^n, or the Billows of compassion;
which would make one even tremble to think of it.

CHAP. II.
1. But what is the reason, why men make no more use of these Predictions of
this warning? but that as near as can be computed, one of two are lascivious or
voluptuous; two of three drunkards, (^n Gods account;) nine of ten cruel and
unjust persons; nineteen of twenty swearers; twenty nine of thirty Athiests;
thirty nine of forty ignorant wretches; forty nine of fifty covetous; ninety
nine of an hundred open, or secret enemies to the power of Religion, and
contemners of holiness: For certainly what God in these three particulars has
revealed in his Word, cannot be unknown to any among us, that hate not the
light; for every house almost has a Bible, and Christ has continued his
Gospel amongst us now, near upon an hundred years, with such supply of able
Ministers, that no Nation under Heaven may compare with us.

2. I might give you many reasons of this, as that they were born stark dead in
sin, and they thank God they are no changelings; that they are as good as their
Forefathers, or those among whom they live, and they neither desire to be
better nor wiser; yea, it were a ridiculous singularity so to be: That the
custom of sin has brawned their hearts, and blinded their minds. That they
(...) as Satan their God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and Father, job. 8. 44. and King, or
Prince, Ephesians. 2. 2. would have them to do: That they will either not hear the
Word; (sor I think I may say, that one half of the men and women in the
Kingdom come not once a year within the Church-doors, I mean the poorer sort
that do not know they have souls: It were good, they were compelled to hear
the Word preached, for the wicked, like sullen children, would not forsake
their play sor their meat, but for the Rod of Correction: And many Saints in
heaven might now confess, that they had not known God, but for the Laws. First,
compulsory means brought them to the feast, whereof once tasting, they would
never leave it; Compel them to come in, etc. Luke 14. 23.) Or if they do hear
the Word and understand it in some measure, they will not apply it to
themselves: That they will not receive the truth in love, that they might be
saved, and are therefore given over to strong delusions to believe lies: That
they will not by any means that Christ can use, understand and be converted,
and saved; therefore they shall not understand, nor be converted, nor saved,
Isai. 6. 9, 10. Matthew. 13. 15. That they harden their own hearts, whereupon
their hearts are more hardened: That because they will not regard nor retein God
in their thoughts, God gives them over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. That
because they will not take the Spirits counsel, the Spirit gives them up to
walk in their own counsels, Ier. 9. 14. That they will believe Satan rather then
God, therefore God delivers them up to Satan, so to be deluded; that the light
of the glorious Gospel shall not shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. 2
These. 2. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 4. 7. That they are not as they ought, and as it was in
the Primitive times cast out of the Church, and all Christian society by
excommunication, as dirt into the street, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Romans
16. 17, 18. 2 These. 3. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 5. That they do as their
flattering False Prophets teach them: That they think they have as good hearts,
as the best; and therefore follow that deceitful guide: That they are not ver^t
in the Scriptures, at least they understand not the spirituality of the Word;
nor have they the Spirit to convince them of sin: But I have largely handled
these upon other occasions; wherefore I will pass them, and only give you
this one, and I pray, mind it.

3. Wicked men (and such are all natural, and unregenerate persons, whether
loose Liberlines, or rich worldlings, or civil Iusticiaries, or formal
hypocrites, or profound humanists, or cunning Politicians,) are so blockish and
void of spiritual understanding, that they will not believe what is written,
till they feel what is written; nothing will fully confute them but ^re and
brimstone: Sin shuts their eyes, and only punishment can open them. Nor will
they once think of Heaven, till with that rich man they are tormented in the
flames of hell: but even that rich man that had so little care of his own soul
during life, when he was in hell torments, took care for his Brethrens, not out
of charity, but because as he had by his persuasion and ill example, bin the
occasion of their greater sin; so they by continuing in those sins, should be
the occasion of his more grievous torment. But had he bin so wise, as to have
believed Moses and the Prophets report of hell, he needed never to have come
into it: The common case of all that come there. They will not believe what
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles tell them, touching the truth,
justice, and severity of God, in punishing sin with eternal destruction of body
and soul, and the necessity of obeying his Precepts, until they shall hear
Christ say unto them, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting f^e, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41.

4. And indeed for want of this sore-wit, the wisest world lings, as Balaam and
Judas, and the rich man in the Gospel, and the Scribes and Pharisees, and all
Atheists, are in Scripture Language styled fools, and the wisdom of the world
called foolishness, twelve times in one Chapter. Read 1 Cor. 1. and Chap. 2.
Nor can there be so sure a sign to distinguish between a wise man and a fool.
A wise man (says Bernard) fore-sees the torments of hell, and avoideth them;
but a fool goes on merrily until he feels them, and then says, I had not
thought. True, many wicked men are taken to ^e wise, and in some sense are so,
they have enlightened heads, and fluent tongues, as had Balaam, and Judas, and
Paul before his conversion, and the Scribes and Pharisees; but their hearts
remain dark and foolish, as is plain by Romans 1. 21, 22. Joh. 3. 10. Whence even
the wisest of them are called by our Savior fools and blind, Matthew. 23. 16,
17, 19, 24, 26. and 27. 3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2. 16. And indeed what is that wisdom
worth, which nothing profits the owner of it, either touching virtue, or
happiness? So that you may take this for a rule, They that have but a show of
holiness, have but a show of wisdom.

5. Men of the world believe the things of the world, they believe what they
see, and feel, and know; they believe the Laws of the Land, that there are
places and kinds of punishment here below, and that they have bodies to suffer
temporal s^art, if they transgress, and this makes them abstain from murder,
selonie, and the like; but they believe not things invisible and to come; for
if they did, they would as well, yea much more, fear him that has power to
cast both body and soul into hell, as they do the Temporal Magistrate that
has only power to kill the body; they would think it a very hard bargain to
win the whole world, and lose their own souls. But if visible powers were not
more feared then the invisible God, and the Halter more then Hell (natural men
being like beasts, that are more sensible of the flash of powder, then of the
bullet,) the world would be overrun without rage. Or,

6. Secondly, they believe the Devil and the Flesh, that prophecy prosperity
to sin, yea, life and salvation; as the Pope promised the Powder-Traitors; for
though men do the Devils works, yet they look for Christ's wages; and there is
scarce a man on earth but he thinks to go to heaven; yea, the Devil and sin so
infatuate and besot many, that they can even apply Christ's passion, as a
warrant for their licentiousness, and take his Death as a license to sin, his
Cross as a Letters Pattent to do mischief; So turning the grace of God into
wantonness: As if a condemned person should head his Drum of Rebellion with
his Pardon, resolving therefore to be evil, because he is good: which is to
sin with an high hand, or with a witness, and to make themselves incapable of
forgiveneesse. And yet wretched and senseless men, they presume to have part in
that merit, which in every part they have so abused; to be purged by that
blood, which now they take all occasions to disgrace; to be saved by the same
wounds, which they swear by, and so osten swear away; to have Christ an
Advocate for them in the next life, when they are Advocates against Christ in
this: And that Heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life
long, they have galloped in the beaten road toward Hell.

7. The Devil makes large promises to his; but ever disappoints them of their
hopes, as he did our first Parents: You shall die says God; You shall not die
at all, says Satan: Yea, you shall be as Gods, says he, when his drist was to
make them Devils. Yet the Devil was believed, when God could not be credited.
Diabolus mentitur, ut fallat; vitam pollicetur, ut perimat, says Cyprian. And
ever since our first parents, gave more credit to Satan, then their Maker: Our
hearts naturally have been slint unto God, wax to Satan; so that Satan may in a
manner triumph over Christ, and say, I have more servants then Christ; and they
do more for me, then his servants do for him: and yet I never died for them as
Christ has done for his: I never promised them so great reward, as Christ has
done to his, etc.

8. Well may these men think they believe the Gospel, as the Jews (who
persecuted Jesus, and sought to slay him) thought they believed Moses writings,
Joh. 5. 38, 39, 46, 47. But it is altogether impossible, as Christ (who knew
their hearts better then themselves) affirms of them: for certainly they would
never speak as they speak, think as they think, do as they do; if they thought
their thoughts, words, and deeds should ever come to judgment.

Did men believe, that neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Swearers, nor Railers, nor the Fearful, nor
Unbelieving, nor Murderers, nor Sorcerers, nor Liars, nor no unrighteous
persons, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; (as the Scripture expressly
speaks,) but shall have their part in the lake that burns with sire and
brimstone, which is the second death: They durst not continue in the practice
of these sins, without fear, or remorse or care of amendment. As for instance,
If Lots sons-in-Law had believed their Father, when he told them from God that
the City should suddenly be destroyed with fire and brimstone, and that by
flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his counsel. Or if the old
world had believed, that God would indeed, and in good earnest bring such a
flood upon them as he threatened, they would not have neglected the opportunity
of entering into the Ark before it was shut, and the windows of heaven opened;
much less would they have scoffed, and flowted at Noah, while he was a bulding
it. So if men did firmly believe what God speaks of bell, it would keep them
innocent; make them officious; they would need no entreaty to avoid it. Men
love themselves well enough to avoid a known pain; yea, there would be more
fear, and danger of their despair, then of their security. And the like of
heaven; if men but believed what fullness of joy, and what pleasures are
reserved at Gods right hand for evermore, for them that love, and serve him in
sincerity, Psalm. 16. 11. they would be more obedient upon earth.

CHAP. III.
1. WHat believe the former Scriptures? and nothing appear in men's lives in the
whole Land almost, but pride, covetousness, cruelty, damnable Hypocrisy,
profaning of the Sabbath, cursed swearing and cursing, abominable, and worse
then beast-like drunkenness, adultery, lying, slandering, persecuting, contempt
of Religion and all goodness: grinding of faces like edged tools, spilling of
blood like water, racking of Rents, detension of Wages, and workmens hire;
incredible cruelty to Servants, enclosing of Commons, engrossing of
Commodities, griping exactions, with straining the advantages of greatness:
unequal levies of legal payments, spiteful suits, biling usury, bribery,
perjury, partiality, sacrilege, simoniacal contracts, and soul-murder;
scurrility and profaneness, cozening in bargains, breaking of promises,
perfidious underminings, Luxury, wantonness, contempt of Gods Messengers,
neglect of his Ordinances, violation of his days, and the like: as if these
were fruits of faith, and not of Atheism rather.

2. Yea, as if we had contracted with the Devil, that we would abuse all Gods
gifts so fast as they come: his blessings make us proud, his riches covetous,
his peace wanton, his meats intemperate, his mercy secure; And all his benefits
serve us but as weapons to rebel against him: so that we turn his grace into
wantonness, and make a trade of sin: yea, it is our least ill to do evil: for
behold we speak for it, joy in it, boast of it, tempt, and enforce to it, yea,
mock them that dislike it, as if we would send challenges into heaven, and make
love to destruction.

3. And yet we are Christians forsooth: I am even ashamed to think that men,
that rational men, should be such Sots, or suffer Satan so to gull and beguile
them! Certainly men are stark mad; for otherwise, how could it be? how were it
possible? that our ears should be always open to the Tempter, shut to our
Maker and Redeemer? That we should do nothing else but sin, and make others sin
too? That all our thoughts, words and works, should be the services of the
world, the flesh, and the Devil? Yea, that we should be even mockers of all
that march not under the pay of the Devil? And yet fancy our selves the
servants of God, and followers of Christ. Will God be thus mocked? O abominable
blindness! for I dare refer my self to the worst of men that have reasonable
souls. As let a very Hea^hen read the Gospel, and compare the rules thereof
with our lives; he must ^eeds conclude, that either it is not Christ's Gospel,
or we are not Christians.

4. O that men would come to themselves! as it is said of the repent^ng
Prodigal, Luke 15. 17. And recover their wits again, that they have ^ost by the
fall, and the long custom of sin. And then they would clearly ^ee and confess,
(as all that truly fear God know) that whatsoever they ^^y, or think of
themselves; they do not in deed, and in truth believe a ^eity: for if they did,
how durst they exercise their saucy wits, in profane ^coffs at Religion? and
disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter they would ^ive a thousand worlds for
one drop: How durst they tear Heaven with their blasphemies? and bandy the
dreadful Name of God, in their im^ure and polluted mouths, by their bloody
oaths and execrations? How ^ould they be such witless, graceless, and shameless
miscreants, as to swear and curse, even as Dogs bark? yea, they have so sworn
away all grace, that they count it a grace to swear! And are so far from
believing, that ^he curse of God shall never depart from the house of the
swearer: And that himself will be a swift witness against swearers: That the
Lord has a great ^ontroversie with the inhabitants of the Land, because of
swearing; and that of all other sinners, they shall not be found guiltless,
that take his Name ^n vain: And that the Land mourns because of Oaths, as the
Scripture speaks, Zach. 5. 1, to 5. Exodus 20. 7. Hos. 4. 1, 2. Jor. 23. 10.
that (as I said before) they think to be saved by the same wounds, and blood
which they swear by, and so often swear away.

And lest they should not themselves soon enough, fill up the measure of their
wickedness, even Boys in the streets, have learned of them to wrap ^ut oaths,
as frequently as they, and no man so much as reprove, or find fault with them:
yea, through the Parents accustomary swearing, their children have learned to
speak English and oaths together, and so to blaspheme God, almost as soon as he
has made them. So that we may well wonder, that the Land sinketh not under us,
because of Oaths: As, o the numberless number of Oaths and Blasphemies, that
this Land groans under! which are spit out, as it were, in defiance of God; and
al his prohibitions to the contrary.

5. But the case is so clear, that I dare refer it to themselves, in their
sober fits: for their consciences cannot choose but tell them at one time or
^ther, when they are alone, and at leisure to hear it: that either they believe
there is no God at all, or else that God is not just and true; nor speaks as he
means in his Word, which is worse: Or if they do believe that he is a just and
true God, they believe also that they shall be punished as he threatens for
their impenitency and provoking of him; and they provoke ^im, that they may be
punished, which is worst of all. But behold the just judgment of God, (upon
the wilfully blinded, and obstinate,) who pays them in their own coin ^ they
will not see, nor hear, nor understand, nor be converted, nor saved; but wink
with their eyes, stop their ears, stifle their consciences, harden their
hearts, and believe Satan rather then God, and walk in their own counsels:
Therefore, says God, the^ shall not see, nor hear, nor understand, nor apply
any wholesome truth (...) themselves, nor be converted, nor saved, as may
plainly be seen by the^ ensuing Scriprures, Prove. 28. 14. Exodus 7. 3, 22. and
10. 20. and 14. 8. Isa. 6. 9, 10. Psalm. 69. 23. Jer. 51. 9. Mat. 13. 15. Ioh.
12. 37, 39, 40. Romans 1. 21, to 33. and 11. 8^ Acts 28. 27. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11,
12. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Heb. 3. 8.

It is exceeding remarkable, how God for this cause inflicteth more spiritual
judgments upon this Age and Nation, then ever we read of. I fe^ few consider
it, as they ought: Wicked men will needs harden themselves without cause;
therefore they shall have cause enough. As, ha^ they ever since the world
began, such cause to speak evil of the way o^ Truth, (if I may so speak) and
the Professors thereof, as now they have, by reason of the many and abominable
errors broached, and maintained? The bitter enmity that is between the very
people of God, about things no^ fundamental: The foul mouths of many, whose
Religion and zeal is to^ rail upon the most godly, able, and Orthodox
Ministers; but especially the vicious and lewd practices of many that pretend
for Religion; and the notorious cheating, and cozening of those in places of
trust, who at first were made choice of, for their pretended piety. All which
God permits for the further hardening of his obstinate and malicious enemies.
And let wicked men look to it: For as the Devil first puts out their eyes, and
then lays blocks in their way, to make them stumble and fall, that so they may
dash themselves in pieces: so God himself in justice suffers these scandals to
be given, or these stumbling blocks to be laid, that they may stumble at them
to their destruction, and break their souls necks, as it is Ezekiel. 3. 20. See
more, 1 King 22. 20, 21, 22. Mat. 18. 7. 2 Pet. 2. 12. Isa. 8. 14, 15. 2 Samuel
24. 1. 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. And this is a sure rule, that none thus stumble at
scandals, but wicked men and Gods enemies; as in the case of David, 2 Samuel 12.
14. If you would see more, read Mr. Dyke, of Scandals.

And herein the sin and punishment answer each other in their trancendeney, for
as of all other judgments, none like this; so likewise of the sin: For this is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil, John 3. 19, 20.

6. Nor is this all, the worst is reserved for the Upshot: As hear what will be
the issue of men's horrible profaneness, and abominable wickedness, if they
continue therein, without hearty contrition, and amendment. Men may think it an
argument of Gods favor, or dispensation, that they prosperm their wickedness;
that some eminent judgment is not executed speedily upon them: But there
cannot be a greater unhappiness, a heavier curse, (...) to prosper in ill
designs, and ungracions courses; to go on in sin uncontrouled; for he that
uses to do evil, and speeds well, seldom ^sts until he come to that evil from
which there is no redemption.

Besides, Forbearance is no acquittance; the wickedness of the Old World ^s
abundant in the New World; yet is not the World drowned with wa^. But why?
because God has ordained for it a deluge of fire. The sins (...) Sodom are
practiced every where in our City and Kingdom, yet do ^e committters escape
fire and brimstone on earth, because they are reser^ed to fire and brimstone in
Hell. Do not many persecute the Church as ^olently as Pharaoh, with Chariots
and Armies? who yet escape drown^g; there is a reservation of a deeper and
bottomless S^ for them; diverse ^urmur at the passages of Gods providence in
these times of retribution and Reformation, who are not stung with fiery
Serpents, as the Israelites, ^cause they are reserved to a fiery serpent in
Hell: Many, yea the most ^at can come by them take Bribes like Gehazi, without
a Leprosy, because ^f that eternal Leprosy which waits for them. How many a
deceitful Executor and Trustee says and swears with a little inversion of
Ananias his (...), I received but so much, I disbursed so much; yet are not
stricken with ^ath temporal, because they are reserved to death eternal. Have
not many ^onopolists with us, done as bad as those Philippians? Act. 16. 16.
19. who ^ompounded with the Devil for a Pattent, to bring them in gain, and yet
^row rich, and prosper, and leave a great deal of substance to their heirs,
those gain will be found loss, when Satan shall seize upon their bodies and
souls, and hurry them to Hell. And so of other Sinners; for the like (...)
appliable to the whole Nation, except some sew despised ones, and he ^s a rare
man, that does not either mis-believe, or grossly mislive, that is ^ot a
worshipper of one of these three, the lust of the flesh, voluptuousness; ^e
lust of the eyes, covetousness; or the pride of life, ambition; which is ^ll
the Trinity the world worships.

But of all the rest, let all envious Cains, scoffing Ishmaels, reviling Go^s,
bloody-minded Hamans and Doegs, cursing Shimeis, railing Rab^ake's, flouting
Tobiahs and Sanballats, cruel Herod's, and all the like God^aters, (that carry
an aching tooth against every good man they know, and will even hate one, for
his being holy, though poor ignorant soul^ ^hey know it not) look for a whole
volume of plagues in the next life, ^ough they escape in this, if they repent
not. For if hellfire shall be their ^ortion that obey not the Gospel, how can
they look to escape that oppose it? Or if at the great day men shall be bid,
Depart into everlasting torments, for not feeding, clothing, visiting; what
shall become of those that maliciously scoff at Religion, and persecute Christ
in his members? which is the depth of sin: For he that despises, traduceth, or
any way wrongs one that believes in Christ, (especially one of his Ambassadors
of the Ministry) strikes at the Image of God in him, by whose Spirit he both
speaks and acts: And God takes it as if it were done to himself, for proof of
both, see Psalm. 44. 22. and 74. 4, 10, 18, 22, 23. and 83. 2, 5, 6. and 89. 50,
51. and 139. 20. Prove. 19. 3. Romans 1. 30. and 9. 20. Matthew. 10. 22. and 25. 45.
1 Samuel 17. 45. Isai. 37. 4, 22, 23, 28. and 54. 17. Acts 5. 39. and 9. 4, 5.
Job 9. 4^ 1 These. 4. 8. John 15. 20. to 26. Numb. 16. 11. 1 Samuel 8. 7. Mark 9.
42. Ier. 17. 18. Psalm. 79. 12. 2 Kings 2. 24. O that my old acquaintance, the
Formal Hypocrite, and my feigned friend the Civil Justiciary, and my
wellmeaning neighbor the Loose Libertine, with millions more, would bu^
seriously consider these Scriptures, and be warned by them, before the
Drawbridge be taken up: For if the bountifulness, and long-suffering of God,
do not lead us to repentance, it will increase our condemnation: Besides, God
owes that man a grievous payment, whom he suffers to run o^ so long
unquestioned; and his punishment shall be the greater when he comes to reckon
with him for all his faults together.

CHAP. IV.
1. BUt admit men's unbelief, impenitency, and profaneness, in such glorious
times of light, and means of grace as ours is, were not enough to provoke God,
to inflict this heavy and grievous judgment upon them; how well do they
deserve this, and much more for their horrible and abominable ingratitude to so
good a God, so gracious a Savior and Redeemer, that has done and suffered, or
would do more for them, then can either be expressed, or conceived by any
heart, were it as deep as the Sea? As mark well what I (the meanest of a
million) shall but paint or draw out as it were with a cole, of his unspeakable
goodness to sinners: I will according to my slender ability, but give you^ a
drop to taste out of that ocean.

Touching what God and Christ has done for us: In the first place he gave us
our selves, and all the creatures to be our servants; yea, he created us after
his own Image in righteousness and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the
truth, with a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed and
happy condition; and this deserves all possible thankfulness; but this was
nothing in comparison; for when we were in a sad condition; when we had
forfeited all this, and our selves: when by sin we had turned that image of God
into the image of Satan, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments, when we were become his enemies, mortally hating him, and to our
utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only enemies; (Sin and
Satan) not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement, but a perverse
and obstinate will to resist all means tending thereunto; He did redeem us, not
only without asking, but even against our wills: so making of us (his cursed
enemies) servants, of servants sons, of sons heirs, and coheirs with Christ,
Gal. 4. 7. Here was a fathomless depth, a wonder beyond all wonders*

2. But that we may the better consider what an alms or boon God gave us, when
he gave us his Son: Observe that when neither heaven, earth, nor hell, could
have yielded any satisfactory thing, besides Christ that could have satisfied
Gods justice, and merited heaven for us, then, O then! God, in his infinite
wisdom and goodness, did not only find out a way to satisfy his Justice and
the Law, but gave us his Son, his only begotten Son, his only beloved Son out
of his bosom: And his Son gave himself to die, even the most shameful,
painful, and cursed death of the Cross to redeem us; That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. The very
thought of which death, before he came to it, together with the weight and
burden of our sins, put him into such an Agony in the Garden, that it made him
to sweat, even drops of blood. A mercy bestowed, and a way found out, that may
astonish all the sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven! Wherefore, o
wonder at this, you that wonder at nothing! That the Lord should come with such
a price to redeem our worse then lost souls, and to bring salvation to us, even
against our wills: The Lord Jesus Christ being rich, for our sakes became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Even the eternal
God would die, that we might not die eternally; o the deepness of Gods love! o
the unmeasurable measure of his bounty! o Son of God, who can sufficiently
express thy love? Or, commend thy pity? Or, extol thy praise? It was a wonder,
that thou made us for thy self, more that thou made thy self man for us;
but most of all, that thou should unmake thy self, that thou should die
to save u^.

3. And which is further considerable, It cost God more to redeem the world,
then to make it: In the Creation he gave thee thy self; but in the Redemption
he gave thee himself. The Creation of all things cost him but six days to
finish it; the Redemption of man cost him three and thirty years. In the
Creation of the World, he did but only speak the word; in the Redemption of
man, he both spoke and wept, and sweat, and bled, and died, and did many
wonderful things to do it: Yea, the saving of one soul single, is more and
greater then the making of the whole World. In every new creature are a number
of miracles, a blind man is restored to fight, a deaf man to bearing, a man
possessed with many Devils dis-possest; yea, a dead man raised from the dead, and
in every one a stone turned into flesh in all which God meets with nothing but
opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

4. But the better to illustrate this love, consider, that salvation stands in
two things: First, in freedom and deliverance of us from Hell: Secondly, in
the possession of Heaven, and eternal life; Christ by his death merits the
first for us; and by his obedience fulfilling the Law, merits the second. The
parts of our Justification are likewise two; the remission of our sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness. And to this would be added, first,
Conversion, which comprehends both Faith and Repentance: Secondy,
Sanctification, the Parts whereof are Mortification that is, dying unto sin;
and Vivisication, which is living unto righteousness. Thirdly, Glorification
begun and perfected, which is freedom from all evil here, and the perfection
of all good and happiness in heaven*

5. What shall I say? God of his goodness has bestowed so many and so great
mercies upon us, that it is not possible to express his bounty therein; for if
we look inward, we find our Creators mercies; if we look upward, his mercy
reaches unto the heavens, if downwards the earth is full of his goodness, and
so is the broad Sea; if we look about us, what is it that he has not given us?
Air to breath in, Fire to warm us, Water to cool and cleanse us, Clothes to
cover us, Food to nourish us, Fruits to refresh us; yea, Delicates to please
us, Beasts to serve us, Angels to attend us, Heaven to receive us; And which is
above all, Himself and his own Son to be enjoyed of us: So that whithersoever
we turn our eyes, we cannot look besides his bounty; yea, we can scarce think
of any thing more to pray for, but that he would continue those blessings,
which he has bestowed on us already: Yet we covet still, as though we had
nothing, and live as if we knew nothing of all this his beneficence. We are
bound to praise him above any Nation whatsoever; for what Nation under Heaven
enjoyes so much light, or so many blessings, as we? above any creature, etc.

God might have said before we were formed, Let them be Toads, Monsters,
Infidels, Beggars, Cripples, Bondslaves, Idiots, or Mad men, so long as they
live, and after that Castaways for ever, and ever: But he has made us to the
best likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed us in the best
Land, and appointed us to the best, and only inheritance, even to remain in
bliss with him for ever; yea, thousands would think themselves happy, if they
had but a piece of our happiness; for whereas some bleed, we sleep in safety;
others beg, we abound; others starve, we are full fed; others grope in the
dark, our Sun still shines; we have eyes, ears, tongue, feet, hands, health,
liberty, reason, others are blind, deaf, dumb, are sick, maimed, imprisoned,
distracted, and the like, yea, God has removed so many evils from us, and
conferred so many good things upon us, that they are beyond thought or
imagination: For if the whole Heaven were turned into a Book, and all the
Angels deputed Writers therein, they could not set down all the good, which
Gods love in Christ has done us. For all those millions of mercies that we
have received from, before, and since we were born, either for soul or body,
even to the least bit of bread we eat, or shall to eternity, (of which we could
not well want any one) Christ has purchased of his Father for us, and yet God
the Father also, has of his free grace, and mercy given us, in giving us his
Son; for which read Psalm. 68. 19. and 145. 15, 16. and 75. 6, 7. Yea, God is
many time^ working our good, when we least think upon him: as he was creating
Adam an help meet for him, when he was fast a sleep. And as much do we owe unto
God, for the dangers from which he delivers us: as for he great wealth and
dignities whereunto he has always raised us.

Now if we are so bound to bless God for his external, temporal, inferior,
earthly, perishing benefits: what praise do we owe for the lasting fruits ^f
his eternal love and mercy? and how thankful should we strive to be? ^ich shall
be the next thing treated of.

Now what should we render unto the Lord our God so good and gracious, in way
of thankfulness for all these his mercies? for favors be^owed, and
deliverances from danger, bind to gratitude; or else the ^ore bonds of duty,
the more plagues for neglect. The contribution of ^essings require rotribution
of thanks, or will bring distribution of plagues.

Neither could we possibly be unthankful, if we seriously thought upon that God
gives, and what he forgives: For in reason has he contrived (...) many ways
to save us; and should not we take all occasions to glorify ^m? has he done
so much for us, and shall we deny him any thing that (...) requires of us,
though it were our lives, yea our souls; much more (...) lusts? We have
exceeding hard hearts, if the blood of the Lamb ^not soften them: stony
bowels, if so many mercies cannot melt them. ^as Christ crucified for our sins?
and should we by our sins crucify him again?

6. Now the meditation of what God and Christ has done for us, ^ould make us
do what we are able for him again. For did Christ all ^is for us, and shall we
do nothing for him for our selves? like savours ^quire like gratitude. He that
confers a benefit upon a grateful nature ^bs him of his liberty, and self also:
and in one and the same act makes ^m a vassal, and himself his master.
Wherefore if we have any inge^ity in us, it will make us to direct all our
thoughts, speeches, and actions* (...) his glory, as he has directed our
eternal salvation thereunto.

But to help and further you herein, if you be willing so to do, take ^se few
directions.

First, Let these things be never out of the minds, memories, and mouths
(...) those whom Christ has done thus for. O let us (I say) remember, as we
^ould never forget. Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid jam addam pro ^facto,
says holy Bernard. If I owed my whole self unto thee, for gi^g me my self in
my creation: what have I left to pay for giving thy (...) sor me to so cruel a
death, ^o procure my Redemption, which was not (...) cheap as my creation?
Great was the benefit that thou would create (...) of nothing; but what
tongue can sufficiently express the greatness of (...) grace, that thou did
redeem me with so dear a price, when I was ^se then nothing? We are full of thy
goodness: O let our hearts run (...) with thankfulness; yea, let so many of
us as have either heart or (...), in the next place say, O Lord, What is man
that thou art so minde^ of him* Psalm. 8. 4. And O man, what is God that thou
art so unmindful of him. And then conclude with, What shall I render unto thee,
Lord, for all these thy benefits? but love thee my Creator, and Redeemer and
become a new creature. I will serve thee, o Lord, by the assistance (...)
thy'grace, because thou have given me my self: but much more hono^ thee,
because thou have given me thy Son Christ.

7. Nor can any man in common reason meditate so unbottomed love, and not study
and strive for an answerably thankful demeanure, (...) a friend had given us
but a thousand part of what God has, we sho^ heartily love him all our lives,
and think no thanks sufficient. What price then should we set upon Jesus
Christ! who is the life of our lives, a^ soul of our souls?

But, thirdly, this should at least make us part with our nearest, dea^ and
sweetest darling sins, to serve him in righteousness and holiness ev^ day;
every hour, all the days of our lives: Even every sin; for what (...) should
be so dear to us, as Gods only Son was to him? Do we then (...) Gods sake not
spare our dearest sin; when God for our sakes, did not spa^ his dearest Son.

Yea, what a brutish and barbarous unthankfulness, and shame were that God
should part with his Son, and his Son with his own precio^ blood for us? and we
not part with our sinful lusts, and delights (...) him.

8. Fourthly, Has Christ done all this for us, his servants, so mu^ and so
many ways obliged unto him? let us do what we are able for h^ again. 1 Let us
be zealous for his glory, and take his part when (...) see or hear him
dishonored. Nor can there be any love, where there no zeal, says Augustine.
Well-born Children are touched to the qui^ with the injuries of their Parents.
And it is a base, vile, and unjust (...) gratitude in those men that can endure
the disgrace of them, under wh^ shelter they live. 2 Let us seek to draw others
after us, from Satan Him. 3 Do we all we can, to promote his worship and
service. 4 Ta^ all good occasions to publish to others, how good God is; and
what has done for us. 5 Let us wholly ascribe all the good we have, or to free
grace; and give him the glory of his gifts, employing them our masters best
advantage. 6 Let us, (that we may express our tha^ fullness to him) show
kindness to his Children, and poor members, (...) are bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30. 7 Abhor we (...) selves for our former
unthankfulness, and our wonderful provoking him. 8 Hearken we unto Christ's
voice, in all that he says unto us; a^ express our thankfulness by our
obedience. Yea, all this let us do, if we it but for our own sakes: For what
should we have, if we did thus s^ Christ, who has done all these things for
his enemies neglecting and (...) honoring him?

True, we cannot properly be said to do any thing for him, that have we have
from him: Or if we could give him our bodies and souls, they ^ld be saved by
it; but he were never the better for them; yet we may do these, and many the
like things, which he accounts, and rewards as done to himself.

CHAP. V.
1. NOw these things we ought to do; thus thankful we ought to be to God, for
his inestimable and unspeakable benefits toward us. But do we thus requite the
Lord? or do we what we are able for him again? O that I could say we did! Yea,
I would we were but so thankful to Christ for all his mercies: (the least
whereof is greater then all the courtesies of men) as we are to a friend for
some one good (...).

But woe worth us, a people not worthy the crumb^ of Christ's, and our Ma^ers
least mercy: Yea, well worthy of more plagues, then either Tire, or Sy^on,
Chorazin, or Bethsaida, Capernaum, Sodom, or Gom^rrah, Matthew. 11. 21, to 25.
or any people since the Creation: For as if all that Christ ^th done for us,
were nothing to move us; we are so far from being thankful, from loving, and
serving him: that did we seriously think of Christ's love, and our odious
unthankfulness: and compare Gods goodness with our ingratitude, rightly
weighing how we have from time to time abused his mercy, and those many means
of grace, which he in his longsuffering has afforded for (...) reclaiming: it
would even make us speechless, like him in the Gospel, as neither expecting
pardon, nor daring (...) ask it. Yea, (...) Lord, it is thine unspeakable
mercy, that our Land has not long since spued us out; and that we are not at
this present frying in Hell. For whereas God has removed so many evils
spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal, from us; and conferred so many
good things upon us, that they are beyond thought or imagination.

2. We have striven to multiply offenses against him, and to make (...) as
infinite in number, as his blessings. We have done nothing from (...) infancy,
but added sin unto sin; as he has added mercy to mercy: whereby our sins are
become for number, as the sands in the Sea; and as (...) Stars of heaven; and
answerable to their multitude; is the magnitude of them, as I have (in the
former Part) shown, and shall further amplify in this. As tell me; may not God
justly another day, call Heaven and Earth to witness against us? that he would
have saved us? yea did w^ us to accept of salvation; saying, Turn ye, turn ye,
from your evil ^ys: for why will you die, o people of England? Ezekiel. 33. 11.
But we would not be converted nor saved. As thus,

3 Whereas God has offered us a pardon (in tendering Christ unto (...), upon
the condition of faith and repentance) even his own Son; to be a means of our
reconciliation; which is such a spectacle of unspeakable mercy, as might ravish
our souls with admiration: We are so far from accepting it thankfully; that we
not only refuse and contemn it, but in a manner deride the offer of it our
selves; oppose the Gospel of glad tidings, and persecute Christ in his Members;
either with hand, or tongue, or both. We are so far from being holy our selves,
(most of us) that we hate holiness in others. For if any become Religious, and
conscionable; and will not for company grievously sin against God; wrong their
b^dies, destroy their own souls, and wilfully leap into Hellfire with us: we
envy, hate, censure, scoff at, nickname, rail on, and slander them; tha^ we
may flout them out of their faith, damp, or quench the spirit where w^ perceive
it is kindled; discourage them in the way to heaven; baffle them out, and make
them ashamed of their holy profession, and religious course and consequently
pull them back to the World; that so we may have their company here in sin, and
hereafter in torment. Nor do we so serve the most sincere only, in whom the
graces of Gods Spirit do as apparently shine as the Sun at noonday, to the
dazzling of their eyes: But we condemn all that have more religion then an
Heathen; or more knowledge of heavenly things, then a child in the womb has
of the things of thi^ life; or more conscience then an Atheist, or care of his
soul then a Beast* That live religiously, and will nor revel it with us in a
shoreless excess* for Roundheads, and Puritans, a name so full of the Serpents
enmity, a^ the egg of a Cockatrice is full of poison.

4. And in all (which is worst of all) we have caused others to d^ the same
abominations, by our evil example. Yea, worse yet then all this our abominable
wickedness, has brought such a scandal upon our Religion, and the Gospel; that
it is even abhorred of the Heathen, and the great and glorious Name of God
blasphemed among them. Yea, what els^ but the unchristian-like behavior of
Christians? has caused the Turk^ and Jews, and many among our selves, even to
protest against their ow^ conversion. Or what else has alienated the Indians
from the Christian Religion, making them to refuse the Gospel; but this? that
they saw ou^ lives more savage, then those Savages themselves: yea, it has
mad^ those poor souls resolve, that whatsoever Religion the Christians were of
they would be the contrary; thinking it impossible, that such beastly an^
bloody deeds could proceed from any true Religion: Or, that he could b^ a good
God, who had such evil sons. Whereas in the Primitive times more of them were
won to the faith, by the holy lives of Christians then by the Doctrine which
they taught: for it caused them to say, Thi^ is a good God, whose servants are
so good.

CHAP. VI.
1. ANd thus according to my scantling, I have spread before you what God and
Christ has done for us: and how we have again required him. Though God (who
searches the heart, and tries the reins) knows infinitely more by us, and
sees what strange monsters; what ugly, odious, hideous fiends: what swarms,
what litters, what legions of noisome lusts, are couched in the stinking styes
of every one of our deceitful hearts: and finds, that if all our thoughts did
but break forth into action, we should not come far short of the Devils
themselves.

And certainly, if we shall compare the numberless number of our great and
grievous abominations, wherewith our Land is filled from corner to corner; with
the many means which God has afforded for our reclaiming: it will be found,
that no Nation under heaven, did ever more provoke the Lord. Nor has he ever
strove more with any Nation to reclaim them, then he has done with us: for
when neither mercies, nor any ordinary means would serve the turn; he has at
several times visited us with several judgments, to try what they would do:
But we have been so little moved therewith, that instead of becoming better,
we have bi^ the worse for them, (as appears at this day) and more audacious in
declaring our sins; as if with Sodom, we took a pride in them, to the great
dishonor of our Redeemer, and his Gospel; and to the hardening of all that
hear of it: so that our horrid sins are grown up unto heaven: in regard whereof
we may justly be confounded, and ashamed to lift up our eyes unto him, who is a
Lord so great, and terrible: of such glorious Majesty and infinite purity. Now
he that has ears, let him bear* and he that has wit, let him consider, and
lay it to heart, how thankful a people we are. And not only ye, o inhabitants
of this our Jerusalem and Judah, would I have to judge, between Christ and his
Vineyard; what he could have done for us, more then he has done, Isaiah 5. 4,
to 8. But hear ye also, o heavens, and give ear, o earth; be astonished at
it, and horribly afraid; that this foolish people and unwise, should so requite
the Lord, Jer. 2. 11, etc. Isai. 1. 2, to 9. and Verse 15, to 25. Deuteronomy. 32. 6,
etc.

Oh my Brethren, Englands unthankfulness has striven with Gods goodness for
the victory, as Absalom strove with David, whether the Father should be more
kind to the son, or the son more unkind to the Father. We have been fatted
with his blessings, and then spurned at his precepts; resembling the Leopard,
who wrongs them most, that give him most fodder.

2. But why do I call it unthankfulness? when our sin is many degrees beyond
ingratitude it self: For not to confess a benefit, is the utmost confine of
unthankfulness: mere ingratitude, returns nothing for good, but we return
evil, yea the greatest, and most malicious evil, for the greatest, and most
admired love.

Argue with all the World, and they will conclude, there is no vice like
ingratitude: But we are more ungrateful to God, then can be expressed by the best
Orator alive. It was horrible ingratitude, which the chief Butler showed to
Joseph, Genesis 41. 9. which the nine Lepers showed to Christ, Luke 17. 17, 18.
which the men of Succoth, and Penuel, showed to Gideon, Judge. 8. 6, 8. which
those five spies showed to Micha, Judge. 18. 14, 18. It was worse which the
Israelites showed to Gideons seed, Judge. 9. 17, 18. which Michael Thraulus
showed to Leo the Emperor; which Justinianus showed to that renowned Captain
Bellizarius. It was yet worse, which Popilius showed to Cicero; which Lycaon
showed to his stranger guests, that came to him for relief. It was worst of all
in the Jews, to scourge and crucify Christ, who did them good every way: for
he healed their diseases, fed their bodies, enlightened their minds; of God
became Man, and lived miserably amongst them many years, that he might save
their souls: (though in killing him, they did their utmost; to sink the only
ship that could save them.) But all these fall far short of our ingratitude to
God: for his maintenance we take and live on, the bread we eat, the air we
breath, the clothes we wear, all are his.

3. That we are out of Hell, there to fry in flames, never to be freed^ That we
have the free offer of grace here, and everlasting glory hereafter in Heaven;
where are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered
into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. 9. we are beholding to him: Yet we
not only deny this Lord that has bought us, (as every one does; that prefers
Mammon, or any other thing before him) but we hate him, (as he does hate, and
not love God; that loves what he hates, or hates what he loves:) but most
spightfully, and maliciously fight on Salans and sins side, against him: and
persecute his Children, and the truth with all our might; persuading, and
enforcing others ^o do the same; even wishing that we could pull him out of his
Throne, rather then to admit him our just Judge: And all this against knowledge
and conscience, after illumination. I wish men would a little think of it; and
then if this will not melt their hearts, no hope that any other means should do
it, but perish they must.

4. I confess, I have small hope, that what has been said of Gods love, and
our odious unthankfulness: his goodness, and our ingratitude; (which being
seriously considered, were enough to bring the whole world upon their knees)
should make them any whit ashamed, or the better; because their blockishness is
such, that they think themselves good enough, and that ^o doubt of it, or
strive to be more holy, were but a foolish and needless scrupulosity. Yea, they
prefer their condition, before other men's that are so conscientious; A thing
strange! yet it is so: For although there be not a leaf in the sacred Volume,
but has matter against a voluptuous life, none for it: For to please flesh and
blood, is the Doctrine of the Devil. Yet how do a world of men stifle their
consciences, and force themselves to believe, if it were possible: that in case
men will not swear, drink drunk, conform to their lewd customs, and the like;
they are overprecise: and that God will like a man the worse, sor his being the
better; or for having of a tender Conscience. And that he looks for less fear,
reverence, and obedience from his servants; then we do from our servants: and
yet hold that a servant can never be too punctual, in his obedience to his
Masters lawful commands. They think it not enough for themselves, to prefer the
pleasing of their senses, before the saving of their souls: and to venture
tasting the forhidden fruit, at the price of death eternal: but they account
them fools, that do otherwise.

CHAP. VII.
1. OMy brethren! it is not to be believed, how blind and blockish men are;
that have hardened their hearts, and seared their consciences with accustomary
sinning: for albeit I have informed them how dangerous their estate is, that
they might plainly see it, truly fear it, and timely prevent it: yet I have
very little hope to do any good upon them. For first, These lines to them are
but as so many Characters writ in the water, which leave no impression behind
them: as being like one that beholds his natural face in a glass; who when he
has considered himself, goes his way, and forgets immediately what manner
of one he was, James 1. 23, 24. or like some silly Fly, which being beat from
the Candle an hundred times, and often singed therein: yet will return to it
again, until she be consumed, Prove. 23. 35. All those Beasts which went into
the Ark unclean, came likewise out unclean.

Secondly, Though these sparks of grace may kindle piety in others, yet not in
them: for they are out of all hope of being healed. For what is light, to them
that will shut their eyes against it? or reason, to them that will stop their
ears from hearing it, and men of their condition, do on purpose ^op their ears,
and wink with their eyes; l^st they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and so should be converted, as
our Savior shows, Matthew. 13. 15. and St. Paul, Acts 28. 27. yea, it is well, if
they do not carp, and fret against the Word, and persecute the Messengers, as
Herod did John Baptist, Demetrius Paul, and the false Prophets Jeremiah. And
how should not that patient perish, who after he is launced, flies from the
Surgeon, before the binding up of his wound? Or how should not that sin be
past cure, which strives against the cure? certainly salvation it self, will
not save those that spill the potion and fling away the plaster. O if these
Adders had not stopped their ears! how long since had they been charmed? I grant
they have reason so to do (such as it is.) For will a Leper take pleasure, in
the searching of his sores; and Satan the like: for if they could clearly see,
the loathso^esse of their impieties: it were not possible not to abhor them;
not to abhor themselves for them: but their blindness makes them love their
own filthiness, as Ethiopians do their own swarthinesse.

2. And to tell you the truth, (though I speak against my self, ha^ I not a
further reach in it) it were an unreasonable motion in me, if I should request
minds prepossest with prejudice to hear reason. Since the World and the Devil
has so forestalled their judgments therewith against Gods people, and
goodness it self; that they resolve never to be better then they are. And
where Satan has set this his porter of prejudice: though Christ himself were
on earth: that soul would make an ill construction, of whatsoever he did or
spoke: as we see in the Scribes and Pharisees; who when he wrought miracles,
reputed him a sorcerer: when he cast out Devils, thought it to be by the power
and Prince of Devils: when he reproved sinners, he was a seducer; when he
received sinners, he was their favourer: when he healed the sick, he was a
Sabbath-breaker, and the like: yea, they counted him the greatest. offender,
that offended not once in all his life; which would make a wise man suspect*
(...) own judgment, or the common fame: and to examine things thoroughly before
they condemn one, whom they know no evil by.

Yet this is the case of these men of most men: for even as an ill stomach,
turn^ all it receives into ill humors: or as a Spider converts every thing she
ears into poison; so they whatsoever they hear of, or see in the godly: So
blinding themselves with prejudice, that like Pyrrhon, they will not believe
what their eyes see, and their ears hear. Yea, I would fain know, what means
can possibly be used, that shall be able to reclaim them? They will neither be
softened with benefits, nor broken with punishments? Gods severity cannot
terrify them, nor his kindness mollify them. Yea, should these fools be
brayed in a mortar, among wheat with a ^stle, yet they will not depart from
their wickedness, as Solomon expresses (...), Prove. 27. 22. Yea, the more
these Anviles are beaten upon, the harder they are.

3. The change of means, whether the Word, Judgments, Mercies, or the like: do
but obdure their hearts, instead of melting them; as we see by many examples.
The nine plagues could not prevail with Pharaoh: Yea; they hardened his heart
the more, When Jesus cried with a loud voice, and yielded up the ghost; the
vail of the Temple rent in twain, from ^op to the bottom: the earth did quake,
the Graves did open themselves, and the dead Saints came forth, and went into
the holy City; the Sun was forsaken of his light, etc. as if all were sensible
of their Makers suffering: when as the generality of the people that had heard
his preaching, and seen his many miracles: yea, those great Clerks, the Scribes
and Pha^es, were altogether insensible, and worse then all the rest of the
creatures: The very stones of the Temple were soft in comparison of their sto^
hearts: and they which were dead in their graves, were alive to those which
were dead in their sins.

Le^* Malchus be smitten to the ground, with the words of our Savior: let him
have his right ear cut off, and miraculously healed again by him, whom he came
to apprehend: yet he will be one, that shall lead him bound to Pilate. Let the
Sodomites be all struck blind, for contesting with Lot, and his two Angels:
they will not cease seeking his door, to break it open, until they feel fire
and brimstone about their ears, Genes. (...).

And let men look to it, for If they will not believe Moses, and the Prophet,
Christ and his Apostles: they would not believe, though (...) should send an
Angel from the living in Heaven; or a Messenger from the dead* in. Hell to warn
them; as Abraham tells Dives, Luke 16. 31. Yea, let God. himself forbid Balaam
to go with Balaks messengers; to curse the children of Israel: yea, let an
Angel stand in his way, with a drawn sword to stop him: yea, let him hear his
beast speak under him: yet he slights all. I might instance other examples; as
what a warning had Haz^el given him by the Prophet; of all the abominable
wickedness he should commit? 2 Kings 8. 12, 13, etc. And likewise Ahab, who
was told from the Lord, that if he went to war, he should perish? yet neither
would take warning, but went on, and sped accordingly. And also of the O^
world: so that one were as good speak to liveless stones, or senseless plants,
or witless beasts, as to such men; for any thing they will be bettered by it.
Yea, reason once debauched is worse then bru^shnesse: I see the savagest of all
creatures, Lions, Tigers, Bears, etc. by an instinct from Go^, came to seek the
Ark: (as we see swine foreseeing a storm; run home, crying for shelter) not one
man do I see, except Noah and his family. So none b^t the well-affected, whose
hearts it pleases the Lord to change, will be the better for what they have
heard, of Gods goodness and their ingratitude, see 1 Samuel 10. 26.

4. They have been too long sick of sin to be recovered, and will rather be
confounded, then reformed: they have brazen brows, stisse necks, uncircumcized
ears, blinded eyes, (...), and heavy hearts, obdura^ souls, as strong as a
stone, and as hard as a nether mil stone, Ezekiel. 11. 1^. by reason whereof it
comes to pass; that those who are filthy, will be filthy still; in spite both
of Law and Gospel. Yea, they are stark dead to all ordinary means: which is an
infallible sign of their eternal ruin, as they may see, both by testimonies,
Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Prove. 29. 1. and 1. 24, 25, 26. Heb. 10. 28. Hos. 4. 14, 17.
Isai. 57. 17. And likewise by pregnant examples, 1 Samuel 2. 22, to 26. 2 Chronicles.
25. 16, 20.

What should I more say? If thou be an habituated sinner; blinded or
forestalled with prejudice; and resolved to go on in thy wickedness, and do as
others do, without either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason. Thou are
dead in sin; and not only dead, as ^us daughter was, Matthew. 9. 25. Nor only
dead, ^id out and coffined, as the wi^owes son of Na^m was, Luke 7. ^4. But
dead, coffined, and buried as Lazarus was, John the 11. 39. even till thou
stinkest in the nostrils of God, and all good men. So that I have no other
message to deliver unto thee; then that which the vigilant Captain, delivered
together with a deaths wound to his sleeping Sentinel: Dead I found thee, and
dead I leave thee.

5. Only thou, o Father, to whom nothing is hard, if it be thy good pleasure:
(as why not seeing it will make much for the glory of thy great Name, to save
such a mighty sinner; who Manasses-like has multiplied offenses above the
number of the sand of the Sea; and is bound down with many iron bands.) Say
unto his soul, Live; yea, quicken thou him, o merciful Redeemer, who art the
fountain of life. It is true, thy angry threatening against sinners is
importable: but thy merciful promise is unmeasurable, and unsearchable. Thou
therefore that art able to quicken the dead; and make even of stones, children
to Abraham: mollify these stony hearts, we beseech thee, with the blood of the
Lamb: and make of these children of the Devil (John 8. 44.) Members of thy Son
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
1. ANd that my utmost endeavor, may answer the strength of my desires: and
for that God does not ordinarily work, but by means. I will notwithstanding the
small hope I have, of these AEthiopians changing their skin: or these Leonards
their spots, Jer. 13. 23. even against my own reason, try yet annother way:
because my hearts desire is, that they may be saved, Romans 10. 1. Yea, I assure
you, if God should bid me ask what I would, (as once he did Solomon) if I know
my own heart, it should be no other thing, then that my brethren, and
Countrymen, might have their eyes opened: be turned from darkness to light;
did from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ, Acts
26. 18.

2. Nor am I altogether out of hope; for as with God nothing is impossible: so
I call to mind that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. If an unbelieving Idiot,
shall hear the secrets of by heart made manifest to himself, and others: he
will then he convinced, and fall down on his face and worship God and say: This
is of God indeed, or of a truth, Verse. 24, 25. and I doubt not, but by Gods
help, I shall show these ignorant unbelievers, from the written Word, their
very thoughts and the most secret intents of their hearts, Heb. 4. 12. and so,
that their own consciences shall bear me witness, I belie them not.

Wherefore lend me your best attentions, I beseech you: and in reading take
notice, of what concerns each of you: and if conscience plead guilty, hearken
thereunto.

3. Now that I may speak to all whom it concerns; namely those ignorant,
unbelieving and ungrateful wretches formerly spoken of: and that it may prove
of general behoof, I will give you the several characters of seven sorts of
men, which include the whole number, viz. The Loose Libertine, Civil
Iusticiary, Formal Hypocrice, Miserly Muck-worm, Profound Humanist, Cunning
Politician, False Teacher, that flatters sin, and flowts holiness.



And in some one of these, every natural man shall read the very thoughts of
his heart: together with his words and actions. For if ought be wanting in the
one, it shall be supplied in the other: which is as much as can be expected.
For otherwise I can no way avoid Tautologies; nor Interfering.

If it be asked, why I seem to forget the character of an ignorant person? I
answer, it were not proper to make him a distinct party: for all these that I
have mentioned; are equally ignorant, (if unregenerate:) touching spiritual,
experimental, and saving knowledge: though some more fools then others in the
things of this life. Nor is any Profound Humanist, or Cunning Politician, or
False Teacher so wise: but it is through ignorance, that he does so ill: and
which is as good, the ignorant man shall meet with his own thoughts, words, and
actions, in every of the seven Characters: if he be but wise enough to know the
issue of his own heart and brain, when he sees the Brats brought before him.

I shall also occasionally pourtray, or paint out: the usual cunning,
Covetousness, and Cruelty. Of Governors, Officers, Judges, Lawyers,
Projectors, Engrossers, Gripers, Wasters, etc.



And the better to illustrate, or set out the fairness, or diformity; of each
virtue and vice: I will give you the lively and lovely Characters of Justice,
Thankfulness, Contentation, Frugality, Liberality.



CHAP. IX.
1. I Begin with the Loose Libertine, or openly profane: for he shall lead the
Troop, as Judas led the Soldiers.

Thou that art openly profane, do so manifestly prove and profess thy self
to be one of those ignorant, unbelieving, ungrateful, and wicked wretches
herein concerned: yea, to be one of the children of disobedience whom Satan
has blinded: that in respect of others, I should think it needless to spend
time in further proof thereof: yet I would gladly say something to shame thee
out of thy self: wherefore brie fly thus: Thou art kept by the Devil in a
snare, and taken captive of him at his will: he rules, and works his
pleasure in thee, as being thy God and Father, and Prince, and Master, 2 Timothy
2. 26. Joh. 8. 44. and 14. 30. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Thy odious qualities are these and
the like: thou do banish all civility, and give thy self over to sensuality:
and art neither afraid nor a shamed; to let thy wicked est thoughts break forth
into actions. Yea, thou think thy self the honester man for it: and boastest
thou art none of those dissembling Hypocrites that seem to be what they are
not. Thou art a common Drunkard: instead of quenching thy thirst, thou drownest
thy senses: and wilt leave thy wits, rather then the Wine behind thee.

2. Thou desire not the reputation of honesty, but of good fellowship: Thou
art a continual swearer, and that of bloody oaths. One of our Ruffians, or sons
of Relial: who when thou art displeased with others, wilt fly in thy Makers
face, and tear thy Saviors Name in pieces: even swearing away thy part in that
blood, which must save thee if ever thou be saved. Yea, if thou art never so
little provoked; curses with thee, strive for number with oaths, and lewd
speeches with both. Thou know no other dialect, then roaring, swearing, and
banning: the language of Hell, which thou learnest before thou come thither:
and in case thou art reproved for it, thou will say, We take too much upon us:
as Corah and his accomplices twitted Moses, Numb. 16. 3. not knowing how strictly
God commands, and requires it, Levit. 19. 17. Heb. 3. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Ezekiel.
3. 18, to 22. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Whence as the chief Priests answered Judas; What
is that to us? so thou will blaspheme God, tear Christ in pieces, and more then
betray; even shed his innocent blood, digging into his side with oaths: and
say: when told of it, What is that to us? When thou might as well say; What
is Christ to us? What is Heaven to us? or what is salvation to us? For to us
the one cannot be without the other. We shall never inherit part of his glory
in Heaven, if we do not take his glories part upon Earth. And with God it is
much about one; whether we be doers of evil, or no hinderers. For if we must
not see our neighbors Ox, nor his Sheep go astray; or fall into a pit: but we
must reduce him, and help him out of it, Deuteronomy. 22. 1. We are much more bound,
to help our Neighbor himself, from dropping into the bottomless pit of Hell.
And what know we? but we may win our brother, and so save his soul? Matthew. 18.
15. Again, thou art an usual companion of Harlots, thy summum bonum is a Punk:
and thou will rather burn in hell, then marry: All thy felicity is in a Tavern,
or Brothel-house: where Harlots and Sycophants rifle thy estate, and then send
thee to rob. Thou art one of those that St. Peter speaks of: thou have ^^s full
of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin. Thou gazest upon every fair ^ace;
and lustest after every beautiful woman: Thy speech is lewd, and ^^scene: thy
discourse scurrility, lascivious thy behavior. Thou art a fre^^ent slanderer
of thy Neighbor: an open Sabbath-breaker: Can boast ^f sin, and mischief,
and if need be defend it.

3. Like the Salamander, thou art never well, but in the fire of con^ention:
And art apt to quarrel, yea, kill a man for every foolish trifle; ^e it but for
the wall, or refusing to pledge thee; as if thy honor were of ^ore worth then
thy soul. Yea, the Devil has so blinded, and bewitched ^hee: that thou think
every wrong, or disgraceful word quarrel just enough, to shed blood: that true
valor consists only in a brave revenge and being implacable: that patience is
but an argument of baseness; and therefore thou will rather suffer a sword in
thy bowels, then a lie in thy ^^roat. I confess, thou will fight in no quarrel
but a bad one: and sooner ^n thy Mistresses defense, then in thy Makers.

4. Thou art of a reprobate judgment touching actions and persons: esteeming
good evil, and evil good, Prove. 17. 15. and 29. 27. Isai. 5. 20. Thou do
stifle thy conscience, and would force thy self to believe if it ^ere
possible: that in case men will not swear, drink drunk, conform to ^hy lewd
customs, and the like: they are over-precise; and to forbear ^vil, is quarrel
sufficient for thee. Thou speak evil of all, that will not ^un with thee to
the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. making them a byword ^o the people, Job
17. 6. and a song amongst thy fellow Drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. Thou art so
desperately wicked, that thou will mock thy admonisher, scoff at the means to
be saved; and make thy self merry with thy own damnation.

5. Instead of hating the evil thou do, and thy self for doing it: ^hou art
glad of it, rejoycest in it, boastest of it; yea, pleadest for it, and
applaudest thy self for thy wickedness: God is not in all thy thoughts, except
to blaspheme him, and to spend his days in the Devils service. And rather then
abridge thy pleasure, thou will hazard the displeasure of God. Thou do not
honor, but art stubborn, and disobedient to thy parents: a Rioter, etc. If
they stand in need of thee; thou will not nourish, or maintain them, as they
did thee in thy need. Thou take no care to provide for thine own family; but
drinkest the very blood of thy Wife, Children, and Servants: and art therein
worse then an Infidel. Thy greatest delight is in devilish cruelty: as to see
the poor innocent Creatures fight, pick out one another eyes, and tear each
others flesh. Yea, to see two men fight, and kill one another: thou accountest
but a sport, or playing, 2 Samuel 2. 14, to 17.

6. Thou will borrow, or run in debt with every one; but never carest to pay,
or satisfy any one: except it be thy Hostess for drink, left she should never
more trust thee. Thou wickedly spendest thy p^ many in riot, and upon Dice,
Drabs, Drunkenness. Thou have never t^ wit to think upon sparing, until thou
come to the bottom of the Purs^ like an ho^-glass turned up, thou never
leavest running till all be o^ Should thou live never so long, thou will
never attein to the years (...) discretion: thou will never become thine own
man, until thou have no (...) thee: nor ever see want, until thou feel it.
Thou art only witty (...) wrong, and undo thy self; and which is worse then
all; if death fin^ thee as banquerout of spiritual; as of worldly goods: it
will send thee an eternal Prison. Thy pride so swells thee, and makes thee look
so big as if the river of thy blood, would not endure to be banked within t^
chan^l of thy veins. Thou must have shift of attire, though thou can not shift
thy self out of the Merce's books, until thou have sold the oth^ Farm, or
Lordship: thou will pay the whole reckoning, that thou may (...) be counted the
best man* a bare head in the streets, does thee more goo^ then a meals meat,
Thou will soon bring a noble to nine pence: an inheri^ance of five hundred
pounds per annum, to five hundred shillings. The ar^ a vain glorious fool, and
scornest any employment, or to be of a^ calling: which is a pride, without
either wit or grace.

7. As g^od men by their godly admonition, and virtuous exampl^ draw all they
can to Heaven: so thou by thy subtle allurements, and v^cious example; drawest
all thou can to bell. For as if it were too (...) to damn thy own soul: or as
if thine own sins would not press thee d^ enough into hell: thou do all that
possibly thou can, to entice a^ enforce others to sin with thee: for thou
do envy, ^ate, scoff a^, nic^ name, ^ail on, and slander the godly; that
thou may flowt them out (...) their ^aith, damp, or quench the spirit where
thou perceivest it is kindle^ disourage them in the way to heaven, to make them
ashamed of the ho^ conversation, and religious course; pull them back to the
world, the so thou may have their company here in sin, and hereafter in to
m^nt.

8. Thou fear a Jayl more then thou fear hell: and stand m^ upon thy
sides smarting, then upon thy soul. Thou regardest more t^ blasts of men's
breath, then the fire of Gods wrath: and tremblest more the thought of a
Ser^ant, or Bailiff, then of Satan, and everlasting perd^tion. Thou take
encouragement from the Saints falls, and sins of Go^ people, to do the like:
when they should serve thee as Sea-marks, to man thee beware. Yea, thou do
most sordidly, take liberty, and incourag^ment to go on more securely in thy
evil courses: because God is mercifu^ and forbears to execute judgment
speedily: and to defer thy repentance, because the ^hief upon the Cross, was
heard at the last hour, Thou will boldl^ do what God forbids; and yet
confidently hope to escape what he threaten^ Thus I could go on, to tell thee a
thousand more of these thy wicke^ thoughts, words, and actions; had I not
already done it. But because I ^ould not present my other Readers, with
Cole-worts twice sod: be per^aded to take view of them, in my other small
Tract, entitled, The (...), despicable, and dreadful condition of a Drunkard,
drawn to the Life: ^ough indeed, even a tithe of these are sufficient
evidences, to prove ^e one of those ignorant, unbelieving, ungrateful, and
notorious wicked ^etches before spoken of: and to make thee confess that thou
art in a ^st danable condition. But stand thou by, and let the Civil
Justiciary, ^d formal Hypocrite hold up their hands, and hear their Charge.

And so much for the first Division allotted for such as are notoriously ^ked.
For though I determined to have made of all but one Volume; ye^ ^w new thoughts
have taken place, and caused me to melt the whole a^in; and cast it into
several Divisions: whereby being ^old single, every ^an may have his proper
portion apart. My reasons are these, and the like.

1 It is because many (be they never so short-breathed, in well doing) ^ll read
a few leaves: that will not once look upon a large Volume.

2 Diverse will be at the cost of a few pence, that would rather perisis^ ^en
lay out a pound.

3 Some, as they have but little money; so they have less time to spare, ^s
they use the matter) for the good of their souls.

4 Admonitions, and instructions if they exceed: are wont as nails, t^ ^ive out
one another.

5 Should the Civil Iusticiary read the profane man's Character; or the
^en-handed Prodigal, the close-fisted, and griping Oppressors: this would ^er
encourage, and strengthen them in their wickedness, then fright (...) from it.

6 Some have such queasie stomachs, that if they see their potion big, as ^ell
as bitter; they will choose to die, rather then take it.

And because I have found by ample experience, that many have a ^de to read
good Books yea, a zeal (such as it is) to reclaim others ^m evil, so it may
cost them nothing: who otherwise have no stomach ^ither. (For when the like was
to be given about, swearing and cursing (...) ^n the better sort of men and
women could fetch them by a thousand ^k from all parts of the Kingdom. But
since they have (for some ^sons) been sold, for eight a penny: not one of an
hundred could (...) in their hearts to give that penny, were it to save eight of
their friends ^ls: which shows both how they love money; and what
hollow-hearted ^otion they have. The Lord discover the same unto them.) There
is ^er against the High Constables short of Shoreditch Church) of this (...)
part, or division to be given freely, together with the cure of cursing ^d
swearing: provided, they that desire them can read very well: for ^erwise they
will so nickname words, and make it such nonsense, that ^e would rather his
lines should never be read, then so brokenly. And I could wish that men would
not fetch them for base ends, as one d^ formerly fetch many hundreds of that
against Swearing, and Cursing only to save the buying of waste Paper (though
he had many fair p^ tences of sending them to Graves-end, Canterbury, Dover,
and all oth^ places, where Soa-men resorted:) which being found out, made the
D^ nor withdraw his gift until now.

It was, I think, a most wicked act, for which he deserves to be stig^ tized
and made an example to others. And let men take heed of abu^ things Dedicated
to holy uses; for they are the sharpest kind of edge tools, and therefore are
not to be jested with: Neither will God so (...) mocked.

The end of the first Division.
POSTCRIPT.
AUgustine that his ignorant hearers might the better under stand him, would
sometimes speak false Latin: and I (...) my accidental Readers good, have (and
that purposely) do^ as absurdly in another kind: viz. used the same expressi^
in one Tract (when I have deemed it weighty and convincing that may be found in
another: which to many will not be di^ cernable, though obvious enough to some:
Who may if the^ please censure it and me for it: But presuming that the mo^
charitable, and ingenuous would not have it otherwise, it she not much trouble
me.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. L. for James Crump, in Little Bartholomews
Well-yard.

The Character of a formal Hypocrite, or civil Justiciary: for they are so
alike, that I am loath to part them. Nor will it be any wrong to either: for
what the one is guilty of, the other is not free from. CHAP. X.
. 1. NOw in pourtraying, delineating, or anatomizing these: First of of them.
Secondly, to them.

Of them, thus much in general. No men under Heaven, are in a more hopeless
condition (as I shall show in the ensuing pages) nor none think better of
themselves. For if you will believe them, they neither break the Laws of God,
nor men: neither offend temporal Magistrates, nor Ecclefiastical Governors:
they live unreproveably, ^ay every man his own; are charitable, chaste,
temperate, make conscience of swearing, lying, etc. They go duly to Church,
are fed with the spiritu^ll manna of Gods Word: yea, once a year, they receive
the Sacrament, upon their knees: and that upon Easter day, or Good-Fryday. They
pay they Tithes, say their Prayers, so soon as they are entered into the House
of God be the Minister speaking from God to them; or the People jointly
praising God, or praying to him, (a good sign to know an ignorant Formalist
by) Perhaps they pray in their Families; yea, so holy are they, that they dare
not pass through St. Paul's, with their Hats on: nor out of it, before they
have kneeled down to a Pillar: though they are in have, and their company
wait the while. And as touching their Diana, the Book of Common Prayer; the
Apocrypha, the Cross, Surpless; the Ring, Rayles, High Altar, Holy Days, etc.
I need not acquaint you, for their zeal is such, that they will lose Laws,
Liberty, Lives, Estates,; all rather then these shall not still be worshipped,
and had in honor. Yea, they not only hate the conditions, but even shun the
very company of those lewd and profane wretches before mentioned. All which
considered, if they be not good, and godly men; what will become of thousands?

2.. These middle sort of men, (I mean for out-ward appearance; and ^orme of
Godliness) have a notable way to delude their own souls; and to put off all
reproofs, and threatenings: that is by comparing themselves, with such as are
(in their repute) worse then themselves: counting none wicked, but such as are
notorious for wickedness. As for example, Because they are not so drunk as
Nabal; they think themselves sober: Because not so proud as Haman, therefore
they be humble; Because not so bloodily minded as Doeg; therefore they are
merciful: Because not so treacherous as Judas, therefore loyal. Because
neither Gallows, nor Pillory can take hold of them; therefore they are honest,
and square dealers.

Nor can there be a more plausible deceit; For as the Swar by compared with the
Blackemore, thinks himself fair: So civil men, looking upon the profane,
admire their own holiness.

Whence it is, that the more unrebukeable any natural man is, the greater is
the difficulty of his conversion. For as nothing is more easily broken, then
that which is most hard: so notorious offenders, are nothing so hard to be
convinced, and converted, as the civilly honest. The civil Iusticiary, is like
the young man in the Gospel; that supposed he had honestly kept all the
Commandments: who when he was bid to follow Christ, turned his bac^ upon him.
But the Loose Libertine, resembles Matthew the Publican, a notorious sinner:
who was no sooner called, but he followed Christ.

3.. But will these men's high thoughts of their own, excellency serve their
turns? No, but condemn them the rather. That civil Justiciary, Luke 18. 9.
to 15. was not a Publican; and thereupon boasts himself extremely: but he was
a Pharisee like these men; which was a great deal worse; wherefore all can be
done for them, will be in vain: except I can first convince them of their
self purity, and the great danger thereof: and after, of the^ miserable
impurity: both which must be done, (as I before intimated) (...) making
manifest unto them, the secrets of their hearts in either. For the effecting
whereof, I will not be sparing, either in pains, or prayer. As O that God
would put words into my mouth: and add virtue unto those words. That he would
give them hearts to mind what I shall say, but so much as it concerns them.
For God alone, has the key of the heart. Acts 16. 14. to whose blessing, I
leave the success, humbly beseeching the Almighty, that these lines, may not
rise up in judgment against those Hazaels that shall read them, and be never
the better: and so instead of ^u in their sin, prove a means, to increase
their torment.

4.. I begin with the first: Let a Minister come to thee, that art a Formalist,
or civil Justiciary; and question with thee about thy estate; or ask thee how
thy soul fares? and what peace thou have? (admit it be upon thy death bed)
what will be thy manner of answering? (especially, i^ thou have not been a
notorious offender) art thou a whit troubled for sin, either Original, or
Actual? Or will thou acknowledge thy self, to be in a lost condition without
Christ? No, thy conscience is at quiet, and thou (...) at peace with thy self,
and all the world: and thou think God, no sin troubles thee. Thou have
been no murderer, no adulterer, no common drunkard: Neither have thou been an
Oppressor. Yea will thou say; I do not know that I have wronged man, woman, or
child. I have been a Protestant, and gone to Church all my days, etc. as
commonly they think be^ of themselves, that have least cause. Yea, the true
Christian, is as fearefu^ to entertain a good opinion of himself: as the
false is unwilling, to be driven from it. They that have store of grace, mourn
for the want of it: and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance.

Yea, (whereas the Law is spiritual, and binds the heart from affecting; no
less then the hand from acting) thou art so blind, and ignorant: tha^ thou
think the Commandment is not broken, if the outward gross sin, be for
borne: whence it is usual with thee, to brag of a good heart, and meaning; of
the strength of thy faith, and hope; of thy just and upright dealing, etc.

Yet, in case thou do abstain from notorious sins: what should hinder, but
thou art an excellent Christian: if God be not beholding to thee, for not
wounding his name with Oaths; for not drinking, and playing out his Sabbaths:
for not railing on his Ministers; for not oppressing and persecuting his poor
Members.

5.. Perhaps thou will in general, or in gross acknowledge: that thou art a
great sinner: But come to particulars, thou can not tell in what. Thou never
brakest the first Commandment, of having many Gods: for thou art no Papist,
nor Idolater. Thou never brakest the second, for thou worshippest God aright.
Nor the third: for thou have been no common swearer, only a few petty Oaths.
Not the fourth; for thou have every Sabbath gone duly to Church. Not the fifth:
for thou did ever honor thy Parents; and art as loyal a subject as may be.
Not the sixth: (for like the young man in the Gospel,) thou dare justify thy
self to Christ's own face, that thou have kept it from thy youth; for thou
did never murder any man; though others find, that thou never go without
enmity in thy heart; against such as are more godly, and sincere then thy
self; but to thy unseeing eyes, that is no manslaughter. Not the seventh; for
thou perceivest not, how the lust of the eye should be a sin, so long as thou
lie not with thy Neighbors wife. Not the eighth; for (though thou have
cousoned an hundredth indirectly; yet) thou never stolest ought from any man.
Not the ninth; for thou Make conscience of perjury, though none of
back-byting, and slandering thy Neighbor; As for the tenth; that perhaps makes
thee at a stand, till thou hear what is meant by, Thou shall not cover: and
so by consequence, thou provest that thou did but lie and dissemble, when
thou did acknowledge thy self a sinner. For indeed and in truth; thou
think thy self noe sinner, or almost: for thou have kept all the
Commandments.

Nor is it any hard matter, to draw it out of thine own mouth; before an
hundred witnesses: for let but this question be asked thee: Art thou proud?
thou will answer, no not I; none are proud but fools; and thou hate a proud
man, etc. which implies, that thou art as righteous as Christ himself; or Adam
in the state of innocence. For he that can clear himself of this sin; may
easily clear himself from all other sins. So that thou art pure in thine
own eyes: have one sin to repent of, but much good to (...) of; which (...)
condition worse, then the wickedest man's alive. For Christ that came to save
all weary, and heavy la^en sins, (be they never so wicked) neither came to
save, nor once to call thee, that have no sin; but art (...) enough without
him Mat. 9. 13.

Om (...) tells thy brethren, the Scribes and Pharisees; who counted then,
(...) that (...) and Harlets, should go before them into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 21. 31, 32. And you well know, that God preferred the penitent
(...), that trusted in his mercy: before the proud Pharisee, that trusted in
his own merits, Luke 38. 10 to 15. Yea, the Publican condemning himself; was
justified, and saved: whereas the Pharisee, justifying himself, was
evelastingly condemned.

6.. Nor can Christ profit thee any thing, until with St. Paul; (who before
his conversion, was such another) thou see thy self; even the greatest of
sinners; find thy lelse in a lost condition: And that thy sins even drive
thee utterly to despair of all other helps; as himself affirms, Mat. 9. 12.
13. Luke 1. 53. Gal. 5. 1. 107. And (which I would have thee mind) until
Christ is become thine by regeneration, and a lively says: thou art bound to
keep the whole Law; actually, and spiritually: with thy whole man, thy whole
life: or else suffer eteruall death, and destruction of body and soul, for nor
keeping it. Whereas all that can truly claim a part in Christ, are freed both
from the rigor, and penalty of it, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Because Christ has done, and
suffered; satisfied and merited all for them, Romans 10 3. 4, 5, 9, 10. a happy
condition, a blessed change, Romans 8. 1. to (...). and 9. 30. to 34. (...) Cor.
5. 1^. 21. which yet may soon become thy (...): had thou the wit to renounce
thine own righteousness; and seek to be justified only by the says of
Christ, and his righteousness. As Paul has taught thee, by his own example,
Phil 3. 7, 8, 9. Gal 2. 16, 19, 20 21. Wherefore, if thou have an (...), he are
what I shall say unto thee out of (...). For (...) knowledge and application of
this point: is in effect al^n all.

7.. The sole perfection of a Christian, is the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, and the not imputation of his own unrighteousness, Romans 10.
4. And (...) Christ (...) ^nner, only by the imputation of our sins: so we
are just one^ by the imputation of his righteousness. Our g^ (...), (were
(...) so many and rare) cannot justify us, or (...) any thin^ (...) ^ds; it is
only in Christ that they are accepted; and (...) for Christ that they are
rewarded Yea, the opinion of our own (...), is so far from saving us, that it
keeps us from all possibility of being saved: and makes us as hateful to God,
as the Devils themselves, as is e^dent by Man. 2. 17. Luke 1. 53. Nor can any
soul, he so dangerously (...): at thou which art least sensible of thy being
sick. Yea, it puts thee out of all possibility of being bettered: for what we
presume to have attained, we seek not after. Whereas otherwise, thou might
become good: if thou did not at present so think thy self. And indeed,
this conceited righteousness; or this opinion of being in case good enough: is
the chief and only cause of all unrighteousness. And many a man, had proved
good; if he had not so thought himself. A man must know himself sick, before
he will seek to the Physician. Until Paul was humbled to the very ground,
even trembling, and astonished: he never asked Lord what will thou have me to do.
And the like of those converts, that were pricked in their hearts, at Peter's
searching Sermon, upon their being convinced, that they were the murderers of
the Lord of life, Acts 2. 36, 37, 38. He is no way fit for absolution: who
finds not himself worthy of condemnation. We shall find no sweetness in
Christ's blood; till we feel the smart of our own sins.

8.. But thou art so far from this; that thou braggest of thy says, works, and
good meaning: that thou never doubtedst in all thy life, and that it were pity
thou should live, if thou did not believe in Christ, and hope to be saved
by him. The usual expressions; of formal, and civil Iusticiaries: who know
not what says means: for that persuasion only, which follows sound
humiliation is faith: that which goes before it, is presumption. And as Ambrose
speaks; none can repent of sin, but he that believes the pardon of sin:
nor none can believe his sins are pardoned; except he has repented. Besides,
how easy a matter soever thou think it is to believe: he that goes about
it, shall find it as hard a work to believe the Gospel, as to keep the Law:
and only God, must enable to both. And yet so sarre, as we come short of
either: so far sorth, we have just cause to be humbled If we consider how God
made us, and how we have unmade our selves.

9.. But thine own mouth condemns thee, in saying thou never doubtest in all
thy life: for who never yet doubted, never yet believed. Yea, who never yet
doubted of their salvation: their salvation is not only to be doubted of; but
even to be dispaired of, until they have that veil, or curtain; which is
drawn over every natural man's heart, (2 Cor. 3. 14. 15. 16.) taken away by
repentance; whereby they shall see sin, in every thing they think, or
speak, or do. And that their very righteousness, is no better then a
menstruous cloth, Esaias 64. 6. And until thou find it thus with thee: know,
and take special notice of it; that Satan has none so sure, as those whom he
never yet assaulted That so long as thou remainest unregenerate; thou art so
blind, and dease, and dead in sin, and in soul: that thou can no more see,
thy spiritual filthiness, then a blind Ethiopian can see his blackness, or
then a dead m^n, can feel the weight of a burden, when it is laid upon him,
Mat. 13. 15. Acts 28. 27 Esaias 6. 9. 10.

10.. So that however thou applaudest, and preferrest thy self before other
men; saying I am no dissember: yea, I hate the Hypocrisy of Professors; I do
not justify my self, and despise others like the Puritanes. I am not factious
Schismatical, singular, censorious, etc. I am not rebellious, nor contentious,
like the Brounists, and Anabaptists. I love an honest man with my heart, etc.
And as touching a good conscience; I was never yet troubled in mind, as many
scrupulous fools are, and the like (which to hear thee, would amaze a man:)
it is no other, then if a Beggar should dream, that he is a King: or a
Traitor, that he should be crowned, when he is to be Beheaded. The case of
Laodicea, Revel. 3. 17. The young man in the Gospel, Luke 18. 20. 21. And that
cackling Pharisee, Luke 18. 11, 12. who had all the very same thoughts of
themselves, that thou have. And yet God abhorred them the most of any.

CHAP. XI.
1. ANd the reason is, the best actions, and services that can be performed: as
Preaching and Praying, and Fasting, and receiving and giving of Alme, etc.
unless they flow from a pious and good heart, sanctified by the Holy Ghost,
and be done in says, obedience to the Word, humility, saving knowledge, and
sincere love to God; zeal of his; lory, and a desire to edify, and win
others: are no better in Gods account, then staying of a man: or cutting off a
Dogs neck; or offering swines blood; or blessing an Idol, as himself
affirms Esaias, 66. 3. And many examples prove, namely Caines sacrificing, 1
John 3. 12. The Jews fasting. Isci. 58. 3. to 8. Those Reprobates preaching in
Christ's name, and casting out Devils Mat. 7. 21. to 24. whose outward works,
were the same which the godly perform: But they springing from ignorance,
infidelity, self-love, and such like carnal respects; were no better then
shining sins. or beautiful abominations. What says Sr. Austin most
excellently? There is no true virtue, where there is no true Religion: And that
conscience, which is not directed by the Word; even when it does best, does
ill; because it does it not in faith, obedience, and love. Nor will God accept
of any action, unless it flows from a pious and good heart; sanctified by the
Holy Ghost.

2.. Whereas thou art so far from being really religious, and godly: that
thou have not yet, made one step toward it. For the first step to Religion, or
Christianity; is to love religion and holiness in another: but thou (as thine
own conscience will bear me witness) wilt hate, scoff at, and persecute
another, for being holy and religious. Nor caust thou endure the power of
Religion in any, though thou love a form dearly: as taking the shadow for
the substance: which notably discovers the deceitfulness of thy heart; and
Satan's subtilty, if thou had but eyes to see it. Nor could thou otherwise
think so well of thy self: for thou think thy self as good a Christian as
the best. Yea, thou passest for, and art reputed an excellent Christian by men
of the World. As diverse will say of Morrall honest men; if they go not to
Heaven, Lord have mercy upon us. Yea, by some of o^ late, reverend Prelates;
and their Creatures: for they, counted men religious, as they were conformable
to their Cannons: and all the congregation, is alike holy, and holy enough to
natural men. As Corah and his profane consorts, told Moses and Aaron, when
they rose up against them, Numb. 16. 1. 2. 3.

3.. But it is manifest enough, by the word of God: that thou art an ignorant,
formal, titular, stature, outside Christian. And that thou have no more of
religion, or godliness; then a bare form, outside, or shadow, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Tit. 1. 16. That thou art a mere Bladder, empty of all true grace; and only
blown up with pride. That there is not a poorer wretch, upon the face of the
earth then thou: that with Laosicea, braggest thy self to be rich, and to want
nothing, when thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and naked, Rev. 2. 17,
only thou art pus^t up, and know nothing, 1 Timothy 6. 4.

4.. But because there is no heating thee off, from thy conceited
righteousness, and self purity: except it be by showing thee thy
unrighteousness, and actual impurity: and because thou must of necessity know
thy self sick; before thou will seek, and sue to Christ the Physician of
souls: I will further discover unto thee, not only thy abominable
wickedness, original, and actual; of commission, and omission: but even the
very inmost secrets of thy heart, and soul: which thou shall confess none
could do, except God were with him. Wherefore mark well what I say.

CHAP. XII.
1. FIrst, admit thou had never offended in the least, in all thy life:
either in thought, word, or deed. Yea, admit thou could now, keep all the
Commandments, actually, and spiritually; yet this were nothing, thou were
miserable notwithstanding. Because thou broughtest a world of sin ^to the
world with thee; and deservedst to dye, so soon as thou beganest to live. Even
when thou wast a little child; thou were a great sinner. We are the cursed
seed of rebellious parents. And are as guilty of Adams, and Eves sin (being
in their loins) as any Heir is liable to his Fathers debt, Romans 5. 12. 14,
15, 17, 18, 19. They were the root or stock of all mankind: and their act
was ours, as the act of a Knight, or Burges; is the act of the whole County. If
they had stood, and continued in that estate of innocence, and happiness; (as
it was put to their choice) we had stood also; and been for ever blessed: And
so on the contrary, Genesis 2. 17. Insomuch that we were conceived in sin, and
borne the children of wrath. Even condemned, so soon as conceived, and
adjudged to eternal death, before we were borne a temporal life, Psalm. 51. 5.
God indeed made us, after his own image: but by sin, we have turned that
image of his, into the image of Satan. So that by nature, (be we never so
mild, and gentle) we are the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. and children of
the Devil, John 8. 44. Yea, the very best natural man, is but a tame Devil:
as Athanasius well notes.

2.. Nor would thou need, any more to humble thee, and make thee loath and
abhor thy self, then the clear sight of thy guiltiness, wickedness, and
wretchedness by nature. For no tongue is able to express, what impotent,
pitiful, and poluted wretches we are; when we are in our blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
As Christ at the first finds us, and before he has washed us white, in his
blood, sanctified us by his Spirit; and covered us with the long white Robe of
his righteousness. As O what swarms, what litters, what legions of noisome
lusts: lie lurking in every natural man's heart; by reason of original sin.
For out of the heart naturally, proceeds nothing but evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, theifts, false-witnesse, blasphemies, etc. as our
Savior shows, Mat. 15. 18. 19. Yea, every imagination of the thoughts of man's
heart; are only, and continually evil; and deceitful above all things, Jet.
17. 9. and that from his youth, Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. And we are all cut out of
the same cloth. So that every man has the seeds of every sin in his heart.
And we are beholding to God, and not to our selves: that we run not out into
all manner of enormeties; even the sin against the Holy Ghost not except. That
we are not worse then Manasses himself. Lord says St. Austin, thou have
forgiven me those sins which I have done; and those sins, which only by
thy grace I have not done. They were done in our inclination to them; and even
that inclination needs God, mercy. Nor are we only apt to all evil: but we
are also reprobate, and indisposed to all grace, and goodness: yea, to all the
means thereof. we are not only weak, but altogether so dead in sin; that
we cannot stir the least joint, no not so much as feel our deadness, nor
desire life: we can no more turn our selves, then we could at first make our
selves. And as God did at first make us, so he must new make us, or we shall
everlastingly perish. Yea, except God bestow upon us daily privative grace to
desend us from evil; and daily positive grace, inabling us to do good: we are
utterly undone. We have ability, we have will enough to undo our selves: scope
enough Hell-ward, but neither motion, nor will to do good. Our understandings
are darkened, and dulled; our judgments blinded, our wills perverted, our
memories disordered, our affections corrupted, our reason depraved, our
thoughts surprised, our desires intraped; and all the faculties, and functions
of our souls: yea, our very natures are no better then poisoned: as every
sanctified heart both feels, and will freely confess, as did David and Paul.
And this let me tell thee, that if ever thou obtainest the grace, truly, and
orderly to repent of thy sins: thou will begin here, as esteeming it the
mother and nurse of all the rest: the puddle or spring of all other sins. The
most soul, and hateful, secret, deceitful, and powerful evil, Psalm. 51. 5.
Romans 7 23, 24. This is the great wheel in the Clock, that sets all the
wheels a moving, while it seems to move slowest.

CAAP. XIII.
1. BUt least this should not sufficiently bear thee off from thy conceited
righteousness, or self purity: see how many several ways, thou have added
actual sin, and guilte unto original. And then except thou have seeled
eyes; thou will acknowledge thy self of the number; of those ignorant,
unbeleeving, ungrateful, and wicked wretches before spoken of: and not any way
worthy to be called a Christian. Yea, mind well what I say, and thou will
find, that I have learned from Gods Word, to know thy heart, better then thy
self. Whereof many instances.

Thou art so stupidly sottish, that thou think, yea wilt profess; that thou
love God, and Christ; and yet hate all that any way resemble him. Can
here him blasphemed, reproached, and dishonored, without being once stirred or
moved at it: and wilt choose rather to disobey God, then displease Great ones.
Thou love the praise of men, more then the praise if God: And fear more
the worlds scorns, then His a^ger. When Gods cause is in danger; thou art
either a never, or an adversary. For thou will not help the Lord against the
mighty. Thou had rather the wicked should bare rule, or be^ exalted then the
godly. Yea, the one rejoycest thee, the other grieves theee. Thou art an enemy
to Reformation, and oppose^ it all thou can. And could these things possibly
he, if thou did in the least degree love God?

2:. But besides all this, Thou do continually murmur at the passages of Gods
providence; especially when thou want ought. Thou love God dearly, but
can not afford to speak a word for him: and likewise his Children entirely;
but instead of justifying them, or speaking in their defense; when thou hear
them reviled, slandered, and slighted by wicked and ungodly men: thou will be
as forward as the best, to flout and slander them. Though thou make those
sins thine own, which thou do not some way reprove. For to be a doer of
ill, or no hinderer; is much about one, in Gods account. Thou love his Word
too: but thou will turn thy back upon it, or spurn against it; when it
crosses thy corruptions. Again.

3.. Thou foolishly think, that thou beleevest in Christ with thy heart, and
^er art ashamed to confess, or profess his name with thy mouth; which is
impossible; for profession, and the truth of Religion are inseparable, Romans 9.
33. and 10. 9. 10. 11. Yea, thou art loath to do ought, appertaining to
Religion; that might difference thee from the multitude: or make thee noted for
singular. Thou owe God some good will; but thou dare not be known of it:
Thou art dumb to any good, and holy conference; but to any thing else, thou
have wind at will, and tongue enough: not having the wit to consider, that the
fearful shall go first, and before other sinners, into the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Revel. 21. 8. and that Christ will be ashamed of them
hereafter in heaven: that are ashamed of him now on the earth, Luke 9. 26.

4. Thou art of a reprobate judgment; touching zeal, and holiness: thinking
good evil, and evil good. Then justifiest the wicked, and condemnest the
just. Thou have strange conceits, and base though^s of the best men: thinking
their life to be madness: Deeply censuring, and condemning the generation of
the just, and their ways, counting them factious and rebellious Enemies to the
State, and troublers of Israel: As Ahab counted Eliab, Thou call our
religion Puritanis^e, our conscience of sin Hypocrisy, our profession
dissimulation, our prudence policy, our faith, and confidence Presumption; our
zeal of Gods glory, to be pride and malice: out obedience to Gods Laws,
rebellion to Princes: our execution of justice cruelty, etc.

If thou hear of oue, that is grievously afflicted in body, or estate; or
troubled in mind for his sins: as commonly all are at their first
conversion: O then he is a greater sinner then other men; he has done, or
committed some strange thing, and God has found him out. If they be any thing
devoute, or forward to admonish others: then they are beside themselves; as our
Savior was thought to be by his Kinsfolk: and St. Paul by Festus, Mark 3.
21. John 10. 20. Acts 26. 24.

5.. Thou condemnest, and cryest out upon their profession; when thy spite is
at their Religion; as what needs so much profession? Cannot men serve God in
secret? Yea, their much hearing troubles thee: therefore thou call upon them
to hear less, and practice more: when thy crying up practice, is but to cry
down preaching. As the Papists extll St. James, that they may disparage St.
Paul.

If thou hear of a professer of Religion; (for otherwise thou have no
quarrel against him,) that through humane frailty, does over-shoot himself,
or is overcome in a fault: thou will for this bare, single act; most unjustly,
and uncharitably judge him, to be a dissembling Hypocrite, as Jobs Friends
dealt by him. Yea, even the least oversight, or in discretion in a professor:
prevails more with thee, to make thee speak evil of him; then much good can
do, to make thee speak well of him.

Yea, in case thou hear of an eminent Professor* that proves himself an
Hypocrite: thou will instantly conceive, an hard opinion of all the rest; and
say these are your religious men; that under a color of holiness, play the
villains. God bless me from their religion, etc. And indeed thou so
fore-stallest thy self with prejudice, against the religious; cause, or no
cause: that thou resolvest never to be religious, so long as thou live. Yea,
thou will judge the godly Hypocrites; for some disaster, or accident that
befalls them, as the Barba^s did Paul, Act^, 28. 3. 4. and those three of Job
Chap. 8. 13. etc. Yea, for doing, or not doing even things indifferent; as if
they will sit at the Lords Table or not bowto the Altar; ^r not be uncovered at
the name of Jesus; or not were a surplice; or omit ^o cross the forehead in
Baptizme; or to observe Holy Days, as they call them; and many the like,
therein resembling the Pharisees; who censured our ^iour, and his Apostles; for
no^ washing their hands, as often as they did eat bread. And (which proves thee
to be, a hater of God, and good men only:) ^hou wilt censure things
indifferent in Gods people, but pass by heinous ^imes in other men.

6. Yea, rather then not censure the religious, thou will accuse them for their
virtues. As what can they do, or leave undone; but thou will strangely censure
them, as if they refuse to Oath it, then they make great conscience of
swearing; but none of lying, and cozening: and therefore are not to be
believed. If they be careful of their society, thou will tax, and stout them;
with stand farther off, for I am holier then thou.

Again, If a man's conscience be tender: and he makes scruple of small matters:
O then he stumbles at strawes, and leaps over blocks: strains at Gnats, and
swallows Cammels.

7.. And as is thy censuring, such is thy envy, and hatred to the Godly; and
why? but because they either do better, or fare betrer, or are better esteemed
then thy self. Yea, even a good Conscience, and sticking close to the word; is
the only thing that raises thy spleen, and is the whetstone of thy malice, as
it faired with Annanias, touching Paul, Acts 23.

This makes thee persecute honest, and Orthodox Christians: and say thou
meanest base, and dissembling Hypocrites. Yea, even while thou caleft them so,
and perhaps in some sense think so, thou do think, and know, and thy
conscience now knows, and thinks to the contrary. A horrible stupidity, and
blockishnesse: that none are liable too, but such as the Devil has blinded.
But because their is no other way, to cure thee thereof: but by thus, showing
thee those secrets of thy heart, which thou could not have thought, God
himself had been privy too. I will proceed, though small is my hope of thy
amendment. Thou can love any that are not religious; but thou hate zeal,
and devotion so inveterately, that thou can in no wise, bare with it in any.
Yea, thy Religion is, to oppose the power of Religion; and thy knowledge of the
truth, to know how to argue against the truth As thou can most wisely, and
subtly; (being prompted by Satan) argue against Gods people, and goodness it
self: taking all occasions so to do; though under other notions, and
pretenses, though thou have not a word to speak for them, or it* whence it is,
that the power of religion. and the people of God, are every where spoken
against as the chief Jews told Paul, Acts 28. 22. yea, whatsoever Sect or
Heresy, thou pretendest: do but ask thy own couscience, whether thou do
not hate them; even for the graces of Gods spirit, which shine in them? and
whether thou do not carry an aching tooth against every godly man thou know
and judge their thoughts to be evil, when thou can not tax their lives.

8.. Thou art an affected scoffer at Religion: like Chan, and Ishmael. Yea,
thou do nickname, rail on, and slander the people of God, misconstrue their
actions, and intentions; and narrowly watch for their halting: Thou rejoycest
at their secret infirmities, or miseries; and at the open scandals of
Hypocrites. Thou art grieved at their good, especially a^ their gifts and
graces. Thou will believe any false report of them (be it never so unlikely,)
and that from the Devils servants. Thou will not suffer wholesome Doctrine; but
carpe and fret against the good Word of God: if it be an untoothsome truth,
though never so wholesome.

9.. Thou contemnest that preaching which awakens men's Consciences; works upon
their affections, and saves their souls. And applaudest such Corinthian
Preachers; as tickle the ear only, and please the ^ce. For let some Boanerges
thunder out the judgments of God against ^n (...) and threaten their
destruction, if they amend not their lives. As Jonah, when in three days, he
converted that great City Nineveh: Or disc^* their most secret thoughts, as
Christ did to the (...) of Sama^, John 4. Or drive an application home to their
Consciences, touching some one sin of theirs: as John Baptist dealt with
Herod: Or as Peter with the Jews, when he converted three thousand at one
Sermon: and five thousand (...) another, Acts, 2. 41. and 4. 4. Thou will most
bitt^rly inveigh against (...), for preaching nothing but Law and damnation:
saying that such Sermons are not to be heard: for they only drive men to
despair. But (...) when Mr. Rogers (spoken of in the Book of Mar^yrs)
preaching after the manner, heard one of his Auditors cry out, I am damned, I
am damned; cried out as fast, I would their were more of you damned; I would
there were more of you damned. So say I, I would there were more such preaching
I would there were more such dispairing. And thrice h^ppy were it for thee, if
thou did so despair, if thou were so damned also. For thou have no other way
to be saved, (in all probability) if ever thou bee^ saved: No other way to go
to Heaven, but by the very Gates of Hell; as I could make plain to thee, if
time would permit. And yet thou forsooth, wilt persecute a Minister to the
death, for showing thee the way to eternal life, as the Iewe^ served our
Savior, John 7. 7. and the Prophets before him, and Apostles after him, Prove.
15. 12. Amos 5. 10. Mat. 23. 37. Gal. 4. 16. 1 These. 2. 16. Act. 4. 17. 18. and
7. 27. and 19, 28. 1 King. 22. 8. John 3. 19. 20, 21. Psalm. 83. 2. to 10. Mat.
26. 4. Mark 3. 6. Revel. 12. 10. And which is more strange the all. Thou will
all these ways which I have laid down, persecute Christ in his Members; and
yet think, thou do God good service therein, and deser Vest great praise,
for thy so d^ing. Here is blindness, and blockishnesse with a witness: to
think that the Father will take it for a sa^ (...) to see his only Son,
most maliciously murdered, in his own sight. 10.. Again, whereas a good man,
is so far from taking offense ^n none is given; that he will not be offended,
when offenses come; ^t the scandalous lives of Professors, or at the multitude
of Heresies, that (...) daily broached; though they grieve his very soul; but
when strange ^gs happen, he makes a wholesome construction thereof. Thou art not
^ly hardened thereby, to thine own destruction; but even as an ill ^ack, turns
all it receives (even the wholsomest meats) into ill hu^urs; or as the Spyder
converts, every thing she eats into poison: so (...), whatsoever thou hear,
or see in the godly: (even their very ver^, and graces) so blinding thy self
with thine own prejudice; that ^ou wilt not believe what thine eyes see, and
thine ears hear.

CHAP. XIV.
(...). ANd so by this time, I hope thou see sin in thy self; be it but as
the man, (half restored to his sight) saw men walking as Trees: ^d that thou
art not so pure, as thou tookest thy self to be. For certain^ these are not
the thoughts, words, and actions of one that has kept all (...) Commandments:
that has so good a heart, and meaning, and so strong says; that loves God,
and the people of God as thou pretendest. Yea, I ^pose, let these things
touching enmity; be but well weighed, and laid to (...); they will convince
thee, and ninty nine parts of the Kingdom with ^ce, (who also think
themselves good Christians) that they are in a most ^esperate, and damnable
condition: even haters of God, and ^sighters against the Lamb; and all that
are one his side; that are called, and chosen, (...): that keep the
Commandments of God, and have the testimony (...) Jesus, as it is Revel. 12.
17. and 17. 14. But I have yet more to tell ^hee, of the transcendent baseness
of thy wicked and deceitefull heart.

2.. Thou have, (as thou well know) gone to Church, and heard the Word
preached, and read, this twenty, thirty, or forty year,: and yet ^hou know
no more savingly, then the child in the womb: art as ^norant ^s a beast. Thou
know not experimentally, the first principles of Reli^ion, in the midst of
so much light, and means of grace. Nor (...) the able to yield a reason of the
hope that is in thee. And yet let ^a Minister that knows thy ignorance; and
that thou art so far from being holy, that thou hate holiness in others:
deny thee the Sacrament; out of conscience, and love to thy soul: thou will
hate him, as Ahab ha^ed Eliah; detain his dues from him; and take all
occasion, to spit out thy spleen against him. Thou have heard the Gospel, day
after day; and year after year: which is the strong arm of the Lord; and the
mighty power of God to salvation: The Sword of the Spirit, and like as a fire,
or an Hammer, that breaks even the Rock in pieces. And that irresistible
Can^ shot that is mighty to break down all the strong holds of Sin and Sa^.
Quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword: and which piereeth
even to the dividing asunder; of the soul, and spirit, ^d of the joy^ and
marrow: and to the discerning of the very thoughts, and secret inte^ of (...)
heart. And yet have stood it out, and resisted instead of submitting to Chri^
call: even refusing the free offer of grace, and salvation. In so much t^ thy
heart, and conscience is word proof, thunder proof; Yea, judgem^ proof: so
that nothing will do good upon thee, should Christ send o^ to thee from the
damned in Hell, or from the glorified souls in Heaven, warn, and invite thee
to repentance. Yea, if thou be never so clea^ convinc^d from the Word: that
thou art in a dangerous, and damnab^ condition; (as possible it is I may do*
before I have done with thee) (...) thoughts thereof presently pass away, like
the sound of a Bell that is (...)*

3.. Now thou art waxen fat, with the good blessings of God: the spurnest with
thy heel; and forsakest God hat made the^: not regarding (...) strong God of
thy salvation: but provokest him with strange Gods, and (...) abominations.
Christ has raised thee from a beggar, to be one of the be^ in thy Parish: but
how do thou requite him? Thou will not (if it b^ possible) suffer a godly,
and conscientious Minster to be chosen; or to (...) bide where thou have to
do. But to bring in one, that will flatter (...) and flour holiness;
discourage the godly, and encourage the wicked, thou w^ use thine own, and all
thy friends utmost ability. When thou wante^ never so little, thou can
murmur: but thou injoyest millions of merci^ (far beyond thy desert) which
thou never cordially gave thanks s^ Thou have made vows, and promised
amendment, when the rod w^ on thy back: but never cardest to perform the same,
when thou were (...) leased. Thou would be taken for religious, (at least
upon occasion) b^ thou make no conscience, or reckoning of it; but when it
may brin^ thee in profit, or procure thee esteem: and then it shall serve thee
as Stalking Horse, that thou may the better deceive unsuspected.

4.. Thou art so far from suffering, for a good conscience: that ((...) thou
may enjoy thy immunities, have the favor of great ones, and gain^ well by
it) thou art for, and wilt conform to any religion the Stat^ shall establish,
were it Popery it self: resembling shel-fish, that increase when the Moon
increases, and decrease as it does.

Thou art a pretended lover of Peace, but a professed hater of truth. Yea thou
think that honesty, and religion, consists only in quietness, an^ living
peaceably amongst thy Neighbors. And that there is no wisdom but in a dull
indifferency: nothing praiseworthy, but discretion, and moderation. And
therefore thou preferest a quiet profaneness, before a zealous devotion.

5. Thou art very partial, and no less defective in thy obedience (...) all
for observing the second Table, without respect to the First: or all for
outward conformity, not at all for spiritual, and inward holiness of the
heart. Thou make conscience of great matters, nor of small: (as thou countest
them, for no sin is small but comparatively.) Thou will not ^re bloody
oaths; but faith, and troth is nothing with thee. Thou (...) not justify, or
defend lying: yet think thou may lie a little, (...) advantage: or bid thy
servants say, thou art abroad; when thou art ^ome. Thou art no accustomary
deceive^, at least while thou have plen^ but rather then not have to maintain
thy self with credit; thou (...) lie, deceive, p^ostitute thy chastity; sell
thy conscience, and what (...): poverty will constrain thee to steal. Nor art
thou a common ^derel, for thy own credits sake: but to lessen thy own shame,
and ^me; thou will traduce one thou have wronged, and as much abuse him (...)
his credit, as thou had formerly done in his substance. Thou ar^ kind (...)
thy Clients, or Customers: but woesully cruel to thy Debtors, the poor, (...)
servants: and yet look to have thy Lord and Master in Heaven merci^ to thee.
Thou will not be drunk, but thou will go five or ten times a day (...) the
Tavern, or Alehouse, to please a friend or customer; and their spend, ^d drink
(without being athirst) as much as would keep six of Christ's ^or members from
star^ing: and how will thou answer this another day.

6.. Thou will follow the example of the greatest number, or the grea^st men,
or the greatest Scollars, or of thy forefathers: though without or ^ainst the
written word. Or thus, Thou squarest thy life by other men's lives ^hout respect
to Christ's life; like some foolish Sexten, that sets his Clock by ^hers Clocks,
without looking to the Sun. Or else thou leavest the most safe ^d ^ing guide of
Gods Word, to follow the decei^able guide, of thine ^ne carnal reason: like an
ignorant Pilot, that sails without a compass.

CHAP. XV.
(...).. ANd so much to show, how sarre short you fall of a privative holiness,
in reforming that which is evil. Now see how short you ^ome of a positive
holiness: in performing that which is good, for to be just (...) the sight of
God, and graciously accepted of him; these two things are ^quired: the
meri^rious part to get Heaven, and the satisfactory part to es^pe Hell. But
first make a stand here; and consider whether a good Tree, (...) bring sorth
all ^his evil fruit? for the (...) is known by the fruit, whe^es it be good,
or evil: as our Savior shows, Mat 7. 16, 17, 18, 20, and ^2. 33. Yea,
Unbelievers may be known from Christians; by their want (...) fruit. We more
then suspect, want of sap in the root of a Tree: if we ^de barrenness in the
Branches. If either it have bad fruit, or no fruit: (...) is but a dead says.
And the true ^od of grace is, cease to do evil, (...) to do well, E^ay 1.
16. 17. For as grace enters into the heart; sin ^oes out: like air out of a
Vessel, when wine is powered in. Therefore ^dmit thou were a negative
Christian, and could not be charged with any ^of this* that I have proved
against thee; much the better: when thou (...) reprobate to every good work.
The Fig Tree was cursed, not for bearing ^ll fruit; but because it bare no
good. The evil servant, was not bound and and foot, and cast into prison; for
wasting his Masters goods: but for not gaining with them. And those Reprobates
at the last day, shall be (...) depart into everlasting fire: not for wronging,
or robbing of any; bu^ not giving, not comforting. Wherefore, as thou have
heard, thy sin commission, laid open: so now I will doclare unto thee, thy
sins of (...) sion, which also would be minded.

2.. Thou braggest, and thankest God with that Parisee. Luke 18. That thou art
just, and payest men their dues; but art thou holy like^ and do thou pay God
his dues also? Art thou effectually called, and (...) come a new creature by
regeneration: being begotten, and borne a new of (...) by the immortal seed
of the Word, and the Spirits powerful working (...) it? Is thy heart
circumcised, or rather has God taken away the stony (...) out of thy flesh;
and given thee a new heart; and put a new spirit into (...) even his own
spirit: whereby thou have union, and communion (...) Christ; and partakest of
the divine nature. Do thou find an appr^ change wrought in thy judgment,
affections, and actions, to what the were formerly. Art thou changed, and
renewed in every part, pow^ and faculty? Is thy understanding enlightened, thy
mind renewed, thy (...) changed, thy affections sanctified, etc.? Has the
Old Man, changed w^ the New-man? worldly wisdom, with heavenly wisdom? ca^
love, for spiritual love; servile fear, for christian, and siliall fear;
(...) thoughts, for holy thoughts; vain words, for holy and wholesome word^
fleshly works, for works of righteousness, etc. as if thou were cast into new
mold: even hating what thou formerly lovedst, and loving what the formerly
hatedst. For as without this new birth, there is no being saved: as (...)
Savior himself affirms, Ioh. 3. 5. So he who thinks he is borne a ne^ and
finds not a palpable change, in his judgment, affections, and actio^ does but
deceive himself.

3.. Art thou more knowing, then the men of the world: as havi^ the light of
Gods spirit, and the Eye of faith above them? Art thou bro^ out of darkness,
into marvell^us light? Are thine eyes opened to (...) the wonders of Gods Law?
is that Veil, or Curtain which was forme^ drawn over thy heart, 2 Cor. 3.
15. 16. taken aw^y by (...)? and the turned from the power of Satan, unto God.
Do thou receive the Word wi^ all readiness? not as the word of men, but as
it is indeed the word of (...) And has it wrought in thee mightily? have thou
found it by experien^ to be quick, and powerful, sharp, etc. as it follows.
Heb. 4 12. Even excelli^ all other Books, as Wheat does the Cha^fe? Has the
Law; which is (...) just, good, spiritual: not only convinced thee of sin,
but so cleared (...) sigh^, that thou can now discern sin, in every
thought, word, and ac^ on of thine? Do thou see thy self, out of measure
sinful? as (...) guilty of all manner of concupisence; as having broken every
one of the righteous precepts, Exodus 20. more times, and ways then thou have
hi^ on thy head. Not being able of thy self, to think a good thought; (...)
that all the powers of thy soul, and Members of thy body; are wholly, and
originally corrupted. Do thou see thy sellse as guilty of Adams sin? (...)
being in his loins,) as any Heir is liable to his Fathers Debt? And (...)
knowledge, that thou broughtest a world of sin into the world with ^hee; and
deservedst to dye, so soon as thou did begin to live? That thine ^standing is
darkened, and dulled; thy judgment blinded, thy will (...), thy memory
disordered, thy affections corrupted, thy reason (...), thy thoughts surprised,
thy desires intrapped, and all the facul^ies, and sanctions of thy soul, no
better then poisoned? That of thy (...) thou (...) not only weak, but even
dead to what is good: moving ^o more, then thou art moved. That thy best works
are faulty, all thy ^nnes deadly; thy nature corrupted originally. That thou
art swift to ^ll evil, but to all good immovable.

4. A^ thou ashamed of thy former conversation? Do thou bewail and mourn
bitterly for all thy sins? actual, and original; of omission, and
commission: secret, as well as known; lesser, as well as greater; evil
thoughts, vain and unprofitable words; as well as sinful actions. Yea, as
well for the evil, which cleaves to thy best works? as for thy evil works,
grieve for thy unprofitableness, under the means of grace: being more sorry
for offending so good a God: then for that it does, or might bring thee shame
or punishment in this life, or in Hell Do thou find thy self in a lost
condition? confessing that thou have deserved all the plagues of this life, and
that which is to come. And groaning under the burden of sin; do thou
utterly despair of all help in thy self; Does it make thee solicitously
careful, in the use of all means, to attain faith in the promise of Gods
mercy, made in Christ? as finding no rest, until thou gettest some assureance;
vehemently hungring, and thirsting after, and earnestly praying for the pardon
o^ sin; waiting on the Lord with patience? Do thou hate sin thoroughly, and
universally? Art thou grieved for the abominations that are done by others: to
the dishonor of God, and slander of Religion, or the ruin of men's souls?
Do thou account spiritual judgments, as the blindness of men's minds,
hardness of their hearts, etc. more woofull then any temporal judgment; the
world is so sensible of, and troubled at.

5. Do thou often, and upon all occasion go to God in prayer: praying by the
power of the spirit, in Christ^ (...); and with the understanding also
according to (...) w^ An^ a^ (...) of thy sins and (...) do thou chiefly pray
for the pardon of sin? the (...) of grace, and for the assistance of Gods
spirit? that thou may more ^mely believe, more soundly repent, more zealously
do, more patiently su^er, and more constantly persevere, in the practice, and
por^ession of every duty; striving against deadness of spirit, and
distractions as an heavy burden.

Do thou not desire outward blessing, so much, as Gods blessing upon them;
more a contented mind, then a great Estate? And in praying to God, do thou
not neglect to use the means? And having attained thy end, do thou ascribe
the praise thereof, wholly to the free mercy of God in Christ? and not to thy
wisdom, industry, etc. As thou prayest for deliverance, when thou art in
distress: so art thou accordingly thankful, when delivered? and so when thou
have obtained any temporal good thing. And as God blesses thee more or less;
so do thou do good: and the more rich, art thou the more rich in good works?
and more ready to distribute, and communicate.

6.. Do thou love to hear Christ's voice? and know when he speaks, and when
the tempter? Do thou receive and apply whatsoever precept, or promise, is
spoken out of the Word: as spoken by God to thy self in particular? Do thou
read and hear, to the end only, that thou may know savingly, believe
rightly, and live religiously? Does each Book and Sermon in thy desire,
increase thy knowledge, and lesson thy vices? Do thou impartially believe the
whole word of God: precepts, and menasses, as well as promises? And by this
thou may know, and be infallibly informed; whether thou be a believer or
no: thy faith in the commands if thou have it, will breed obedience: in the
threatenings fear: in the promises comfort. Do thou feel the power, and
efficacy of Gods Word, and Spirit? persuading thy conscience, that thy (...)
are pardoned in Christ, and that thou art in favor with God; trusting in him;
and casting thy self wholly and only upon him; for pardon and salvation. Art
thou often, and grievously assaulted with fears, and doubtings? and often in
combat, between the flesh and the spirit: the spirit in the end getting the
upper hand? Have thou a sweet and sanctified peace in thy conscience (...)
arising from the assured forgiveness of thy sins. A sound and strong joy in
the Lord? and in his word through believing

7.. Do thou declare thy faith by thy works? thy invisible belief by thy
visible life. Art thou inflamed with the love, and estimation of God and of
Christ? especially, upon the return of thy prayers; or the obtaining of some
mercy. Art thou not dumb in publishing his praise? no^ back ward, to justify
him in his judgments. Do thou prefer Gods favor, before all the worlds? and
his glory, before thine own credit. I^ it grievous to thee; to hear him
blasphemed, and dishonored? Does i^ cut thy very heart, to hear Christ so
wounded with Oaths, Blasphemies and reproaches? who is the life of thy life,
and soul of thy soul. Do^ thou omit no opportunity of doing good? nor do
evil though thou ha^ opportunity. A^ thou willing to be at cost, to serve the
Lord? Do tho^ freely administer carnal things: where thou pertakest of
spiritual things and count the same as a due, not as a benevolence? Do thou
think i^ most just, that he who preaches the Gospel; should live of the
Gospel and that as comfortably, as men of other callings.

8.. Do thou entirely love, and highly esteem Gods people? Not out of any
carnal, or self ends: but for their graces, the truths sake, and because they
are borne of God. Art thou prone to justify them, and speak intheir defense?
when thou hear them reviled, slandered, or contemned by wicked, and ungodly
men: though thou incur their displeasure by it

Do thou seek the good, and to promote the peace of the place, thou ^st in?
And can comfort thy self with this? that in thy very calling, and public
employments: thy aim, and endeavor is not more at profit, or credit, then at
the glory of God and good of others. H^ thou an (...) reable and public
spirit? delighting to d^ good offices. Ar^ them active to pleasure others;
willing to make thy self a servant to all, the (...) in ^ed of thee? Do thou
rejoice at the progress of the (...); and ^n the common good of the Church?
and so at the graces, or good success of any member in particular? Do thou
(...) desire the salvation of others: and endeavor to win all thou (...) to
Christ? Art thou zealous to admonish, reclaim, and reduce the^ (...), and go
astray? and to save those among whom thou (...), (...) th^ulnesse to God, and
thy Redeemer; and out of love to (...) (according to thy ability,) relieve
Christ's Members for his save: and give ^cke a considerable part of all thou
have to (...) and acknowledge thy self only a Steward, (not an owner) of wh^
thou do possess.

Do thou express thy love, and thankeful^ (...) God, by (...) his ^ommands?
As thou have once been the servant of (...), so art thou now become the
servant of righteousness: And as thou have been (...) to Satan; so art thou
now as active to serve Christ; and as (...) in good works, as thou have
formerly been in evil (...). Do^ thou ^ember thy vow in Baptizme? being (...)
to perform, what the (...) then promise: and so (...) as thou (...) of
performing the (...), art thou, or (...) thou (...) to be (...): Art thou not
(...) in thy obedience? but universal: making conscience of every du^ and all
that God commands: the (...) as well as the second, and ^he second, as well as
the first: even the (...) things, either required, (...) forbidden in the Word.
Art thou as careful to (...) the (...) sin, or least appearances, or (...)
of sin; a actual sin it (...)? Do thou make (...) of (...) (...): and
(...) that all under thee, do the (...)? Do (...), and ^up Gods worship
therein: (...), (...), etc. and in (...) thy children, and (...); (...) them
(...) fear the Lord. Nor will thou approach the (...) Table, without due
ex^ination and prepartion.

9.. Art thou just, and (...) in thy deal^? do thou not detain ^ges, nor
workemens (...)? (a crying (...), that this City groans un^.) When thou
hast-prejudiced thy Neighbor, will thou willingly, and without compulsion,
satisfy for the damage? If thy conscience tells thee, that thou have any way
wronged another: though there be none to witnese against thee, and it be
unknown to the party himself, that suffers the damage: will thou make
satisfaction? and never think thou meritest by it. If thou find any thing,
do thou desire, and endeavor to find out the owner? that thou may
restore it. Will thou not compound with Creditors, for (...) shillings in the
and: when thou ^t able to pay all. Before thou usest the extreami^, either of
Law or Arms: Do thou offer conditions of Peace? and before thou ^lest to
blows, by what reason will do: and after that yield some part of thy ^ight,
rather then do wrong, contend, go to law, or make war. Do thou hate gifts,
and desire rather to buy what thou would have; then that it be given thee?
choosing to eat^ thing ow^e breed, and drink water out of thine own Cesterne.
Art thou just in the least things, and saithfull to such as put thee in trust?
If thou art (...) servant, do thou no way deceive nor purloyne. O that men
would try themselves, in point of justice: for though he that is not a true
Christian^ may be just: yet he that is not just, cannot he a true Christian.
Do thou first labor to inform, and then hearken to, and obey the voice of
conscience; together with the motions of Gods spirit? Consider another case by
thine own? and in a good measure, do unto all others, as thou would have
others do unto thee?

Do thou fear an Oath? hate a lie? yea, will thou not (for some great
advantage) swear a lie? a lawfull^ and needful question i^ these atheistical
days: for I that scarce know what a trial in Law i^ out of my small
experience of the Consciences, of your civil honest men and women; have known
no less then ten forswear themselves poy^ blank in diverse particulars: when
examined in Chauncery, and other Courts. Do thou neither back-bite others,
nor give ear to back-biter of others? Do thou neither tarry long at he wine,
nor go often to it (...)

Let none blame me, for heaping up proofs of this man's sinfulness for its
well, if all will be sufficient to his unseeing eyes. It must be a ver^ clear
light, and a large print; that must make plain to the f^rmall li^ pocrite, or
civil Iusticiary; that he must either be saved by another rightecousnesse, or
else everlastingly damned.

CHAP. XVI.
1.. JF a Magistrate, Art thou not parciall in any cause: will thou neither
(...) steeme Father, nor Mother, nor Wife, nor Child, so; as to disobey (...)
in the least for their sakes? Will thou not either for fear, or favor; d^ any
thing against the truth: or give sentence against thy conscience? (...) use thy
power in favor of the wicked? but be severe to the evil; (...) ^shing, and
protecting the good. If a master, do thou use thy serva^ so; as considering
that thy self is a servant, to a greater Master? Have the learnt from Gods
dealing with thee, to be merciful? Art thou faithful to my friend? does thy
love extend to his soul? will thou speak of his (...) to his face; of his
virtues behind his back? Yea, do thou not ^ffer discretion, to thrust our,
and eat up thy zeal and devotion? Had thou rather hazard the censure of some,
then hinder the good of others? Is thy ^le a sweer compound, of love and anger?
Can thou hate the vices of (...) wicked man, and yet love his person? Can
thou chide him sharply, and at the same time pray for him heartily? Can thou
refuse to revenge thy self upon an enemy: though thou ha^ power, and
opportunity to lo it? Yea, upon the least change, forgive hi^ as heartily, as
thou de^rest God should forgive thee? Can thou wish well to, and desire thy
^eatest enemies conversion; together with his prosperity?

2.. Do thou unfainedly desire, to forsake all sin: even those sins ^at are
most pleasing and profitable in thy esteem? Art thou fully per^ded that God
sees all things, and is ever beholding thee: and does ^is make thee upright,
and sincere hearted to God, and man; as conscien^ous alone, and in private; as
if thy greatest enemy, or all the world ^d behold thee? and to have a spirit
without guile? Art thou more de^us to be good? then so accounted. Do thou
more seek the power (...) godliness, then the show of it? Do thou resolve
to lose thy liberty, ^ut with the right hand of profit, and the right eye of
pleasure, rather then ^rt with a good conscience? or sin against God. As what
thou do is ^ood for the matter, so art thou as careful to do it well for
the manner ^so: and in all, yea, above all, observe whether thy ends be good or
evil; ^d whether the evil, or the good do most sway thee: for this do I
hold ^th half my Divinity, though it is now above thirty years since I learned
(...) Art, at a plain Sermon touching Hypocrisy. Do thou whatsoever ^ou
do, out of duty, and thankfulness to God, and thy Red^emer? and (...) of
love to thy fellow Members? Is Gods glory thy principal end, and ^ow to be
saved, thy greatest c^e.

3. Art thou bettered by affliction? and as it is sent for thy good, so ^th it
do thee good? Do crosses in thy estate, diseases in thy body, ^dies in thy
mind; prove medicines to thy soul? Is the impairing of (...) one, the
repairing of the other? Does thy sin dye with thy same? (...) with thy
health? or with thy peace? or with thy outward estate? yea, ^th it both lessen
thy sins, and increase thy gr^ces? Do thou grow (...) grace, and find a
blessed thriving, and gracious progress in true heli^sse? Does thy sufferings
make thee pitiful, and compassionate to others* (...) participating, and being
touched with compassion; and having a fellow ^ling of their misery, and
selicity? as one Member has of another, espe^lly of the Church^ as a Member
has of the whole body.

4.. Art thou hared of the world for goodness? Do thou suffer some ^y for
Christ? at least art thou evil spoken of, for well doing? Art thou made a by
word and song of the (...)? for else Christ has not chosen thee out of the
World: N^ is thine the true Religion, except it be commonly spoken against.
Do (...) G^d in all thou (...), and acknowledge him in all thou ^her (...),
(...)? And do thou observe the several pa^a (...)* (...) all things ^o ^e
ordered thereby? and that (...) (...) (...) thou comfortable exp^ience of hi^
(...) all (...) work for the (...) thee? admi^ing the same, and his (...); and
being accordingly thankful for it, and keeping a (...), (...) ^all ^cies, and
deliverances; and o thy (...) great provoca^s. Do the abhor to think thy
self (...) th^n o^s? because God blesses thee more with outward (...) o^
(...) m^re inward gifts and graces upon thee, the (...) o^s? Does thy knowledge
make thee (...) humble? And (...) wa^ of g^e, then confide in what thou have?
D^ (...) thy sal^tion with s^e and trembling? not t^g in (...) to (...), (...)
being e^ jealous, and su^ (...) ^hy (...) thee, (...) pre^g a^ hu^ (...), (...)
come. Do thou forget thy good deed, that G^d (...) remember thy evil (...),
that God (...) the^* A^ thou ever and (...), bew^iling thy wan^ and weaknesses?
the (...) of thy he^, want o^ says. etc.

5.. And (...), have (...) and p^med thy ^most: not to (...) rit by it, but to
(...) to him, the has done, performed, and (...): D^ (...) ^sse thy self an
(...) profitable servant? and (...) in (...) co^ (...) t^ du^? Yea, do (...)
that ^t were just for God (when the have done thy (...)) (...)* Do thou who^y
(...) lie upon the assi^nce of (...)* (...) all good co^ from him^ and (...)
all glory (...) to him? and endeavor acc^* din^ly to ho^ur, and (...) hi^
(...) thy ric^, wisdom, power, (...) what other g^s (...)? When the (...) done
any (...) amiss, D^ (...) accus^ thy (...)? (...) ^y th^g well, D^ thou give
all (...) praise to God? of whom (...) the (...) thou hold.

6.. These things the (...), and a^ commanded to do: the should be thy
though^, (...), and actions. But are they alas no, no^ them ever troubled thee,
o^ once ^d into thy though^. Thou (...) be a good civil, moral, honest,
Hypocrite, o^ ^dell: but none of the graces grow in the ground of thy heart.
Yea, thou cou^est the (...) these, but as the the thing of M^ and Cu^. But thou
shall once (...) (and dea^ly pay for it, either with tears, or (...)) that
Christians Christians bound to shi^ ou^ as lights, by a holy conversation: to
glorify God, and (...) others. And that only to refrain evil; except thou
hate i^ also, (...) do the contrary good, is to be evil still: because
honesty witho^ pi^ is but as a body without an head: Yea, without a Soul. And
that when the ^uth of obedience, and power of (...) is wanting: there is no
difference be^een an (...)* and an (...); a circum ^sed Hebrew, and (...) (...)
ised Philistine* (...) baptized english man, and an unwashen Turk: except that
such a Christian is in (...) ^ar (...) condition, then the worst of (...):
because (...) against me^y, the abundance of means, and many wa^ings which
(...) (...)* ^or ordinary disobedience, in the time of (...) and (...) of
Christ's call, in the abundance of means, is a great deal (...), (...) the
commission of greater sins in the days and places of (...): when, and where
the like me^ are wanting* (...) (...). 15 2^. and 9. 41. Jerusalem is said by
our (...), to (...) (...): (...) the Sodomites in Hell. Now if we ju^ie (...),
(as (...) they were never convinced that Christ was the (...), (...) from God
to re^me the world) (...) we shall be love* (...) H^ll, the either the Sol^s
or the Jews. For we are so much the worse; by how much we might, and should
have been better.

CHAP. XVII.
1.. BUt least (...) have not yet spoken enough to convince and shame thee: I
will show what a Christ^ the* (...).

All thy Religion is either superstition, or (...), or Hypocrisy: as I could
l^ely and plentifully demonstrate. And i^ were a good deed to set down, or
(...) a (...) or all thy (...), (...), (...), and superstitious (...): which
thou (...) childishly (...) confidence in: and tell the (...) of the^. And I
could find in my heart to do it; but a touch will be sufficient, having
already said more th^n enough; were it spoken to one not (...), and inco^gible.

2.. To pa^y the most, and give you one instance of ten: Instead of serving God
(...) spirit, (...) ((...) all that are wise hearted; do live, and believe and
(...), and (...), and hope, and fear, and love, and worship God in such (...)*
as his Wor^ prescribes: thou servest God by the precepts of men, and (...)
displeasure, as thou breakest their traditions. Yea, the (...) more zealous,
for a bare vizard of Discipline, then for soundness of Reformation, or
Doctrine: Or all for Ceremonies, and circumstance: not at all for substance. An
apparent Hypocrite, thou look to small things; as the Cross, Surpl^e. Holy
doyes, etc. which are but the commandments of men; and overlookest the great
things of Gods L^e, as the Sabbath, the ^st and second Commandment; the due
administration of the Word and Sacraments. But O simple soul! that art not
able to make a difference between Gods Laws, and (...) ^aditions. But like
that Fool, thou think thy self as fast bound with a Rush, as with a Rope.
Yea, thou did when time was, honor the Prela^es, more then thou honoredst
God, and stoo^est more upon their Ecclesiastical C^ous, then his divine com man
is: and fearedst more their High Commission, then thou fearedst Hell. Thou art
worse then those Hypocrites, the Scribes and Pharisees, who made conscience,
and were very punctual in tything of Mint, Annis, and Cummin: while they
neglected the weightier matters of the Law; as judgment, and mercy, and
fidelity, without any straining of their consciences. For Mint, and Annis, and
Cummin, were enjoined by God himself, as well as those greater matters. Yea,
thou do worse then strain at Gnats, and swollow Camels; stumble at strawes,
and leap over blocks. For thou art more severe against the breach of an
Holy Day; (which had its rise from I^ollatrous Heathens, and Papists; and not
from Gods Word) especially Christmas day; then for the breach of the Sabbath.
And make far more conscience of keeping Holy days, then of keeping those
days holy. The precept of Lent, thou more strictly observest; then any in the
Decalogue. Neither should it be better here, then it is in Rome, where the
Jews, enemies to the very name of Christ, do live in peace: but the faithful
Christian^ are burned: might thou, and such other formal Hypocrices as thou
art, have their wills.

3.. Again, thou think thy self sanctified by outward performances: and
preferrest outward privileges, before inward graces: being like those
Hypocrites, Jer. 7. 4. who enjoying the Oracles of God, and having received the
cognizance of circumcision; could boastingly cry ou^, the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord: when they even hated the Lord of that Temple, Esaias 66.
3. 4.

Thou have a form of godliness; but in that thou denyest the power thereof;
thou art the worse for it. Thou drawest ne^re unto God with thy mouth, and
honor him with thy lips: but because thy heart is far from him, ^hou art
styled an Hypocrite, both by Esaias, Chap. 29. 1^. and our s^viour Christ, Mark,
7. 2. to 14. Math. 15. 7. to 10. And well thou deservest to (...) styled: for
there is as much difference between thee, and what then pretendest, and
think thy self to be: as there was between David, and Michaels Image of
Goats hair.

4.. Again, thou art notoriously superstitious: for wanting the true fear of
God, and the fear of sin; which would dispell all other fears: thou art
grievously, and perpetually perplexed, and troubled with, false, fond, and
foolish fears. As for instance, Thou most fordidly, and slavishly fear, and
obervest; the flying of fowls, the signs of Heaven, the crossing of an Hair,
the croaking of a Rave^, the howling of a Dog, the dreaming of dead friends:
perhaps eating of an Egg in Len^, or flesh on a Friday, racks thy Conscience.
Childermas day, the Salt sell or falling toward* thee, or stumbling at a
Threshold; presages strange things to thee. Or not crossing thy bre^st before
thou go abroad. And what E^ra Pater speaks, is more surer to be accomplished
then Christ's Prophecy in the Revela^ion. Yea, thou art so besotted, and
bewitched with this kind of superstition, and Idolatry, Witch-chraft rather)
that thou think thou prosperest better, in observing these divilish
fopperies; then if thou should serve God: Like those Idollatrous Jews, Jer.
44. who told the Prophet, that they had found by experience, that their serving
of God had undone them: whereas, when they burned Incense un^o the Queen of
Heaven; and powered out drink Offerings unto her, and made Cakes to worship her:
They, their Sons, their Kings, and their Princes; had plenty of all things,
were well, and saw no evil. But when ever they left her, to worship the true
God, they wanted all things, and were consumed by Famine, Sword, etc. Jer. 44.
15. to 20. Here was a whims^e able to make the Prophet sick to hear it: And
yet thus it fares with thee, touching what I have named, and many the like,
which I forbear, or rather (...) ashamed to name. Nor can thou deny; but
thou do absolutely fear, that thy serving of God, would prove thine undoing.

CAAP. XVIII.
1.. THou do indeed frequent the House of God; at least in the forenoon,
accompanied with a great part of thy Family. Yea, thou will join with the
Congregation, in praying, singing, and hearing; and therein seen more devoute;
in lifting up thine eyes, elevating thy voice, sighing, etc. then ordinary.
Again, if Authority command a ^ast to be kept; thou will observe it with the
rest of thy Neighbors: yea, with those Hypocritical Jews, Esaias 58. 5. thou will hang d^n thy head like a Bu^rush; when yet thy heart is lofty enough. And
fall thou will from meat by all means; which is but the shell, o^ ^utside of
fasting: but not from sin, the kernel, or soul thereof. When thou hear
the name of Jesus read, (be it but the Son of Syr^ck) thou doffest thy ^at,
bowest thy Knee, and perhaps scrapest such a ^g, as shall disturb the whole
Parish. When the Gospel is read, (after the old manner,) thou stand up all
the while: (but fittest prayer time.) And so when the Creed was wont to be
pronounced, or rehearsed; which denotes, that then wilt be ready to justify,
stand too, and maintain those Cannons of thy faith, against all opposers; when
none oppose them more then thy self. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, thou
so adorest: that the only receiving it, makes thee as holy as David: though
thou differest not from a Beast, more then in speaking. Then wilt sing in the
words of the Psalm^st, Unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my soul, Psalm 25. 1.
when thy soul can no more mount up in meditation of heavenly things, then a
Cow is fit to fly. Again, thou cryest out, As the heart brayeth after the
Rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee O God, Psalm. 42. 1. Thy word is
more sweet unto my mouth, then the honey, and the honey Comb, etc. Psalm. 119.
when thou more regardest the getting of five shillings in money; then the joy
of the Holy Ghost, or the peace of conscience: and more prisest the filling of
thy Barnes, and Belly, then the bread, and water of life; Or the light of Gods
countenance. For all thou do, is only in formality, and out of custom. Thou
prayest, that Christ's king dome may come; and his will be done on ^earth, as it
is in Heaven: when thou h^test nothing more, then to be governed by his Laws,
or ruled by his Septer. Finally,

2.. Thou adorest Christ so often as thou come to Church; as it were with an
Ave Rex in thy mouth: but scoftest, and jeerest at him in his Members, when
thou art out of it.

For notwithstanding all this thy profession, zeal, and devotion: none more
malicious, in scossing at Religion: or in accusing, and persecuting the godly,
then thy self. Nor can any place, except H^ll, yield a worse enemy to the
cross of Christ then thou art* had thou power, and opportunity (...) effect
thy wicked will, and wishes. Neither was our Savior in j^t, when he prefe^ed
Thieves, and Harlots; before the Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders: who we^ me^
ju^ of thy temper, Mat. 21. 31. and (...). (...).

I (...) that (...) of other sins, thou may fall short of, and be more
(...) the^ Thieves, Harl^ts, ^kards: But in this sin, thou art inferior
(...) n^e Or thou may differ from them in many things; but n^r in this: as
so* instance, (...), and Ishmael, Moab, and the Haga^, Ge^ (...), and A^n
Am^eck, and the Philist^s; the men of Ty^e, and Ashar, had (...) G^ds: yet all
conspired against the true God, Psalm. ^3. 5. to (...). (...) (...) Ephraim, and
Ephraim, against Man^s; but both against I^ah. ^od, and Pilate; two Enemies
will agree, so it be (...) Christ^ (...) ^ill fall in one with another, ^o fall
out wi^h God The Sad^ces, Pharisees, and Herodians, were Sectaries of diverse,
and ad^erse f^ctious: (...) all of them join against our Savi^ur, Mat. (...).
The (...), (...), A^exandrians, Sile^s, and As^s, diff^r they never (...), will
join (...) dispute against Stephen, Acts (...). 9. The lust of the Rulers was
envy, Hered, was curiosity, Pilate: popularity, Judas cove^eousnesse, the
Soldiers cruelty: yet were they all consederate against Jesus* All the ^ble of
the Jews hated Christ, (and cried out, let him be (...) (...) non^ like the
Scribes, Pharisees, Priests* and Elde^s. So now with (...) all the are
unregenerate, pr^phane, and loose persons, civil, and moral men; do
inveterately hate Christ's members for his sake, and s^uily entreat them, but
none like those, that have a ^orme of godl^nesse, and deny the po^er ^here of.
That serve God according to the prece^ of men; as do fo^ll (...), civil
Iusticiaries, and (...) Ministers. For if you obse^ Religion has e^ver (...)
most from those which pretend, and (...) up^old her. And n^ne have been s^
bitter enemies to the g^y, as tho^ that (...) the same Faith, and Religion with
them, as almost all t^ (...) (...) h^ve written, (...) complained What says
Justin Mar^yr of hi^ (...) the Cr^fix, that are the greatest enemie^ to the ^ss
of Christ. And (...) of his; They wor^ the dead saints, in a cold profession;
while they worry the living in a cruel ^secution. And Sr. Austin of his? a
Christian in name will most maliciously ^e at a Christian indeed. And Nazianzen
(...) his; Christ is ^oned by ma^er, the^ are called Christians. So that if the
Bramble were made the King (...) Trees, the Vine could not meet with worse
usage. And the reason is, ^hen sincerity is wanting, the nearer the ^ine with
any opposition, the greater Eclips. Who was the greatest enemy to Christ? but
his greatest ^end, even one of his household Chaplains: And who but Ieremiahs
familiers, wa^ched for his halting. Of all the persecuting Emperors, none were
(...) serpentinely malicious, as Julian, who had formerly professed himself a
Christian. Those that are openly profane, do more publicly profess their
enmity; and make a greater noise like Shimei; but civil and mor all (...)
resemble Balam, who would no^ curse, but he would advise: and his counsel is
worse then a curse: for his curse had ^int none but himself, whereas his
counsel cost the blood of four and twenty thousand Israelites; which may most
fitly be applied to our late condition: for who have been the ince^diaries of
this bloody, and worse then savage civil war, in all the three Kingdoms; not
men of the Sword, not uncivil ones: but principally the learned Prelates,
Civilians, and Moralists; merely out of a mortal hatred, and enmity which they
bare against zeelous Christians, and Orthodox Ministers; their sincerity, the
power of Religion and Reformation; though they cunni^gly pretended the good of
the Church; and of the Protestant Religion. Ulisses contrived all, though
Dio^edes must go through with it: the one played the part of Achitophel, the
other of Doeg; whereof the best was a Belial.

CHAP. XIX.
1.. ANd so much for Explication, and Confirmation: Now a word or two of
Application, (^eserting the principal until there conc^usion) for it remains,
that e^ch formal Hypocrite, and civil Iusticiary, looks himself in this
Glas^, or tryes himself by this Touchstone. As no Glass can more lively
represent your faces, then this Book does your (...)... Nor did the Prophet
deal more plainly with Hazael, (in showing him that wickedness to be in him,
which he could not see, nor believe to be in himself) then I have dealt with
you. So that you can no longer be deceived, except you desire to deceive your
selves. You cannot possible after all this, think your selves to be
Christians, or religious in the least: however you have formerly sancied, or
flattered your selves For consider I beseech you, that there are but two sorts
of men in the World; Believers, or Unbeleevers; regenerate, or unregenerate*
(...) of God, or children of the Devil; the seed of the Woman, or the seed of
the Serpent; there is no mean betwixt them: every soul says Chyrs^stome, is
either the Spouse of Christ; or ^e Adul^resse of the Devil. He is either a
branch (...) from Adams stock* hi^ draws sap from that cursed root of death;
or else he is transplanted into the Vine Christ, and draws his Sap from him.

2.. Nor is it hard to know, whether we are the children of God; or the
children of the Devil; since there are more differences between them; then
there are between Men and Beasts: and the rule which the Apostle has given,
Romans 6. 16. is both plain and easy: which makes him say, Know ye not? that
to whom ye yield your selves as servants to obey; his servants ye are, to whom
ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. It
is likewise St. Peter's infallible doctrine, 2 Pet. 2. Of whom a man is
overcome, unto him he is in bondage, verse. 19 And St. Ioh (...), 1 Ioh. 3. In
this are the children of God known, and the children of the Devil: whosoever
does not righ^eousnesse, is not of God; but of the Devil, ver. 8. 10. And
after this manner, does our Savior reason with the Jews, Ioh. 8. Ye are of
your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will ^e. If ye were
Abraham's,, if ye were Gods children: ye would do the works of Abraham, the
will of God, verse. 33. to 48. See then whose Commandments, ye do, Gods or
Satan's. If Satan's, (as I have sufficiently shown, and plentifully proved) then
says St. John, Let no man deceive you through vain words; for he only that
does righteousness is righteous; and he that does unrighteousness, is of the
Devil, 1 John 3. 7, 8.

3.. Now I have shown you in more then a hundredth particulars, how barren, and
unfruitful you are in the works of righteousness; and how active, and
isntrumental you are to serve Satan. And there is scarce one of those signs
but might serve as a sufficient evidence, that you are not as yet become the
child of God by regeneration: that the image of God, by faith in Christ; is
not yet repaired in you. But to repeat and apply each of them particularly, as
it would be endless, so it were also needless. ^ee the Holy Ghost has given
us one sign, that never fails: That is by our L^ve, or hatred ^o the
Brethren, 1 Ioh. 4. Love is of God, and every one that loves, is horn of God,
verse. (...). Yea, not only our selves may know by it, 1 Ioh. 3. We know says
St John, that we are translated from death to life; because we love the the
brethren, ver, 14. But others may likewise know. Ioh. 13. By this shall all men
know, that ye are my Disciples; says our Savior, if ye love one another, ver.
35. that is, if ye love the Godly, because they are godly, even for Christ's
sake; and because they are like Christ in holiness: But so do not you, for
you will hate a man merely for his being holy, as I have proved by many
instances, and your own consciences know: for you could love such a preciseans
person well enough; if he were not conscionable. Yea, thou bear no good
affection to the Ministry, that are the Ambassadors of Christ; but have a
spleen against one for being so, especially if he be a godly Minister, much
more if he be thine own Minister, and speaks home to thy conscience, as
Michaia dealt by Ahab, and John Baptist with Herod. Or in case he will not
admit thee to the Lords Table without trial, or examination: thou will ever
after be his enemy, impeach his credit, and de^aine from him his dues, which is
enough to prove thee a wicked man. For as when Homer had spent many lines in
dispraising the body of Ther^ies; he briefly described his soul thus; That he
was an enemy to Ulisses: So we need say no more of a bad man, then he is an
enemy to his Pastor, if a godly and conscientious one; that is enough to brand
him: and the like ^ouching private Christians: for the very first part of
conversion, is to love them that love God, 1 John 3. 10. as in reason, if the
image of God by faith, were repaired in thee: thou could not but be
delighted with those that ^e like thy self.

4. But this is a small matter with thee, for thou art a traitor to God, and
^st up Arms against all that worship him in spirit, and in truth. Nor do the
only serve Satan, but he works his pleasure in thee, Ephe. 2. 2. 3. He
sells thy heart, Joh. 13, 2. stretches forth thine hands, Revel. 2. 10. and
^pens thy m^uth, Mat. 16. 23. for he speaks in, and by thee, as he did by the
Serpen^, Genesis (...). 1. 4. and it is but his mind, in thy mouth, his heart, in
thy lips: when thou scoffest, or scornest any of Christ's little ones, Mat. 16.
23 Joh. 8. 34. 44. and 12. 31. and 14. 30. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Timothy 2 26. Ephe. 2.
2. 3. Nor can the Devil, put you upon any work, or service like this: For
herchy, viz. in making Religion contemptible: you detain many, from entering
into a religious course: stagger many, who have made some progress in the way:
keep many, from doing the good which they would; or appearing the same which
they are: beat many off from their profession: harden many, and make them
resolve against goodness: intentionally slay many, with death eternal: and so
advance his Kingdom exceedingly, and as much as in you lies, both block up the
way to Heaven; (...) open a flood-gate to all manner of profaneness.

5.. I grant that you know it not (...) as those four hundred of Ahabs
Prophets, in whom this ev^ll spirit spoke; did not know that Satan spoke by
them 1 King. 22. 22 Neither did Judas know, when he eat the sop, that Satan ^nt
ed^o him, and put it in^o his heart to b^tray Christ, Ioh. 13. 2. Neither do
Magistrates (when they cast the servan^s of God into prison) once imagine, that
the Devil makes them his Iaylors: but he does so; whence that phrase of the
Holy Ghost; The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, Revel. 2. 10. They
are his instruments, but he is the principal Au^r. Neither did Aranias, and
Saphira once think that Satan had filled their hearts, or put that lie into
their mouths; which they were stricken dead for, Act, 5. Yet the Holy Ghost
tells us plainly, that he did so, verse. 3. Nor our Grand mother Eve in
Paradise, had not the least suspicion, that it was Satan which spoke to her by
the Serpent. Nor Adam, that it was the Devils min^e in her mouth, his heart in
her lips, when tempted to eat the forbidden fruit. Nor did Dav^d once dream,
that it was Satan which moved him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Much
less did Peter, who so dearly loved Christ imagine, that he was set on by
Satan, to temp^ his own Lord and Master with those affectionate words; Master
pitty^ thy self: For if Christ had pitied himself* Peter and all the (...)
(...) perished. Yet he was so, which occasioned Christ to answer him; Get thee*
behind me Satan, Mat. 16. 22. 23. Yea, poor ignorant (...), you are so far
from knowing it, or being acquainted with Satan's ^iles, Ephe. 6. 1^. (...)
though you fight under Satan's Banner, against Go^s people, ye^ y^ (...) your
selves to be (no^ Sata^s, but) Gods servants. Ye^, you think^ you do^. God good
service in it as the Holy Ghost (...) Job. 16. 2. Gal 1. 13. 14. Phil. 3. 6.

6. Yea, worse then that: you shall never know it, but go on i^ thinking your
selves (...) (...) goo^ (...); w^ile you are indeed very A^ists, and Devils.
You (...), and persecu^e the conscion^ble; an^ (...) the^ ^o the death, eve^
for the grac^s of Gods spirit which shines in them; and yet cou^ your selves
Relig^ous: until you he^rken more to wh^ Go^ speaks in his W^d, (...) to the
^ter. Until you are led by a be^er guide; (...) cust^, or example, or carnal
reason, or good inventions, or the dictates of your deceitful hears. For all
these will deceive you, until you have the (...), a^ grace to apply to your
selves, what is delivered unto you out of the word: For till then, as a Child
when he beholds his own face ^n a Glass; he think^ he sees another Chil^ face,
and not his own: so will it fa^e with you, touching what I have hitherto said.
Yea, the whole B^ble, all the Sermons you here, the check^ of your ow^e
consciences, and the m^ions of God spirit, will be altogether ineffectuall; as
you know they have proved hitherto, which is the reason that you trust your
self so m^h, an^ know your self so little.

CHAP. XX.
1.. FOr notwithstanding you are guilty of all I have laid to your charge
whereof one sin is soul Ma^her; which will cost you dear one day, either in
tears, or in torment. No man under Heaven, thinks better o^ himself. For as
M^cha could d^ingly say, Now I know that the Lord will (...) good unto me,
seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. Or as those Hypocrites before spoken of,
Jer. 7. 4. could applaud themselves for their outward work^ and privileges,
Esaias 66. 3 4. So will thou most shamefully, though tho^ do even renounce both
Christ, and thy Baptizme, in persecuting him, an^ all that sincerly profess
(...), as I have abundanly shown.

2.. True, as the pretended M^her, that stole away the live Child, 1 King 3.
16. to 28. prosessed before King Solomon; a^ great love to it, and pleaded as
hard for it, as the natural M^ther could d^e: and yet so little did she care
for it, that she wa^ content to have (...) divi^d: which showed plainly that
love of strife, and envy to the true Mother, prevailed (...) with her then true
affection to the thing striven for: so thou pretendest as gre^ love to Christ,
and the true Religion, as their best and truest friends (...) when it comes to
the trial, they have no greater enemy. For for matter of Reli^ion, thou art
much like the ancient Romans: whom a sensualist would have taken to be very
religious, and conscionable: for they al^ed of ^he service of all Gods; and to
that end built a Temple to all Gods, ^alling it Pan^beon: yet it was evident
they were not, because they would never ad^it of the true God, to wit Jehovah.
So thou, (and in indeed all (...) at large) art very religious: For thou will
conform to any Religion the State shall establish, were it Popery it self: as
when super^, and (...), were ^dvanced in England by Queen Mary did not ninteen,
or rather ninty nine parts of the Land conform to Popery? And would they not
do the like now, if the stream should turn: yes, it is more then probable
they would. And indeed men that scoff at the power of godliness, are for any
Religion; so they may enjoy their i^ities, D^n 3. 7.

3.. Let none object their suffering since the Parliament; and how constant
they are to their principles: For I grant t^y are as stiff as a stake, as
immov^le a^ a R^e, in their resolution against Reformation. That they will ^ick
as close to their wicked, and s^stitious Custo^s, as Clay to a Cart wheel.
Yea, the a^e m^e (...) t^ Sa^n for the most part; then Christ's s^vants are to
him. But if ever a mere ei^ill man suffer for his faith in Christ, and for
(...) sake, (...) have my head cut off. No, they will rather worship a ^alse
wi^h the Israelite^, Exodus 32. 4. O^ a golden Image with the Cha^deans, D^n. 3.
7.

I know diverse will say, (not for want of ignorance in the Scripture) if these
honest, moral men, go not to Heaven: Lord have mercy upon us. And yet Chri^
s^aith, except the most ri^hteous of them, have another righteousness
exceeding their own: they shall never come th^re, Mat. 5. 20. Yea, he plainly
affirms, that Publicans, and ^rlots shall get into Heaven sooner, Mat. 21. 31.
as I showed you befo^. And for further answer, (...) Isaac, if he had not been
(...), would (...) h^ve bl^ssed Jacob for ^sau: nor Jacob, taken (...) for
Rachel if he had not been in the dark. So these, if they were not carnal
themsel^, and so by consequence ignorant of the Scriptures: they would not take
mere ^vill m^n, ignorant, formali, titular, stature, outside Christians, that
have no more of Religion, then a bare shadow; for true and real Christians in
de^d. (...) its a true proverb, the blind (...) many a fly: and all colo^ are
alike (...) him (...) is in the (...).

4 And so (as I suppose) (...) h^ (...) (...) Hypocri^e, and (...) Iusticiary,
have a (...) of themselves. Y^, there is some probability, that I have
convinced them, that they are of the number of those ignorant, unbeleeving,
ungrateful, and wi^ked wretches concerned in the former part of this Treatis^:
However, it will appear plainly enough to others. And truth is truth, as well
when it is (...) ^knowledged, as when it is.

Now these having leave to withdraw, bring hither the M^erly Muck-worm.

Thus the second Division being ended, and yet much room left: that each part
may be several; I take leave to fill up the sheet with the Copy of a Letter,
(...) to a Factor in Forrayne parts: who ill discharged the trust, and
confidence of his deserving Master.
Kind Sir,
WEre there no other ground of my writing, this were enough. I have a public
spirit, and love to do good offices; though I should purchase ill will for my
pains. But the lively resemblance of my self, which I once saw in you, your
making choice (as I supposed) of those true ^ches, that being once had, can
never be lost. And your offering to my view those lives of a rare Author (which
did not a little pleasure me) propounde themselves to me, as a great
engagement. Besides my love too and hopes of you formerly were not greater,
then is now my fear. And possible it is, I may prove another Pho^ion unto you,
who when a friend of his would have cast himself away, suffered him not
saying: I was made thy friend to this purpose. So you have my Apology; or if
you shall further ask why I take this pains? (...) to Levit. 19. 17. Heb. 3.
13. and you have there both my answer and warrant.

You cannot think much, that Mr. N. should acquaint me (of all others) with
what Moneys you have long ought him; and how little conscience you make of
paying thereof.

But that you should so use so good a Master; to whom also you were once bound
by Oath (if you remember) moves wonder in me to astonishment.

To do unto others, as you would have others do unto you, is a point agreed
upon by all, even infi^els that expect not another life; nor once dream that
they have immortal souls. And I need not ask any more, then that you would
ask your own conscience, whether you would be so dealt withal? But here what
I shall speak to you from the mouth of God.

I ^rant the case is common with (...), who believe not that there is a God, a
Heaven, a Hell, a day of judgment: not that every man shall be rewarded
according to his deeds, be they good or evil. But that you should manifest
your self to be such an one, makes me to cry out, O the depth!

Good sir bethink your self, for there is not a more infallible Character of
a wicked man, in all the Book of God. The wicked bo^roweth, but pays not
again, Psalm. 37. 21. As for a good man, he breaks not his promise, though be
be dampnified by the performance, Psalm. 15. 4. You cannot be ignorant, that
with what measure ye meet to others here, God will measure it to you again
he^eafter, Mat. 7. 2. that the Law of God, under the penalty of his curse,
re^uireth ^o restore whatsoever has been committed to you in trust, Levit. 6.
2. 3. N^ub. 5. 6. 7. 8. Nor that there is a flying Roll, a winged curse for him
that gets riches by robbery, and oppression: that shall not only pursue hi^
(...) even enter into his house, and consume it with the timber thereof, and
the (...) thereof, Zach. 5. 3, 4. of which I might heap up instances. As o the
^ultitude of examples of those, that have miserably perished for their
false^ood, and perfidiousnesse, in betraying the trust that they have
underta^en. And this you may boldly build upon; There is no fruit, but shame
and death to be gathered from the forbidden Tree, whatsoever Satan may ^me to
promise.

Nor is it always the lot of those, that care not how they get wealth, to
^ecome rich, Eccle. 9. 11. For get men never so much, without Gods blessing;
even all their getting of great wages, is but ^utting money into a bag with
holes, as the Prophet Haggai speaks, Hag. 16. much more, he that gets
riches, and ^ot by right, Jer. 17. 11. Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it. It is in vain to rise early, and lie down
late, and eat the ^read of carfulness, Psalm. 127. 1. 2. It Is only the
blessing of the Lord, that makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. Yea, have not you ^ound
it so: I dare say, reckon from that very hour, wherein you first resolved to
cozen (if ever you so resolved) and you will find, that you never since
prospered.

Or in case he that resolves to be evil, making no conscience how he comes by
his riches, so he have them; have his hearts desire: his riches prove but the
agravations of his sin, and additions to judgment. For God does not only
with draw his blessing ^om, but even se^d his curse with the riches he
bestows; so that it becomes their bane. He gives is them in wrath, and for
their hurt: as he did a King, and Quails to the Israelites; for which see Hos.
13. 11. Mal. 2. 2. Psalm. 69. 22. Eccle. 5. 13 and 8. 11. 12. I pray turn to the
places, for I cannot stand to amplify it.

Nor shall he alone (...) the worse; for God has threaned to bring plagues
upon the Children, and childrens children of such an one; unto the fourth
generation, Exodus 20. 5. and more particularly, that they shall be vagabonds,
and beg their bread: so that none shall extend mercy, or favor unto them,
Psalm. 109. 7. to 17. God will make those Children beggars, for whose sakes the
Father has made many beggars.

Nor is this all, in any degree: For there is no end of plagues to the wicked
man, Prove. 24. 20. Without paying, or restoring (so far as a man is able) there
is no being saved: for as humility is the repentance of pride, abstinence of
surfe it, alms of coveteousnesse, love of malice: so only restitution, is the
repentance of injustice. And he that dies before restitution, dies in his
sin^e; and he that dies in his sin, cannot ^e saved. And indeed repentance,
without restitution; is as if a These should take away your purse, ask you
pardon, say he is sorry for it; but keeps it still: in which case you would
say, he did bu^ mock you.

Now what shall it profit a man, to gain the whole world, if he gain Hell
with it; and loose both Heaven, and his own soul? Mat 16. 26. What is it to
flour^h for a time, and perish for ever?

A man would think, the A^han paid dear enough for his goodly Bibilonish
ga^ment, the two hundredth (...) of silver, and his we^ge of gold which he
coveted, and took away: when He, his Sons, and Daughte^ his Oxen, and
Asses; his Sh^ep, and Ten^; and all that he had, were stoned with stones, and
burnt with fire: if that was all he suffered, I^sh. 7. ^8. to 26. But to be
cast into Hell, to lie for ever in a bed of quenchless s^nes; is a far greater
punishment. For the soul of all su^ferings, is the su^ferings of the soul;
and in reas^, if Dives be torm^ed in endless (...), for not giving his own
goods to them that needed, Luke 16. 21. 23. Mat, 25. 41. to 43. What shall
become o^ him, that takes away other men's? If that servant in the Gospel, was
bound to an everlasting prison, the only challeng^d his own debt; for that he
had not pity on his fellow, as his M^ster had pity on him: whether shall they
be ca^t, that unjustly vex their Neighbors, quarrel for that which is none of
theirs, and lay title to another man's propriety? If he she have judgment
without mercy, that she^es not mercy, Jam. 2. 13. What shall become of
subtraction, and Rapine, Psalm. 109. 11. Oh the madness of men! that cannot be
hired to hold their singer for one minu^e, ^n the we^k flame of a farthing
Candl^; knowing it so intolerable and yet for tri^les, will plunge themselves
body and soul, into those endless and everlasting flames of h^ll fire.

If a K^g threatens a (...) to the Dungi^n, to the R^cke, to the wheel his
bones tremble, a terrible p^lsie runs through all his joints: But let God
threaten the unsufferable tortures of burning Toph^th; we stand unmoved,
undaunted. Bu^ he not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6. 7. And it is a
fearful thing to fall into the (...) of the liv^ng God; who is a consuming
fi^e, Heb. 12. 2^.

True, He that makes gain, blesses himself, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
10. 3. Yea, if he can, (I mean the cunning M^h. vilian, whom the De^il and
coveteousnesse has blinded) any way advantage himself, by another ruin; and
do it politickly: how will he h^gge himself, and applaud his own wisdom!
Hab. 1. 13. to the end. But by his leave, he mistakes the greatest solly, for
the greatest wisdom: For while he cozens other men of their Estates; Sin and
Satan cozens him of his soul, see Ioh 20. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 8. 10. And woofull
gain it is, that comes with the souls loss. And how can we think those men
to have reasonable souls, that esteem money above themselves! That prefer a
little base peife; before God, and their own salvation.

Nor are their any such fools, as these crafty knaves: For as Aus^in speaks;
If the Holy Ghost term that ri^h chur^e in the Gospel a fool^, that only laid
up-his own Goods Luke 12. 18, 20. find out a^me for him that takes away other
men's?

These things considered, (viz.) the curse of God here, both upon the pa^y, and
his posterity: and the eternal wrath of God hereafter; together with the folly
and madness of preferring Earth; yea Hell, to Heaven; time to eternity, the
body before the s^ule; yea, the out-ward estate, before either soul or body)
exempt your self out of the number of those fools, as little Zacheus did:
what you owe, pay it; If you have wronged any man of ought, restore it; though
you part with a great part of your Estate. Yea, admit you shall leave your
self a beggar, do it: for (as you see) there is a necessity of it: Yea, there
is wisdom, and gain in it; for when all is done, how to be saved is the best
plot: And better it is to cast your evil gotten Goods over-boord, then make
shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience, read Job. 20. from verse. 5. The
Merchant will cast even his ^ullayne into the Sea, to save himself. And he
that is troubled with an aching tooth, finds it the best way to pluck it quite
out.

Here I might show you, both from the Word, and a world of instances that
restoring and giving rather then sinning, is the way to grow rich; I mean in
pecu^ary riches, see Prove. 11. 24. and 28. 27. Mark. 10 29, 30. Mat. 6. 33. 2
Cor. 9. 6, 9, 10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. and 27. 6. Deuteronomy. 7. 13. to 16. and 28. 1.
to 14. 2 King. 6. 25. to Chap. 7. verse. 17. Psalm. 34. 9. 10. and 37. 26, 28.
and 112. 3. and 37. 3, 4, 5. Luke 18. 29, 30. M^rk 4. 24. Hag. 1. 2. Chapters,
Mal. 3. 10, 11 12.

But I fear least addition in this case, should bring forth substraction: Yea,
if this weary you not, its well; for I may conjecture, that time, and the
deceitfulness of riches have wrought in you a change, since we were first
acquainted. Wherefore before I go any further, a question would be asked.

Does coveteousnesse rain in you? Are you yet bewitched with the love of money?
Is your heart rivited to the Earth? Are you already inslaved to this sin? do
you make Gold your God? and Commodity the ste^ of your Conscience. For if so,
all labor hitherto is lost; and all that can more be said, will be to no
purpose: Yea, it is to no more end to admonish you, then to knock at a deaf
man's door, or a dead man's grave, and that for sundry reasons.

First, Because, as their is no colors so contrary, as white and black. No
elements so disagreeing, as fire and water: so there is nothing so opposite to
grace, and conversion; as coveteousnesse. And as nothing so alienates a man's
love from his virtuous Spouse, as his inordinate affection, to a filthy
strumpet: so nothing does so far separate, and diminish a man's love to God, and
heavenly things: as our inordinate affection to the World, and earthly things.
Yea, there is an absolute contrariety, and impossibility between the love of
God, and the love of Money: Ye cannot serve God and Riches, Luke 16. 13. All
those that doted upon Purchases, and Farms, and Oxen; with o^e consent, made
light of it, when they were bid to the Lords supper, Luke 14. 16. to 21. The
G^derens, that so highly prised their Hogs: would not admit Christ within their
borders, Luke 8. 37. Judas that was coveteous and loved money, could not love
his Master; and therefore sold him. when Demas began to embrace this present
World: he soon forsook Paul, and his soul saving Sermons, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

If a man's affections be downward, his hope and inheritance cannot be above.
And they that expect no life after this, will make as much of this as they can.

Secondly, If a coveteous man do repent, he must restore what he has
wrongfully gotten, which perhaps may amount to half, or it may be three parts
of his Estate at a clap: which to him is as hard, and as harsh an injunction,
as that of God to Abraham, Genesis 22. 2. Sacrifice thy Son, thine only Son
Isaac. Or as that of our Saviors to the young man, Luke 18. 22. Sell all that
ever thou have, and distribute unto the poor: And is there any hope of his
yielding No, Coveteousnesse is Idolatry, Ephe. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5.

And Gold is the coveteous man's God: and will he part with his God, a certainty
for an uncertainty? No. A godly man, is content to be poor in outward things,
because his purchase is all inward: but nothing except the assurance of
heavenly things, can make us willing to part with earthly things. Neither can
he contemn this life, that knows not the other: and so long as he keeps the
weapon (evil gotten goods) in his wound, and resolves not to pluck it (...)
by restoring: how is it possible he should ever he cured? Whence it is that we
shall sooner hear of an hundredth Malefactors contrition at the Gallows; then of
one coveteous Mizers in his bed. To other sins, Satan tempts a man often: but
coveteousnesse is a fine, and recovery upon the purchase. Then he is sure of
him; as when a Jailer has locked up his Prisoner safe in a Dungion, he may go
play.

Thirdly, Coveteous men, are blind to all dangers; deaf to all good
instructions: they are besotted with the love of money, as Birds are with their
have. Yet they resolve against their own conversion: The S^es and ^harisees who
were co^ e^us: shut^ (...), stopped their ears, and (...) w^doed their hearts
against all our Savior did, or said. Yea, they (...) at his preaching. And of
all sorts of sinners, that Christ preached unto: he was never scorned nor mocked
but by them; when he preached against coveteousness, Luke 16. 14. And well may
rich wordlings, scoff at Christ's poor Ministers: when they think themselves
as much wiser, as they are richer. And commonly, the cunning Politi^ion is
wiser then his Pastor; or indeed any of his plain dealing Neighbors; by five
hundredth, if not five thousand pounds.

These things considered, no wonder that our savior expressly affirms, that
it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of needle, then for a rich man
(that is a coveteous rich man) to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 18.
25. and the Apostle, That no coveteous man, can look for any inheritance in
the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephe. 5. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.

Secondly, Hence it is, that in all the Word of God, we read not of one that
was coveteous, but Hypocrites: as Laban, and Naball, and Judas, and the rich
Fool, and the Pharisees. For though Zacheus (before he met with Christ) knew
nothing but to scrape: yet so soon as Christ had changed his heart, all his
mind was set upon restoring, and giving, Luke 12. 8. which also was a (...),
(...) his curing of him that was sick of me deal Palsy, M^. 9. 2. to 7 And
Christ did some miracles, which none of his Apostles were able to do, Mat. 17.
16.

And indeed, it is a sin so damnable, and inconsistent with grace: that of
all sins, the children of God have cleared themselves from coveteousnesse,
when they would approve their integrity before God and Men Thus did S^el, 1 Samuel 12. 3 and Jeremiah, Chap. 15. 10. and Paul, Acts 20. 33. and Ioh, Chap.
31. 24, 28. and Agar, Prove. 30. 8. and David, Psalm 4 6, 7. and Solomon, 1 King.
3. 5, 9. and Zacheus, and in fine all that s^ue God, 1 Cor. 7. 30. 31, 32.
Their expressions are very remakeable: but I may not stand so repeat them.

We find many acts of deception in the the Saints infirmity in those acts, But
coveteousnesse, that idolatrous sin we find not. Once Noah was drunk with
wine, never drunk with the World. Lot was twice incestuous, never coveteous.
Peter denied his Master thrice: it was not the love of the World, but rather
the fear of the World that brought him to it: for he had denied the World,
before he denied his Master. Once David was overcome with the flesh, never with
the World. Grace may stand with some transient acts of naughtiness, but never
with coveteousnesse: those were acts, avarice is an habit.

Coveteousnesse is ^at idolatry, which makesit out of measure sinful, and
more hamous then any other sin, as appears, Col. 3. 5. Ephe. 5. 5. Ioh. 31.
24, 28. Jer. 17. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. Fornication is a soul sin; but nothing
to this: that pollutes the body, but covereousnesse defiles the soul: and the
like of other sins. Yea, it is such a fordid, and damnable sin; that it
ought not once to be named among Christians, but with detestation, Ephe. 5. 3.
Nor ought coveteous persons to be admitted into Christian society, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

Thirdly, From hence it is; that the whole Bible, all the Serons men hear; yea,
the checks of their own consciences, and the motions of Gods spirit,
judgments, mercies, and what else can be named, prove altogether ineffectuall.
And that their is so small a part of the world, scarce one of an hundredth; that
runs not a whoring after this Idol: and is not in too great a degree
coveteous. That from the least, even unto the greatest, every one is given unto
coveteousnesse, and to deal salsly, ser. 6. 13. and 8. 10. (For I may speak
it with sear and trembling) where shall we find a just Cato, Romans 13. 7. Where
can we meet with a sincere ^ngle heatred* Nathaniel, in whose spirit there is
no (...), John 1. 49. where with a Job, an upright, and just man, Joh 1. 1.
Where with a Samuel, that can be acquitted by himself in private, by others in
public, by God in both, 1 Samuel 12. 3. where with a Paul, that can say I have
coveted no man's silver, nor gold, Acts 20. 33. and 24. 16. where with one that
does unto all others, as he would have others do unto him, as our savior
requires, Mat. 7. 12. Where is a Jonathan, 1 Samuel 23. 16. 17. or an Eliezer,
Genesis 15. 2. to be heard of, that is not troubled at, but can rejoice in their
welfare by whom themselves are deprived of great honor, and Revenues. O that I
could be acquainted with three such men.

And yet justice is the mistress of all virtues; and the truest trial of a
good man. For as the Touchstone tryes Gold, so Gold tryes men: and there is
little or no danger of that soul, which will not bite at a golden hook.

Ministers wonder that their Sermons take no better; That among so many Arrows,
none should sit the mark: but God tells us the reason, Ezekiel. 33. They sit
before thee, and hear thy words: but their heart goes after their
coveteousnesse, verse. 31. O this golden Devil, this Diana has a world of
worshippers: For how to gain, is every man's dream from sun, to sun, so long
as they have one foot out of the grave. Yea, it destroys more souls, then all
other sins put together, as the Apostles intimates, 1 Timothy 6. 10. But were
men so wise, as they think themselves: Yea, did they but truly love
themselves, and covet to be rich indeed, and not in conceit only: they would
both know and believe, that better is a little with righteousness, then great
Revenues without equity, Prove. 16. 8. And (to omit all that has been formerly
said) that ill gotten goods, lie upon the conscience, as raw meat upon a sick
stomach; which will never let a man be well, until he h^th cast it up again
by ^estitution. That sin arms a man against himself; and our pe^ce ever
ends with our innocence: That guilt occasions the conscience, many a secret
wringe; and gives the heart many a sore lash. Or if Satan finds it
advantageous, to lull us a sleep for a time: yet when death besiedgeth the
body, he will not fail to beleag^ the soul: and that then their will be more
ease in a nest of Hornets, then under the sting of such a tormenting
conscience. And certainly, did you know what a good conscience, and the peace
of God which passes all understanding is; you would think it more worth, then
all the worlds wealth, multiplied as many times, as there be sands on the sea
shore* that any thing, that every thing were too small a price for it. That
things themselves, are in the invisible world: in the world visible, but their
shadows only. And that whatsoever wicked men enjoy, it is but as in a dream:
that their plenty is but like a drop of pleasure; before a river of sorrow, and
displeasure: and whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery, before a
river of mercy and glory. And lastly, That shallow honesty will prove more
profitable in the end, then the profound quicksands of craft and policy.

Wherefore let your conversation be without coveteousnesse, and be con ent with
that you have (I mean remaining, after you have faithfully, and impartially
given to every man his own.) For God has promised, never to leave or forsake
you, if you will rely upon him, in the use of lawful means only, Heb. 13. 5.
And (with which I will conclude) bethink your self now I beseech you, rather
then when it will be too l^e; when the Drawbridge is taken up, and when it
will vex every vein of your heart; that you had no more care of your soul.

POSTSCRIPT, OR, A necessary advertizment about Reading and Hearing.
Courteous Reader.
IF Thomas Aquinas, could utterly spoil in one minute, what Albertus Magnus
had bestowed thirty years study, and pains upon. Or if Hero^us, an obscure
and base fellow, could easily in one night, destroy the ^mple of Diana at
Ephesus; which was two hundredth and twenty years ^n building, of all Asia; at
the cost of so many Princes, and beautified with the labors, and cunning of so
many excellent worke-men. Well may Satan (who wants neither strength, subtilty,
nor malice;) find out a way to make void, fruitless, and frustrate what any
Author, with incomparable pains, and ^dy, shall be able to contrive.

Nor can his so prevailing, be thought any disparagement to the best: when with
one lie to our first Parents, he made fruitless, what God himself ^d preached
to them immediately before, Genesis 3. 4. 5. Only I hold my self bound, for the
benefit of such as it may concern (least it fare with them, as it ^d with the
old World about the good counsel of Noah, Genesis 6. and 7. chap. with Lots Sons
in law, touching the good advice of their Father, Genesis 19. 14. With Rehoboam,
concerning the sage counsel of those Ancients, 1 King. 12. 8. And with
Zedekia, and his Princes; about the Prophetical, and Pathetical persuasions of
Jeremiah, 2 Chro. 36. 12. Who did not more slight, what was at present told
them for their benefit: then they repented themselves, afterward when it was
to late) to advertize them of two things.

The first is, that they would not turn their backs, upon those Books and
Sermons, which show them their sins, and the punishment of them mo^ clearly:
Because the viewing of our Counting Books, is the best means to keep us from
miscarring in our Estates. That they will not be so prone to dislike what
crosses their profits, or pleasures: as for the most part they are, especially
if it be delivered with power: as I have known many, when enjoined to read a
Book, or bear a Minister preach, which in probability, migtht have converted
them, and saved their souls: resemble a sullen Patient, who after he is
launced, and searched, flies from his Chyrurgion, before the binding up of his
wound, not suffering him to proceed to a perfect cure: alleging, that they
were so touched to the quick; that the truth was, they durst not hear, or read
the same any further, which is an argument, they prefer the pleasing of their
senses, before the saving of their souls: and that they like a thing the
worse, for being the better: whereas if they were wise, they would love their
Monitor so much the more, by how much the more they smart: Because wounds
cannot be cured, without they be searched to the quick: and what wise Patient,
but desires that physic; which is most proper for his disease, and will
soonest, cure him? And without a discovery of our disease: how should there be
a recovery of our health?

The sight of our filihyness is the first step toward cleanness. Wholesome
medicines will for the present bite, and offend: yet afterward, they bring
health and pleasure. And certainly it is better to hear of their sins, then
be damned for them. The Law Waspe like, stings shrewdly; but Satan that Hornet,
will sting much worse. And he that will not at the first hand, buy good
counsel cheap: shall at the second hand, buy repentance over dear. For to
fly from the light, and reject the means, as it ever argues a guilty
conscience: (For none fear, shun, and hate the light, but evil doers, John 3.
19, 20, 21.) so it leaves men without hope. That sin is past cure, which turns
from, and refuses the cure, Deu. 17. 12. Pro. 29. 1. In reason if those
murderers of the Lord of life, Acts (...). 23. had refused to hear Peter's
searching Serm^n, they had never been pricked in their hearts; never been saved,
verle 37. 41. And take this for a rule; is ever you see a drowning man refuse
help, conclude him a wilful murderer. But they that have no reason, will hear
none; neither is any light sufficient, where the eyes are held through
unbelief, and prejudice.

The second thing, that most Hearers, and Readers would be minded, and
admonished of is; that when they hear Sermons, or meet with Books; that with
Gods blessing, are of singular use, both to undeceive the deceived, and to
pluck sinners out of Satan's snares; that are not inferior to any man's
compositions, or discourses; either for matter, or method, argument, or
elegancie: For moving the will, working upon the affections, or speaking home
to the heart and conscience: that they would not suffer Satan, by the tongues
of any; so to forestall them with prejudice against the Authors; as to dislike
their labors against their own reason and judgment; and refuse to read or
hear them. The case of many among the Hebrews, touching Paul; who were so
forestalled with prejudice against his person; that he durst not fi^ his name
to what he wrote unto them, in that rare Epistle: Least finding his name in the
frontispiece, they might hapily reject the same, and not vouchsafe to read it.
Yea, he was so generally slighted, by many of the Corinthians, and others Acts
17. 18. 2 Cor. 10. 10. That least their prejudice against his person, should
cause them to slight whatsoever he either spoke, or wrote unto them: (the
better to vindicate himself) he spends almost three whole Chapters, in his
own praises, 2 Cor. 10. 11, and 12. chapters: And yet the worst they had to
say of him, was; His Letters are weighty, and powerful; but his bodily
presence is weak, and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10.

And in the very same manner, were the Jews prejudiced against our ^aviour,
John 1. 46, and 7, 15, and 8, 57, and 9, 16, 24. Mar. 13. 55. ^^^k 6. 2, 3.
which was the only reason that so few believed in him; ^r received his
Doctrine: but slighted, and contemned whatsoever he did, ^r spoke; as you may
see by the sore quoted places. And no less, were (...) the Apostles slighted:
and their Doctrine disesteemed wheresoever they ^^me: through the like
prejudice, which Satan, and his instruments, had ^rocured to be cast upon them,
as appears plainly by Acts 4. 13.

And whosoever observes it shall find; that if any one preaches, or ^riteth
profitably; with power and authority, whereby Satan's Kingdom (...) like to be
shaken; and by which his servants are disturbed, and terrifi^d; in, and about
their vicious courses: If he shall be more then ordina^^ly crafty, in making
choice of such theames, as may most lively repre^^nt the face of every natural
man's heart to himself. If he have a singular ^^^^iculty in moving the Will,
working upon the affections, and speaking home ^o the heart and conscience:
that so if possible, he may take his hearers, or ^eaders with guile: undeceive
the deceived, and with blessing from above, ^luck sinners out of Satan's snares:
He shall be sure to have some aspersi^n, or imputation cast upon him: whereby
nothing that he shall be able to ^peake, or write; shall be (by sensualists)
regarded: So that infinite are ^he number of those, whom Satan gulls, and
beguiles of their souls this way, as I could multiply instances out of my own
experiance. Nor can man devise a cunninger trick to hinder a sinners conversion.

It is very remarkable, what is observed of one that shall be namelesse. No
man's Books, or Sermons are liked better: (by all sorts of Readers) and yet few
eminent Authors sell worse: hundreds are so taken with them, while they are
hearing or reading them, that they never read the like in all their lives: and
they will instantly buy all his Works, whatever they cost: but having converst
a while with some Stationer, or other acquaintance about ^^e Au^hor: they no
less slight them, then before they admired them. And yet were it true, that is
objected: it would be no dispraise at all to the ^^^^y, (in the judgment of an
intelligible, and impartial hearer) but ^ather redown to his praise, and Gods
glory. But most men want brains; and others blind themselves, with their own
prejudice. Yea, observe I pray ^ou, whether men do not seek for strawes, to put
out their own eyes withal, as Bernard speaks. Whether opinion does not more
govern them, then the things themselves: And whether Satan may not easily gull
us, when we are so willing to gull and delude our selves?

As what can they say for themselves? a Book is the same, after they know the
Author, that it was before. Yea, admit the Author should be either Beggar,
Knave, or Fool; wherein lies the difference? The same sum of Money, or the
same counsel, from a rich man, or a poor; from a Fool, or from a wise man,
from an honest man, or a Knave, is all one; and none but Fools will make any
difference. Truth is truth, wheresoever we find it as Gold is gold, of
whomsoever it be given, or received: Call upon thy God was good counsel for
Jonah, and worth the following: though from He^thens, Jonah, 1. 6. Yea, what
condemned person would not receive a pardon though from the hands of the
Hangman? And yet, as if men wanted the we call reason, or judgment: they
regard not so much what is writ, or spoken; as who writes, or speaks. They
value not the Mettle, but the stam^ which is upon it. If the man like them not,
they will dislike the matter. For shame my brethren, be not so blindly
partial: for this is such a shallow (...) that it even deserves the Rod:
though a cunning trick of the Devils, where by he cheates thousands of their
souls

Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all thing 2 Timothy 2. 7.

Those thoughts which our experience has found comfortabl^ and useful to our
selves, should (with neglect of all censures be communicated to others, the
concealment whereof (m^ thinks,) can proceed from no other ground, but either
timerousness or envy, and it is probable that that midicine, which has cured
one desperate patient, if it be communicated, man work the same effect upon
others, the consealing whereof, would argue in a Physician, either too much
lucre, or too little love however the conscience of good intentions in
themselves, le^ their success be what it will, is both a discharge and comfort
to a free and willing mind.

The end of the second Division.
Imprimatur,

Thomas Gataker.
LONDON, Printed by I Bell, for James Crumpe a Booke-binder: and and to be sold
at his House, in Little Bartholmewes Wel-yard; and probably at most Stationers
Shops.


