AN INVITATION OF LOVE To all who Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, to
come and take of the Water of Life freely without Money and without Price.

With a Word of Advice to such as are Asking the WAY to SION (and are Weeping)
with their Faces thither-ward.

Together with A faithful Warning to the Inhabitants of BABYLON, to come out of
her, lest (partaking of her Sins) ye also come to partake of her Plagues.

By Isabel Yeamens.

And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be
not Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues,

Romans 18.4. Printed in the Year 1679.

TO THE READER
Friendly Reader;
WHen in the weighty and deep Meditations of my Heart I beheld the States and
Conditions of such as are inquiring the Way to Sion, and have some tender
desires begotten in them after the Lord, and the Knowledge of his Way; my Life
was abundantly drawn forth in the Love of God, with living breathings unto him
(in whom all Fullness dwells) that of the Manifestation and free Dispensations
of his Love and Life all such may come to feel and receive, and to take heed of
sleighting the Day of their tender Visitation, whilst the Lord secretly calls
unto them by his good Spirit in their Bosoms, lest the Night overtake them,
wherein no man can work.

And in the Sense of the Universal Love of God extended unto All Mankind, I was
constrained in my Spirit to commit these following lines to public view, as
finding my Burden unremoved until I was made willing to communicate the same,
which I have done with as much brevity as I could with clearness, hoping the
ponderous Reader, and such whom it chiefly concerns, may not be distasted at
the simplicity of the Srile, or my want of Eloquence in expressing my self in
things of this nature, having herein hinted at diverse things which I have
experienced through the free Love of God to my Soul, which seeming but little
and low things, yet may not miss of some service for the stirring up of the
simple-minded, to make a diligent search how the Case stands betwixt God and
their Immortal Souls, who thereby coming to see their Conditions, and their
Neglect and Disobedience, in not answering the Lord's Requirings, according to
the Manifestations and divine Discoveries of his Light and Grace in their
Hearts, may come to redeem their Misspent Time (which is irrevocable) and take
up a Holy Resolution, by the Assistance of the Grace of God to redeem their
Time to come, by a Godly, Righteous and Sober Conversation, in the Fear of the
Lord, and by taking heed to this pure Principle of Light, and Life, may come to
be enabled thereby to perform that Duty and acceptable Service which the Lord
requires of them, and receive the Reward of the Profitable and Obedient
Servant, is the Desire of my Soul.

And that none may slight the Day of small things, but be faithful to what
little measure the Lord commits to them, and thereby to become worthy of more.

So not desirous to be tedious, or to undertake great things, I recommend the
Reader to the following Lines, whose Mind I desire may be possessed with
seriousness, and with the Fear of the Lord, when exercised in reading of things
relating to Eternity; so shall such reap Benefit hereby, and answer the End of
my Labors and Travails, which is the Well-being of their IMMORTAL SOULS.

This is chiefly intended for the Northern Parts of this Nation, where many are
thirsting afresh after the Truth, although ignorant of it; and that such may be
informed of the Way thereto, and reap Everlasting Life by it, is my Soul's
Desire.

Isabell Yeamans.

An INVITATION of LOVE to all that Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, etc.
TO all you who are ignorant of the Way of Life and Salvation, and are seeking
the Living amongst the Dead Tombs and Sepulchers, and are wandering in the
Night, in the dead Forms and empty Professions, Will-Worships and Traditions of
Men, which are set up, held and performed in man's Will, and in man's Time, and
not in God's Time, nor according to his Mind and Will, and therefore are an
abomination unto him.

Now that all such may be informed aright, my Testimony and Exhortation in the
Fear of the Lord is, That he is not there, but is arisen and ascended far above
all Heavens; the Stone is roled from the Door of the Sepulcher, and the
Grave-Clothes are left behind; the Watchmen of the Night could not hold him,
nor the Grave contain him: Oh! look not for him where he is not to be found, as
the Angel said to Mary Magdalen and the other Women, He is not here, he is
risen, and they declared his Resurrection, John 10.17. Matthew. 28.7. Where it is
manifest, that the first Witnesses that were commissionated (and that by the
Angel of the Lord) to preach the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, were Women, who
(as its written) returned with Fear and great Joy, and could not but declare
what they had seen and heard concerning the Lord Christ, though yet it seemed
to some (yea, of the Disciples themselves, who were afterward convinced of the
Truth of those Women's Testimonies) as idle Tales; as it seems to many in this
Age, because the Resurrection is held forth and born Testimony unto by Women:
but blessed be the Lord, he has raised up many, both Sons and Daughters, to be
living Witnesses this day of his inward and spiritual Appearance, and Power of
his Resurrection and Ascension. So look not for him in the Shadows and Forms
without the Power and Substance, nor be satisfied with the hearing of him by
the hearing of the Ear, or a notional Traditional Knowledge, without the saving
Knowledge of Power; for until you come to know his Power and Life in your
selves, to save you from Evil, you are not come to the Substance; but are still
running from Mountain to Hill, as Sheep having no Shepherd, seeking living
Bread in desolate places, and hewing unto your selves Cisterns that will hold
no Water (an Evil which the Lord complained of among the Children of Israel)
saying, Ye have forsaken me the Fountain of Living Water, and hewn unto your
selves Cisterus that can hold no Water. So come, ye off the Mountains of Esau,
into the low Valleys, where the Springs of Life you may feel, and come into the
Valley of Jehosaphat, where the Lord pleads with all flesh by Sword and by
Fire, that through his deep, Judgment, for Sin and Transgression, through true
Acknowledgment and Repentane the Valley of Achor may be known to be a Door of
Hope to the Transgressors, and by this Hope through Faith come to receive
Christ in you the Hope of Glory, who is the Resurrection of the Just unto Life,
and of the Unjust unto Condemnation; the first begotten from the Dead, and the
first born of every Creature, and now glorified with the Father the Creator of
all things; who made the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of
Water; who formed the Mountains, and created the Winds, and declares unto man
what his Thoughts are, Amos 4.13. the Lord of Hosts is his Name: He is making
himself known in the Hearts of people by his great Power, who will overturn and
remove all Mountains and Hills that may be shaken or removed, that that alone
which cannot be shaken may remain; then shall the Loftiness of the Heart of Man
be brought down, and the Haughtiness thereof laid low, that all Flesh may fear
and tremble before the Lord, who gives unto all Life, Breath and Being.

And as Man and Woman comes to believe in the Light of Christ Jesus, which
discovers and makes manifest unto them the most secret Thoughts and intents of
their Hearts, that they are continually Evil (in the unregenerate state) for as
the Lord said, Every Imagination of the Heart of Man was only continually, Gen,
6.5. and the Prophet says, The Heart is Deceitful above all things, and
desperately Wicked; who can know it? I the Lord search the Heart and try the
Reins, to give unto every Man according to his Ways.

This Light, I say, being believed in, kept to, and obeyed, is able work a
Change, and to cleanse the Heart, that was corrupted by Sin and Transgression,
and to beget good Thoughts and good Desires, and to judge down the contrary,
even all the Corrupt Ways that man in his own Inventions has involved himself
into, and forsaken his Maker: But this is not of our selves, nor by any
Acquirement of our own; but is the free Gift of God (the Giver of all good
things) which he has given us to believe in; and to him alone (not unto any
thing of our selves) we ascribe the Glory and Honor, to whom it is due forever.

Now, forasmuch as all men have sinned, and fallen short of the Glory of God,
it pleased God (out of his infinite Love and Compassion toward the Sons and
Daughters of Men) to send his only begotten Son Christ Jesus a Light into the
World, that all through him might be saved, and have Everlasting Life, who gave
his Life a Ransom for all, that he might purchase them by his precious Blood;
He is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for our Sins only, but also for
the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. And as man comes to believe in his
Name (which is his Power) he comes to know Reconciliation through his Death and
Blood, and by it Redemption up unto God again: And the Everlasting Gospel
(which is the great Power of God unto Salvation to all that believe in it, and
obey the same) comes here to be witnessed, which is that Gospel which Christ
commanded his Disciples to preach throughout the World to every Creature under
Heaven, Mark 16.15. And, If any man preach any other Gospel then that which is
already preached and declared, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. But if this
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this World
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God should shine unto them, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4.

Now this Everlasting Gospel is preached again in the same Power and
Demonstration of the Spirit, as in times past, by virtue whereof Life and
Immortality is again brought to Light; so that the Prisoner of Hope comes to
receive the acceptable Tidings of Liberty and Freedom out of spiritual Bondage
and Captivity.

And the Lord is arising and appearing in the Hearts and Consciences of the
Sons and Daughters of men by the bright shinings of the Beams of his Glory, to
give unto them the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Christ Jesus, 2 Corinthians. 4.6.

Now, the Reason why people have been erring and wandering every one after their
own Ways, and in the dark Imaginations of their own Hearts is, for want of the
Knowledge of the only true God, and Christ Jesus whom he has sent (whom to
know is Life Eternal) and the Reason why People come short of this Knowledge
is, because they will not believe in, and yield Obedience unto the Light of
Christ Jesus, manifested in their Hearts, to give them the glorious Knowledge
of the Lord, and of his Way of Life and Salvation, and to lead them from under
Satan's power, who has held people in Ignorance (through Unbelief) and has
kept them under the Region of the Shadow of Death: For Christ Jesus, who said,
I am the Light of the World; also said, Except ye believe that I AM HE, ye
shall dye in your Sins, and whither I go ye cannot come. So that Unbelief in
the Light, was and is the Cause why people dye in their Sins, and come short of
the Knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal.

But Christ Jesus, who is that Word that was in the Beginning, by which all
things were made that were made, in whom was (and is) Life, and the Life was
(and is) the Light of Men, John 1.4. he is the true Light, that lights every
man that comes into the World, by which lost man comes to see his Way to God
again out of his miserable Estate and undone Condition, where all Flesh has
corrupted its way before the Immortal God; in which way of Corruption (by
reason of Sin and Transgression) there is none that does good, no not one. And
in this fallen Estate and deplorable Condition has the Lord God beheld the
Sons and Daughters of fallen Adam, and with an Eye of Pity and in the Bowels of
Compassion has he looked down from the Habitation of his Holiness, and has
sent forth the Son of his Love, who (by his Light and Grace) appears in the
Hearts of all Mankind; his Light, and his Grace, and good Spirit, is universal,
and freely extended unto all, that as they mind it, believe in it, and are
obediene to it, they come to witness Salvation by it, according to the
Testimony of the holy Apostle, The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
we should live soberly and godly, etc. Titus 2.11, 12.

Now there is none excluded from the Appearance of this free Grace of God, nor
any to be excused who receive it not, and resit the Teachings of it: But as
many as are obedient to the Teachings of it in their own Hearts, they come to
witness Freedom and Liberty by it, and Power in it to resist the Temptations
and many Snares that be in the Ungodly World And those that hate the Reproofs
of its Instruction (which is the Way of Life) and turn from it into
Lasciviousness and Vanity, they will find it to be their Condemnation; and
those are they that crucify unto themselves afresh the Lord of Glory, and put
him to open shame, and trample the Blood of the Covenant under foot, as a thing
of no value: And here the Lamb lies slain in the Streets of the Ungodly World
(spiritually called Sodom and Egypt) that his got a place in man's Heart since
the Fall. The Foundation of this wicked World, that is in Sin and Polution,
that has so corrupted the Earth, and filled it with Violence, was laid by
Transgression, whereby Death came over all men. But as by the Disobedience of
one Man, All have sinned, and fallen short of the Glory of God; so by the
Obedience of one Man (the Man Christ Jesus) we come to be made alive again: And
as the Creature comes to join with the Manifestation of the Light of Christ
Jesus (the free Gift of the Father's Love, who is full of Grace and Truth) they
come to know and feel his quickening Spirit, which sets free from the Law of
Sin and Death: And keeping to the Light, which discovers all the Deeds of
Darkness, they come to see their Way out of the old Adam, to Christ the second
Adam; and how to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good, according as in the Light
it is made manifest; for, as says the Apostle, All things that are reproved
are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest, is Light,
Ephesians. 5.13.

Now mind that in your own Hearts which reproves in secret, when no mortal Eye
sees, nor Ear hears the small still Voice, which calls unto you when you are
running to do Evil, which grieves the Spirit of the Lord in you: Return,
return, hearken unto the Voice of Wisdom; for she utters her Voice in the
Streets of the World, and in the midst of the Concourse of the People, How long
ye simple ones will ye love Simplicity, and Scorners delight in their Scorning,
and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn ye at my Reproofs, etc. Because I have called,
and ye have refused; I have stretched forth my Hand, and none regarded; but ye
have despised all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I will also laugh
at your Calamity, when your Fear comes like a Desolation, and when Affliction
and Anguish shall come upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but shall not find me; because they hated
Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of the Lord: But whosoever hearkeneth unto
me, shall dwell safely, Prove. 1.22, 23, 24.

Here the Wise Man in the Wisdom of God shows what is to be turned from, and
the Safety, Peace and Consolation of those that turn at the Reproofs, and
hearken to the Voice of this pure Wisdom; as also, the Calamity and Distress of
such as will not give ear to the Reproofs of Instruction (which, as one said,
is the Way to Life) nor be obedient to the Measure of Light and Life in their
Hearts, such must reap the Fruit of their own Devices.

Job speaking excellently and experimentally of this Wisdom, says on this
wise; Where is Wisdom to be found? and where is the place of Understanding? Man
knows not the Price thereof. The Depth says, It is not in me; and the Sea
says, It is not in me: It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be
weighed for the Price thereof. But THE FEAR OF THE LORD that is Wisdom; and TO
DEPART FROM INIQUITY, that is a good Understanding. Death and Destruction have
heard of the Fame of Wisdom; and many can talk of it; but they are Aliens to
it, and their Hearts remote from it. Oh! the pure holy Fear of the Lord God, it
keeps the Heart clean, it preserves out of all Evil, and delivers from the
Snares of Death; it is a precious Pearl indeed, a matchless Jewel: Where is the
Man that is furnished with Eloquence, to unfold the Excellency of this Wisdom?
or who knows the Worth of it? but those who have dug and searched the Deep
for it, and when they have found it, sold all their Treasure, that they have
been heaping up in their Notional and Artificial Wisdom, which is from below,
and made a Purchase of this precious Treasure and Riches, which endures
forever; such have made a blessed exchange, never to be repented of; the Thief
cannot break through and steal, nor Moth corrupt, neither can Canker rust or
eat this Treasure. But this is not to be found or attained unto in the Path
where the Lions Whelp has trodden (the fierce angry Nature) or the fierce Lion
has passed by; no Vultures Eye nor Beast of Prey can walk therein. And though
the Lions may suffer Hunger, yet those that fearthe Lord shall want no good
thing (a blessed Privilege indeed.) It was the Fear of the Lord that preserved
Joseph in his tender Years, when he was in Egypt, and when the Egyptian Woman
(his Mistress) tempted him: How can I (said he) do this great Wickedness, and
sin against God? Genesis 39.9. The Dread and Fear of offending the Lord was before
his Eyes, whereby he was preserved out of that Snare. Oh that people would lay
these things to heart! and consider what they are a doing, and search their
Hearts in the Light and Fear of the Lord, and humble themselves before him (to
whom they must give a just and final Account of the Deeds done in the Body)
that they may receive Mercy at his Hand, before the Door be shut, and there be
none to open.

For says the Lord by the Mouth of his holy Prophet I says, wash you, make
you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do
Evil, learn to do well, then come and let us reason together; though your Sins
were as Crimson, they shall be made white as Snow; though they were red as
Scarlet, they shall be as Wool: If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the
good of the Land; but if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with
the Sword, etc.

And the Son of God says, Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden
(with your Sins and Iniquities (and know not whither to go) and I will give you
Rest.

This is Glad Tidings of an Acceptable Rest indeed, unto all who are weary with
traveling in the By Ways and Crooked Paths, which lead to the Chambers of
Death. And this Rest remains for all the People of God, who have been willing
to come unto Christ (by his Light in their own Hearts) and to bow to his
Appearance.

And all you who are in want of this Rest, and desire the attainment of it, but
are ignorant of the Way that leads to it, my Exhortation and Advice unto you
is, to come unto him who said, Come unto me all you that are weary etc. of whom
it was testified, That when he should come, he should reprove the world of Sin,
of Righteousness and of Judgment; and cease from seeking and striving in your
own Wills (which is not according to the Will of God) and rest from your own
Labors (as God did from his) and mind that which discovers Sin, and reproves
in secret for it, and turn at the Reproofs of it (which is the Way of Life) as
one well experienced, and testified in his day; The Commandment is a LAMP, and
the Law is LIGHT, and the Reproofs of Instruction THE WAY OF LIFE, Prove. 6.23.
This is that Lamp and that Light of which David testified, saying, Thy Word is
a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Paths, Psalm 119.105. He also said,
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; and is that Word of which
he said, Wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his Ways? by taking heed
thereto, according to thy Word: Which Word, Light, Law, Lamp, Grace, Spirit,
etc. with many other Names and Denominations, are one and the same in nature
and quality, though proceeding from the holy Spirit and Power in the holy Men
of God under several Names and Appellations, according to the various Effects,
Dispensations, Manifestations and Operations of it in their Hearts; as when it
manifests unto man the Evil of his Ways, it is properly called Light; and as
it judges and condemns for Sin and Evil, it may be called a Lawgiver and a
Judge, etc. this is able to deliver and set free from the Power of Sin and
Death, and to bring lost man to God again: It was sufficient under every
Dispensation for the Recovery and Salvation of Mankind, as it was obeyed and
believed in, by which the Righteous Seed and Holy Men of God found Acceptance
with the Lord, and knew that they pleased him, and walked with him, as Enoch
did, and were made perfect, as Abraham was, to whom the Lord said Walk thou
before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1.

But is now manifested in these latter days in a more Glorious and Evangelical
Appearance, wherein the Lord has fulfilled his Promise of old, and is pouring
forth of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and is causing his Sons and his Daughters
to prophecy, and to declare of his wondrous Works: and now Christ Jesus is
manifesting himself in his inward and spiritual Appearance of Light in the
Hearts and Consciences of all men, who is come a Light into the World, that
whosoever believes on him might not perish, but have Everlasting Life; and in
this Manifestation of his Spirit he is calling and inviting the Sons and
Daughters of men, Behold, (says he) I stand at the Door and knock; if any man
hear any Voice, and open unto me, I will come in and sup with him, and he with
me, Rev. 3.20. It is the Voice of my Beloved that knocks, saying, Open unto me;
for my Head is filled with Dew; and my Locks with the Drops of the Night, Song
of Sol. 5.2. The Disobedient and Rebellious will not entertain him in their
Hearts; but he is pierced by their Iniquities, and as a Lamb slain without
their Door, and as killed all the day long as to them (though in himself he
lives to judge them) He made his Grave with the Wicked, and with the Rich in
his Death, Isa. 53.9. But the Lord beholds the Proud afar off, who think they
know enough, and are fat and full, and want nothing, when they are miserable,
and naked, and bare, and want all things; but the Humble he teaches, and
dwells with the Contrite in Heart; for it is in the Heart and Consciences of
Men and Women where he ought to dwell, and it is his Prerogative to sway the
Scepter there; although the old Usurper of Authority (called the Devil and
Satan) by his Stratagems and Insinuations, has gotten a large Room and open
Entertainment in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, so that the Inn is
taken up with other Guests (the vain Delights and Pleasures of the World) and
no room is left to entertain the Lord of Glory, but he is as laid in the
Manger, and turned out of Doors, and his small Appearance slighted and
rejected by the Ungodly: But now is the Prince of Peace come, and is arising in
his glorious Power, to dis-throne the grand Enemy of man's Happiness, and to
discover his many Snares, Baits and Temptations, which he has laid suitable to
the Propensity and Inclination of the Creature, to betray the Simple-minded,
and to draw forth the Heart and Affections after his Inventions, thereby to
enslave and imbondage the Creature in Sin and Iniquity, and to plunge it
therein, until the Custom of it comes to take away the sense of the Evil of it,
and then persuades the poor Captive, There is no Freedom from it, nor no
Perfection to be attained on this side the Grave; and here he labors to keep
them under his Power whilst in this Life, knowing that after Death, Judgment
comes; and as the Tree falls, so it lies; and that there is no Repentance in
the Grave; and here he obtains his End, which is the Eternal Destruction of Men
and Women's Souls; for he laid the Foundation of his Kingdom in the Heart of Man
and Woman by a Lie, through which Sin entered, and by which he upholds his
Kingdom to this day in all the Disobedient and Rebellious. But in the Light of
Christ Jesus (which discovers all the Deeds of Darkness) is he clearly seen,
and his rotten Foundation, which was grounded upon a Lie, begins now to shake
and reel, and the Downfall of his Kingdom is now seen to approach by them
whose Eyes the Lord has opened. But as for those who despise this Inward and
Evangelical Appearance of Light and Grace, and call it Natural. or the Check of
a Natural Conscience, and a thing Insufficient (though obeyed) to Salvation;
nay, many will not stick to call it Dia bolical: whoever they be that are in
this state, I am bold to affirm and testify, That the same Power (call it what
they will) that secretly checks and reproves for Sin and Evil in the
Cansciences of Men and Women the same (in the Day of Account) shall set the
Sins of the Wicked and Disobedient in order before their Eyes, and shall be
their Judge in that Day, and as a Stone that shall grind them to Powder; and on
the contrary, to those that love it and obey it, will be the Joy, Comfort and
Everlasting Salvation of their Immortal Souls.

Now the Reason why people hate the Light, is very evident from Christ's own
words, who says, This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World,
and men love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil, for
every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest
his Deeds should be repreved, John 3.19, 20. But he that does Truth, loves the
Light, and brings his Deeds to it, that they may be proved and tried that they
are wrought in God.

Now the Serpent in his Subtilty is the same at this day that he was in the
Beginning, who in direct Opposition to the Command of God told Adam and Eve
That in the day they did eat of the Forbidden Fruit they should Not surely dye,
but should be as Gods knowing Good and Evil: and here was the Temptation laid
under the presentation of an Higher Attainment, or that it was higher or of
further Latitude, which certainly was more pernicious and Destructive; for,
until the Temptation was entered into, they had not the Knowledge of Evil by
participation, but were clothed with the Sweet Innocent Life of God, which he
breathed into them, and dwelt in Covenant with their Maker. But after the Enemy
had prevailed, and had subjected the Creature unto Vanity (as says the
Apostle, Romans 8. verse. 20.) not willingly, but in Hope of an Higher
Attainment, or Better State than that wherein the Lord had placed them, they
were betrayed, and lost their Habitation by breaking the Command of God, and
lost the Heavenly Dignity and Excellency of the first Creation, and became dead
as to that sweet Unity, Fellowship and Access they had unto God: and here the
Serpent was found a Liar, who told them, They should not surely dye, etc. So
here Man and Woman were drove out of the Paradise of God, and became degenerate
Plants of a strange Vine, branching forth it self into many Corrupt Trees,
whose Fruit have been Envy, Wrath, Murder and Persecution about Religion,
Sacrifice and Worship, Pride, Emulation, Deceit and Hypocrisy; and in these
evil Branches have the unclean Birds and the Fowls of the Air lodged, and the
Cockatrice, that comes out of the Serpent's Root, whose Fruit (says the
Prophet) shall be a Fiery Flying Serpent, Isa. 14.29.

Now the Cockatrice has been hatching and bringing forth her Cage of unclean
Birds by the power of the Serpent, whereby they are become Birds of Prey, to
the persecuting of the Innocent Birth or good Seed of the Kingdom, and
quenching the good Desires which are in the Hearts of People. But as the first
Appearance or Motion to Evil is resisted and turned from, the Conception
thereof is prevented in the Heart (for it is there that Sin is conceived, before
it is brought forth into action) and the Cockatrice comes to be crushed in the
Egg, before it is brought forth to be a Bird of Prey, and the Creature
preserved out of the Snare, And so it may be seen, that this Crooked Serpent
has been the ground Cause of all the Woe and Misery that is come upon Mankind,
who seeks to betray and deceive the Innocent, as he did Adam and Eve, who
actually knew no Evil, until under a fair Pretense he presented the forbidden
fruit unto Eve (the weaker Vessel) who by hearkening unto him did eat, and gave
also to her Husband, and so brought Death over themselves, according as the
Lord God had said, In the day that ye eat thereof, ye shall dye. Thus by
transgressing the Righteous Law of God, in eating the forbidden Fruit, Sin
entered, and Death by Sin, which is come upon all, and all have fallen short of
the Glory of God. And they that are feeding of the Tree of Knowledge without
Life, are under the same Sentence of Death, which was passed over Adam and Eve,
through their Disobedience. So Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them
who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam 's Transgression, as says the
Apostle: For as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to
Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
unto Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. And as many as receive the free Gift of
Grace and Righteousness, shall reign in Life by Jesus Christ.

And in this free Gift of God (in which is Life eternal) comes Man and Woman to
inherit their former Privilege and Right to the Tree of Life again: for the
universal Loving Kindness of the Lord God was such toward the Noble
Workmanship of his Hands, that notwithstanding Man and Woman had transgressed
the holy righteous Law of the Lord, and being first violated by the Woman, yet
he promised, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head; and
to the Serpent he said, I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and
between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise
his Heel, Genesis 3.15.

This faithful Promise, in which the Patriarchs of old, with the Prophets and
Holy Men of God believed, in the Fullness of time came to be fulfilled, and the
Virgin conceived by the Holy Ghost, and by the Overshadowing of the Power of
the Most High, and brought forth that Holy Thing whose Name was called Jesus,
according as the Angel of the Lord had foretold unto Mary, saying, Blessed art
thou among Women, thou have found Favor with God; for lo, thou shall conceive
in thy womb, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus. Now Mary reasoned a
little, saying, How can this be, seeing I know not Man? To whom the Angels
Answer was, The Holy Chost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Most High
shall evershadow thee; therefore that Holy Thing that shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God. So Mary consulted no more, but believing the
Angel, said, Be it unto me according to thy word, Luke 1.35. And in the
overcoming Sense of the Joy which through Faith she had received, said on this
wise, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my
Savior; from henceforth all Generations shall call me blessed, because be that
is mighty has done great things for me, and Holy is his Name. So in the Seed
Christ Jesus, the second Adam, that never fell, who is made a quickening
Spirit, comes the Blessing again to be obtained, and all those that believe in
him come to be redeemed from under the Curse, and to know his Spirit as a
Standard lifted up in them, to the crushing and breaking down the Head of the
Serpent (which is his Power) so that the Enmity that is put between the two
Seeds shall never be reconciled; and as this Seed of Life, which the good
Seedsman has sown in every Heart, comes to take root and grow, it will suppress
and keep under the Evil Seed of the Serpent, which brings forth Briars and
Thorns, to entangle the Soul as in a Net, whose End is to be burnt up and
consumed by the Breath of the Lord. And although the Enemy has come in the
Night, and has sown Tares and Brambles in the Field (which is the World) where
the good Seed was sown, yet mark, their End is to be cut down at the time of
Harvest (which is the end of the World) and to be bundled up, and cast into the
Fire unquenchable. Oh! what will become of all those in that day, who have
suffered the Tares and Brambles to grow, and have not believed nor put
Confidence in, but obstinately resisted the appearance of Christ, the benefit
of whose Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Assention such might have
received, and have been cleansed from all their evil Ways and corrupt Devices
by Christ Jesus, who is come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in
him, should not abide in Darkness, but have the Light of Life, John 8.12. he
testified of himself, saying, I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: this is he to whom all
the ends of the Earth are to look for Salvation; he is the Shiloh, the
peaceable Savior, who is now come according to Jacob's Prophecy upon his dying
Bed, saying, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his Feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of the
People be, Gen 49.10. (which Scepter of Government is long since departed from
Judah, therefore Shiloh is come) Now the spiritual Scepter is delivered unto
him, who, without Respect of Persons, is holding it forth unto all Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues and People, that his Government may be set up, and his
Scepter sway in their Hearts, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and of
his Dominion there shall be no End; upon whose Shoulders the Government is set,
and the Nations of them that are saved must walk in the Light of the Lamb, who
is come to take away the sins of the world, and has brought a Remnant (through
their Belief in and Obedience unto the Light of Christ) to the knowledge of his
saving Power, which brings out of the dead Forms to the living Substance, which
gives true Satisfaction to the Soul: And such cannot but say unto and invite
all, who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, To come and taste with us, and
see how good the Lord is; for it is that which was from the Beginning, which we
have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our Hands have handled
of the Word of Life, that we declare unto you, that you also might have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his
Son Jesus Christ, John 1.3. And the Spirit and the Bride says Come, and let
him that hears say Come, and he that is athirst let him come, and take of the
Waters of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. Oh! why will you spend your Money for that
which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which does not satisfy your
Souls, who with the Prodigal have spent your Portion, and are feeding upon the
Husks in your Notional Self Performances, and Imitations of true Religion,
Sacrifice and Worship? But alas! it is not the Profession, Show or Likeness of
these things (without the Possession of that Life and Power in which they are
accepted of the Lord) that will stand in stead in the needful time; for it is
not a sight or show of Food that will satisfy an hungry or traveling Man; but
Give me Bread (says the hungry Soul) or else I dye -- Oh! how does my Spirit
mourn for those who are seeking living Bread among the Husks, where its not to
be found, and are inquiring after their Souls Beloved, and are running from one
Watchman to another, seeking the Footsteps of the Flock of his Companions, and
where he feeds them, and causes them to lie down at noon day. Come you that
have been enquiring of the blind Watchmen of the Night, I will tell you where
we have found the Beloved of our Souls (where you also must find him) The
Spouse of old sought him amongst the Watchmen, yet found him not; But, says
she, when I had past a little from them, then I found him whom my Soul loved:
Such was our inquiring Condition amongst the blind Watchmen of the Night, who
cried, Lo here and Lo there, whose Trumpet gave an uncertain sound unto us, and
instead of Relief caused our Wounds to bleed afresh, telling us, Revelation was
ceased and we must not expect God and Christ in that inward and spiritual
Appearance wherein he made known himself to his People in days past; but we
must apply our selves to this outward Ceremony, and the other Ordinance, etc.
and thus they smote us and wounded us: But blessed be our God forever, who
turned us from them, to the Light of Christ Jesus, which gave us the knowledge
of our Beloved, and directed our Feet into the right Way, even the Just Man's
Path, which is a shining Light, and shines more and more unto the perfect day,
and the Wayfaring Man (though a Fool) shall not err therein. So it was by the
inshinings of his Light and Grace in our Hearts, that we received the Discovery
and Knowledge of our Beloved, who is become the chiefest of ten thousand unto a
Remnant, as he was to the Spouse of old: He is the Door into the Sheepfold* and
the true Shepherd, who laid down his Life for his Sheep; and whoever enters
into this heavenly Fold of Rest and Peace, must enter in by his Light, who is
the Door; for whoever climb up any other way, are Thieves and Robbers; and his
Sheep hear his Voice, and the Voice of a Stranger they will not follow, because
they can clearly distinguish between the true Shepherd and the false Shepherds
(who whilst people put into their Mouths cry Peace, Peace; and when not fed,
prepare War against them) witness the many grievous Sufferings of Innocent
People in Body and Estate; how many nasty Goals have been crowded full by their
Cruelty? how many Wives have been made Widows and Children Fatherless (whose
Cries have pierced the Heavens, and whose Complaint has entered the Ears of the
Lord) by their unrighteousness and inhuman dealings with God's people: And how
have these Idol Shepherds, who have sought the Fleece, and not regarded the
Sheep, like Wolves and Bears, rended the Goods of such as could not put into
their Mouths, the impartial Reader and every unbiased Mind can well inform.
But the great and powerful Shepherd, the mighty God, has taken Cognizance of
these things, and will surely call them to account, and reckon with them in a
Day that is come and coming upon them, wherein they shall be more and more made
manifest, that they are not sent of God, nor true Ministers of Christ, because
they abide not in his Doctrine, who said, Freely ye have received, freely give:
and if any shall ask, How we know them? we need go no further then the words of
Christ, who said, By their Fruits ye shall know them; for they are such who
seek their Gain from their Quarter, who feed with the fat and clothe with the
Wool, and love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and Greetings in the
Marketplace, with diverse other Marks, whereby we know them to be such as ran
and God never sent them, and their Doctrine to be erroneous and unprofitable.
But the Sheep of Christ's Pasture are clothed with the Lamb-like, Meek, Quiet
and Suffering Spirit of Jesus, who makes his Followers conformable unto
himself, that in all things we may be found followers of him in his Light and
Grace, who has other Sheep which are not of this Fold, whom also he said
should be brought in, that they may hear his Voice; and there shall be one
Sheepfold and one Shepherd, John 10.16. And for those Sheep who are not yet
gathered into this Fold, does my Soul travail, that they with us might partake
of the living Bread, which comes down from Heaven. I am that living Bread
(says Christ) that came down from Heaven. My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed; whoever eats of the Bread and drinks of the Water that I
give, shall never hunger nor thirst any more: Except ye eat my Flesh and drink
my Blood, ye have no Life in you. This was an hard Saying to the professing
Jews, whose Eye was outward and carnal; as it is with many this day, who make a
great talk of his Flesh and Blood: But except you have Faith in his Name, and
by virtue of that Faith come to eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, ye have no
Life in you; for, says he, (who sais, I am the Light) Except ye believe that I
am he, ye shall dye in your Sins, and whither I go ye cannot come. so that it
is Unbelief in his Light or Grace in people which disappoints them of the
benefit of his Blood, which cleanses, washes and sanctifies all those that
believe in his Name and Power, by which, as they keep unto and abide in it,
they come to witness their Redeemer to live, even Christ, the Anointed of God,
the Everlasting Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which
God has pitched, and not Man; he is become our High Priest, and the Bishop of
our Souls; he is teaching his People himself; and our Invitation unto all is,
that they may come and sit down under the Teachings of his Spirit and Grace in
themselves; For, whatsoever may be known of God is manifest within; and he has
shown unto Man what is good, that he should obey it and do it; and the Apostle
said, Examine your selves, prove your selves; know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. Now thou who have had
thine Eye outward, and have bin running abroad, and spent thy Portion with the
Prodigal, and have not obtained an Establishment in that which is durable and
satisfying the Soul; Return, return to thy Father's House, and turn thy Mind
inward to that which thou have run from, and have been seeking without thee,
and thou will find virtue in it, and the Efficacy of it to satisfy thy
breathing Soul: for, remember the Parable of the Woman, who sought her piece of
Silver without her House, but turning within, lighting a Candle, and sweeping
her House, she found it, and for the Joy that she had found this Treasure,
invited her Neighbors to come and rejoice with her. Now the Candle of the Lord
(which is the Spirit of a Man) is lighted, and the Houses of many are swept,
and that which they have been seeking without they have found within them, to
the exceeding great Joy and Gladness of their Hearts, so that they could not
but invite and persuade others (through the constraining Virtue and
Soul-satisfaction they had received from it) to turn in to that inward Word of
Power which is nigh, in the Heart, and is a sure Word of Prophecy, unto which
(says the Apostle Peter) ye do well to take heed, as unto a Light shining in a
dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet.
1.19.

Now we having taken heed unto this divine and heavenly Word in our Hearts, we
are come to see the arising of the Star of Jacob, and to the bright and morning
Star, by which the blessed Day of God's great Salvation is known and
experimentally witnessed by a Remnant. Oh! how glorious is the appearance and
breaking forth of this heavenly Day, in which the rising of the Son of
Righteousness (who is risen with Healing under his Wings) many are come to
behold; how excellent is the Power, Wisdom and Majesty of him who is greater
than Solomon, whose mavelous Order, Magnificency and Splendour the Queen of
Sheba, from the uttermost parts of the Earth, came to see, who when she had
heard and seen all that she desired (yea to her Astonishment) made this
acknowledgment, I believed not this Report, until I had seen it with mine Eyes;
but lo, the one half was not told me; for thou have more Wisdom and Prosperity
than I have heard by Report, 1 Kings 10.7. And many can now say, that a Greater
than Solomon is now come, whose infinite Wisdom and Power, whose excellent
Glory and Majesty the Tongues of Men and Angels are incapable and insufficient
to set forth, who is filling his latter House with the Splendour of his own
Glory, for transcending and surpassing the Glory of the Outward Temple, which
was typical and figurative of that which is not built with Hands; and many Sons
are coming from far, and Daughters from the ends of the Earth, to behold the
Beauty and Comeliness and Holy Order of the House of the God of Jacob, which he
is establishing atop of all the exalted Mountains and Professions without
Possession, and above all swelling Notions and Hills, and Nations are flowing
unto it, according as the Lord spoke by the Mouth of the Prophet, Isa. 2.2.
Beautiful for ^^tuation is Mount Sion (the Hill of God) and it is now fulfilled
in these latter days, that many are come to say, Let us go up to the Mountain
of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
Ways, and we will walk in his Paths. These are the true Jews in Spirit, the
Circumcised in Heart and Ear, whose Praise is of God, and not of men: such are
the true Worshippers, who worship the Father in the Spirit and in the Truth,
which is that living, true and standing Worship) set up and established above
sixteen hundred years ago, by our Lord and Savior, in that blessed Conference
held with the woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well, who hearing of the Disputes and
various Opinions about the Place where men ought to worship, said, Woman,
believe me, The Hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain nor at
Jerusalem worship the Father; for the Hour comes and now is, that the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth; and such is the
Father seeking to worship him, John 4.21, 23. This Woman, by this Converse with
Christ, being converted to the Faith in him, went her way into the City, and
gave this Testimony of him, Come see a Man (says she) that has told me all that
ever I have done; is not this the Christ? And many of the Samaritans believed
on him, not only because of the saying of the Woman, who told them, That he had
told her all that ever she had done, but because of his own Word: And we know
(say they) that this is indeed the Christ. Now these men were directed unto
Christ by the Declaration or Preaching of a Woman, who was not despised by them
because of her Sex, but they received her Invitation, and came to be made
Believers in him, who had told the Woman all that she had done; and well were
it for the People of this Nation if they would be of the Samaritans Mind, and
believe in that inward Testimony and Power, which lets them see and tells them
all that they do and reproves them for Sin and Evil. Now, God is a Spirit* and
they that worship him aright* must worship him in and by the divine Assistance
of his Spirit; but those who deride and make a Mock at the Spirit, and the
Guidings and Leadings of it, are known to be out of the Spirit, neither know
the Truth, bat are Enemies to it; and all their Worships, Duties,
Self-Performances, Offerings and Sacrifices out of the Truth, are an
Abomination unto the Lord* let their Pretense be never so specious: Now God in
his Love has given a Measure of his Spirit unto All people, whereby (through
Obedience thereto) they may be enabled to perform that acceptable Service he
requires of them: and they that come to feel such a good Desire and holy Thirst
begotten in them (as did the Woman of Samaria) after the Water of Life, such by
pursuance after the same in the Faith, come to receive Satisfaction and
Refreshment from the Fountain Christ Jesus, who said unto the Woman, If thou
knew'st the Gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee [Give we to drink]
thou would have asked of him, who would have given thee living Water: those
(said he) that drink of this Water (speaking of the Water in Jacob's Well)
shall thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the Water that I shall give
him, shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
Well of Water springing up unto Everlasting Life. The Woman said unto him, Sir,
give me of this Water, that I thirst not again, etc. So it appears this Woman
was ignorant of the Gift of God, though it was in her; yet by believing in and
receiving his gracious Words, she became acquainted with the true Knowledge of
the Gift of God in her self (as are all true Believers and spiritual
Worshippers at this day) and thereby to receive the ingrafted Word with
Meekness, which is able to save the Soul, in and through which the true
Worshippers offer up an acceptable Sacrifice within the Gates of the New and
Heavenly Jerusalem, which John saw coming down from God out of Heaven, as a
Bride adorned for her Husband, Salvation is the Walls of this holy City, and
her Gates Praises; neither in her is there need of the Light of the Sun, or of
the Moon or Stars, but the Lord God and the Lamb is the Light thereof; and the
Nations of them that are saved must walk in the Light of it, rev. 21.23, 24.

Now we, who are come to witness this defirable and glorious Habitation of Reft
and Peace (which through many deep Sufferings, Cries and Travails of our
anxious Spirits we have mourned for, sought after and obtained) we cannot but
declare unto others in the Love of God, with tender Pity and Compassion unto
their Souls, who are tossed about with every Wind of Dectrine (as a Ship in a
storm) and even labor to persuade such, who are thus distressed, to lay hold
on the great Salvation of God, which he in and by his Son Christ Jesus, has
freely tendered unto all People, to be his Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, a
Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the Glory of his People Israel; this
is he whom good old Simeon saw in his day, when he was waiting for the
Consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25.

And you who are looking for Christ without you, in the outward Forms and
Traditions, my Advice unto you is, To turn to that Principle in your own hearts
that is meek and lowly; for says Christ, Learn of me, I am meek and low in
heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls, Mat. 11.29. The Humble he
teaches his Way, and the Meek will he guide in Judgment: This is the good
Physician of Value, who has brought Balm from Gilead, and gives Health to the
wounded Soul; he washes and thoroughly cleanses the Wound; and when all that
has poluted and defiled the Heart and Conscience is purged and done away, then
he pours in of his precious Ointment, which gives a fragrant smell to those who
have been poluted and defiled by reason of Sin, of which the Ointment was a
Figure, that was poured upon Aaron's Head, and run down to the Skirts of his
Garment, and was precious; and if that was precious which was outward and
typical, how much more is this which is an inward and spiritual Unction (which
only can reach the Soul, as that did the Body) and which comes from Christ, who
is anointed with the heavenly Oil above his Fellows, by virtue of which inward
Anointing Health and Soundness of heart and mind comes to be known again by
those who through this Universal Grace receive it; a measure of which Grace is
committed to every one to profit withal, if they would prove it and try it, it
is one and the same in Nature and Quality, though not in Quantity; For unto one
he gave five Talents, to another two, and to another one, and to every man
according to their several Abilities, in the least of which is sufficientcy (if
obeyed and improved) and where much is given, much is required: But the wicked
and sloathful Servant, who had but one Talent, counted the Lord an hard Master,
because he was negligent and careless to improve it, and hid his Talent in the
Earth; but read his Portion; was he not cast into utter Darkness, where is
weeping and gnashing of Teeth? and the same Reward to this day remains for all
the Negligent, Unfaithful and disobedient Servants, who will not improve their
Gift and Talent committed unto them.

Now, to speak a little after the manner of men, and to compare Spiritual
Things with Temporal; That as no Malady or Distemper of the Body can be healed
without the Application of some suitable Medicine, and that only such as can
reach unto the grieved part; even so no visible Preparatory or outward
Existence, can reach unto, or effectually heal a Wounded Soul, but the alone
saving Health and Power of Jesus; and whosoever makes a right Application of it,
comes livingly and experimentally to witness the blessed Effects thereof, which
are the same as in the days past, that is, to give Sight to the Blind, to
cause the Deaf to hear, the Lame to walk, the Leper to be cleansed, and the
Tongue of the Dumb to be unloosed, to praise the Name of the Lord, and to
magnify his great Power in the Land of the Living; and the Poor in Spirit have
received the Everlasting Gospel of Peace, which is freely preached, and Life
and Immortality is brought to Light thereby -- Oh! the Day of Glad Tidings is
come, and the Year of Jubilee to the Prisoner of Hope, and to the Captives and
Disconsolate Souls is known, who had no Comforter in the Earth, nor any to be
found that had the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season in the
needful time.

But now has the Lord appeared to comfort the Mourners in Sion, and to give
Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praises for
the spirit of Heaviness, Isa. 61.3. Therefore lift up your Heads, ye mournful
Travailers, who have been weeping as Rachel for her Children, and refused to be
comforted because they were not, Jer. 31.15. For the Comforter is now come,
even the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth all those that are willing
to follow him, who says, I am come that you might have Life, and that you
might have it more abundantly, John 10.10. and he will lead you by a Way you
know not, where you shall not Err.

Life from God, the Fountain of Life and Glory, is now come, and is entered
into the Witnesses; the Graves are opened, the Dead is raised, and they that
hear his heavenly Voice, their Souls live unto him: This is the new Birth,
which the Apostle speaks of on this wise, My little Children, of whom I travail
in Birth again until Christ be formed in you, Galat 4.19. Here the Apostle
travailed for the bringing forth of that holy Birth which is conceived by the
holy Ghost, and is born of the Water and of the Spirit, and is made a new
Creature in Christ; for (says he) If any man be in Christ, he is a New
Creature: But Nichodemus (a Ruler of the Jews) who came unto Jesus by Night,
reasoned carnally on this manner, How can a Man be born which is Old; can he
enter again into his Mother's Womb and be born? How ignorant was this Teacher
of Israel concerning the Work of Regeneration? it was a sealed Book and a
Mystery unto him, as it is to many Wise Professors and Night walking
Nichodemus's of this Age, who though they pretend to high things, yet stumble
at that which should open their Understandings, and give them a true Discerning
betwixt that which is born of the Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit;
but are yet in the dark, and their Understandings veiled by reason of Sin and
Transgression, which stands as a Partition Wall unremoved, and the old man with
his Deeds not put off, nor the new man (the second Adam) put on, which bears
the heavenly Image; and being gone astray and alienated from the Life of God in
themselves, they become not acquainted with that which should work a Change in
their Hearts, not withstanding all their Profession of God and Christ in Words,
whilst in their Works they deny him. Now the birth of the flesh is known by its
fruits, which is Envy, Wrath, Murder and Persecution of that Birth that is born
after the Spirit, and has been so even from Righteous Abel to this very day:
for Cain, who was the first that was born of a Woman, envyed his Brother Abel.
and slew him (because his Brother's Sacrifice was accepted, and his rejected)
whose innocent Blood, from the Ground on which it was spilt, cried in the Ears
of the Lord for Vengence, as does the Blood of the Innocent People of God this
day cry unto him, who will render Judgment and Vegeance upon the Enemies of his
Righteous Seed and People, who have sacrificed unto and worshipped the Lord
their God, according to his Commands, and the Requirings of his holy Spirit in
their Hearts.

And Ishmael the Son of the Bond Woman (who was born after the Flesh, and is in
Bondage with her Children) he was a Mocker, and Mocked Isaac, who was the true
Seed and Heir of the Promise; so all those now, who are of Abraham's Faith, are
of the true Seed, and inherit the Blessing and Kingdom prepared for them before
the Foundation of the World.

And again, you may read how Esau (the first birth) who was a profane man, and
sold his Birthright for one Morsel of Meat, he set himself against Jacob (the
second Birth) who was of the true Seed and righteous Line, unto which the
Promise and Blessings did descend and appertain.

So here people may see, how that after man had transgressed and forsaken the
Lord, he fell short of the Blessings of God, and in that state the first birth,
which was of the Earth, earthly and sensual, was rejected with its Offerings
and Sacrifice; so it is the second birth, which is after the Spirit, that
obtains the Blessing.

And Haman, an Informer against Mordecai, was of this corrupt seed and birth of
the flesh, whose Offspring as well as himself has been persecuting the Members
of the true Church and Seed of God for these many hundred years unto this very
time, and all about Religion, Sacrifice and Worship: so that our Persecutors,
who have been rending and tearing (like Dogs and Bears) and persecuting people
for their Nonconformity and different Persuasions about Religion, may see
their Off spring, and who was their Captain and General in this wicked Work,
whose Spirit is alive though his Body be dead; and it will deceive them in the
end: And Woe and Misery will be the Portion of all such (if not prevented by
timely Repentance) at unawares, when 'twill be too late to call unto the Hills
and to the Mountains to fall upon them and cover them from the Presence of the
Lord, and to hide them from his dreadful Majesty and fierce Indignation, which
is kindled against all the Enemies of his chosen People, who are unto him as
the Apple of his Eye; and no Way will be found to escape his terrible
Judgments: For such as every one sows, such must they reap; and they that sow
to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption; but they that sow to the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap Life Everlasting, Gal. 6.8. And if they who
are and persist in Cain's nature and Esau's spirit, seek a place of Repentance
with Tears, as they did, they shall not find it, but shall be like Cain, who
was a Fugative and a Vagabond in the Earth, being driven out from the Presence
of the Lord, and said, My Punishment is greater than I can bear.

Oh! that people would but consider what they are a doing, and to whom they
yield their Members Servants to obey, and follow that Exhortation of the
Apostle, Romans 6.13. Yield not your Members as Instruments of Unright cousness
unto sin, but yield your selves unto God; for the Wages of Sin is Death, but
the Gift of God is Eternal Life. Now this Gift of God is freely extended unto
all Mankind, in and by which he calls and excites to Purity and Holiness, and
to turn to him, and forsake Sin, which makes the Separation, and to come out of
Ungodliness and all Uncleanness.

The Call of the Lord has reached unto all; but the Apostle says, Have they
not all heard? yes verily; their sound went into all the Earth, and their words
to the end of the World, Romans 10.18. but all have not obeyed the Voice of the
Lord. Oh! why will ye stand idle in the Marketplace, pleading for and
contending about outward Observations, Days and Times, and who shall have the
greatest Wages, as did those whom Christ called into the Vineyard, who gives
Liberally without upbraiding a Reward answerable to every ones Desert; he is
just and righteous in giving true Measure and full Weight, and will reckon
truly with every one, and will bring all thy Deeds and Actions into thy
Remembrance: If his Witness in thy Conscience justify thee, then may thou
with Courage, Boldness and Joy appear before him; but if it condemn thee, then
God is greater, who will in no wise hold thee guiltless in his sight. And the
sluggish, idle and negligent Servants shall be clothed with the Rags of old
Adam, and their Nakedness and Poverty will appear unto all: For when Adam and
Eve had sinned, they saw their Nakedness (and not before) for then they were
naked and stripped of that Garment and Covering of Innocence, wherewith the Lord
had clothed them at the first; and then they went to work, and made for
themselves Coverings of Fig Leaves, which was but a mean Covering, instead of
the Garments of Innocence and Holiness, which the Lord had put upon them.

And how insident is it unto fallen Man and Woman to make Unrighteous Coverings
for Sin, and (as Adam after Transgression did) to hide themselves under the
Thickets and Shades of Excuses and Pretenses: But the Lord will rip off all
such Coverings and Pretenses; and We from him is pronounced against such as are
covered and not with his Spirit, that they may add Sin unto Sin. Isa. 30.1.

But now is the Everlasting Comforter come the Spirit of Truth, which leads the
Believers and the Obedient into all Truth, of whom it is written on this wise,
(as a signal Token, and to give full Assurance, that it is he who was promised)
When he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness and of
Judgment: of Sin, because they believe not in me; of Righteousness, because I
go to my Father, and ye see me no more; of Judgment, because the Prince of this
World is judged, John 16.8, 9, 10, 11.

Therefore arise, stand up and make haste, you who have been idle, and come
into the Vineyard and Work of the Lord, who gives Light unto all, whereby they
may see what is the Work of the Day, and what is required of them; for, when
the Night comes, no man can work for God: Therefore follow Christ, the Anointed
of God, who is given for a Leader and a Commander unto the People, who is
Jesus, the Peaceable Savior, who leads his People out of, and saves them from
their Sins; he has been slighted, despised and set at naught by the Wise
Master Builders; but unto a Remnant is he become the Head Stone of the Corner,
Chosen of God, Elect and Precious unto all those who have received him and
believed on him. He is that Stone which Daniel saw cut out of the Mountain
without Hands, and is now growing great, and shall fill the whole Earth, and is
striking at the Feet of the great Image and Images,; and the power of the
Dragon, Beast and False Prophet is coming down apace, and Mystery Bobylon, the
Great Whore and Mother of Harlots, is now discovered, who has ridden upon the
Beast (which by his power has defended her) and has made the Nations drunk with
the Wine of her Fornication, which she had hold forth in her Golden Cup, who
has this Inscription written in her Forehead, Mystery Babylon the Great, the
Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth, Rev. 17.5. This Whore (the
False Church) has gone a Whoring from the Life and Power of God, and from
Christ Jesus the Ground the Apostles and primitive Church of God was built. And
this false Church is that great Whore which John saw sit upon the Waters (which
are Nations, Multitudes, Tongues and People; who are not mis-parallel'd to
Waters, because through the drinking of the Whore's Cup, they are become
unstable and wavering in their Minds and Judgments) and hence did arise
Confusion, like a troubled Sea, and great Combustions, which ended in Bloodshed
and Murder; and the Beast upon which John saw the Woman sit, became Scarlet
colored; and he saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the
Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, that has been shed from Age to Age, and cries in
the Ears of the Lord for Vengeance, who will judge and avenge the Righteous
Cause of the Faithful Followers of the Lamb, with whom the Dragon, Beast and
False Prophet have made War, because they have kept the Commandments of God,
and have the Testimony of Jesus: But they overcame by the Blood of the Lamb,
and by the Word of their Testimony; and they loved not their Lives unto Death:
These are they who are not defiled with Women, but have come through great
Tribulation, and have made white their Garments in the Blood of Jesus: And we
know the Lamb shall have the Victory: And he will overturn, and overturn, until
he come to reign whose Right it is; whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and whose Dominion endures throughout all Generations; and the Kingdoms of this
World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall
Reign forever and ever, Rev. 11.15.

And Desolation and sudden Destruction is coming upon Babylon (the great City
of Confusion) and all her Inhabitants and Merchants, who have enriched
themselves by trading in her Wares and with her Costliness, shall weep and wail
because no man buyeth them any more; and they shall stand afar off for fear of
her Torment, and east Dust on their Heads, and say, Alas, alas! the Great City,
wherein were made Rich all that had Ships on the Sea by her Costliness; for in
one Hour she is made desolate, Rev. 18.15, 19. And the Lord will dry up the
Tongue of the Egyptian Sea; and all the goodly Buildings and pleasant
Pictures, which men in their fallen Wisdom and sensual Inventions have been
erecting and setting up, must now be broken down and demolished by those
Weapons which are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty through God to the
bringing down the strong Holds of Satan, the Prince of Darkness. And those whom
the Lord has delivered out of this spiritual bondage, and from under the
Egyptian Taskmasters, and has opened their Eyes to behold their miserable
Estate, and the great Desolation that is coming upon them who are yet in this
City, whose rotten Foundation is tottering and ready to fall; They cannot but
call unto them and cry, Haste, haste, and escape for your Lives out of Babylon,
and flee to the City of Refuge, as just Lot did at the Warning and Call of the
Angel of the Lord, to haste out of Sodom, and flee to the little City Zoar; and
how soon after was Sodom destroyed with Fire and Brimstone! and how eminently
was the Arm and Power of the Lord manifested in preserving his People (to wit,
Lot and his Family) in that day, who smote the Sodomites, which pursued his
Messengers with Blindness, so that they could not find the Door to go into the
House, Genesis 19.11. even so we have seen in our day, when the Lord has sent
forth his Messengers and Servants from City to City, and from one Country to
another, to persuade and exhort people, to cease from the Evil of their Ways,
and to fear and obey the Lord that created them: How has the Wicked, even Gog
and Magog, mustered up their Forces against us, the Dragon and his Angels
against Michael and his Angels; but Michael our Prince shall have the Victory.

And we have seen the Lord to smite the Egyptians, as he did Pharaoh and his
Host, when they pursued the Israelies, and would not let them go free out of
Egypt according to the Mind and Will of the Lord, that they might Worship him;
how wonderfully did the Lord God appear for their Deliverance, to the dividing
the Waters of the great Deep, that his chosen People might pass through, and
escape the Hands of their Enemies: The Sen obeyed his Command, and fled; and
Jordan was driven back, etc. Exodus 14.22. Psalm 114.3. and Pharaoh and his Host
overturned in the midst of the Sea, so that they saw the Egyptians dead upon
the Shore. Then they sung the Song of high Praises to the Lord, and the Songs
of Deliverance to the God of Israel,; whose mighty Wonders they had seen in the
Deep. And many in this day can sing a Melodious Song of High Praises to the God
of their Salvation, upon the Banks of Sion, and upon the Walls of Jerusalem, in
the deep Sense of his many great Preservations and Miraculous Diliverances,
which we have known since we were a People, by the saving Arm of his Power;
unto which we ascribe all the Honor and Glory of his own Works, who is God
over all, worthy to be Magnified, and in the highest Praised forever and
evermore.

And as we have stood in his Counsel; when with Tribulations and Temptations on
every hand we have been surrounded and beset, as the Israelites were when nthe
Sea was before them, and the Egyptians pursuing after them, and Hills and
Mountains on every hand; yet standing still, and in Patience waiting upon the
Lord, we have seen the great Salvation of God manifested in our greatest
Straits, and his Strength in our Weakness. And although we be but poor and
despicable Instruments, as in the Eyes and Esteem of the Wise and Prudent of
this World, yet is the Wisdom of this World Foolishness with God; and he is
making choice of the Despised and Contemptible things of this World, to
Confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and to bring to Naught the Understanding of
the Prudent; that no Flesh may glory in his Presence, before whom every tall
Cedar and sturdy Oak must how, and all Shrubs must be rooted up; not by Sword,
nor by Spear, or any Carnal Weapon, but by the Word of God's Power, which is
quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged Sword: which Word also is as a
Fire and an Hammer to cut down, burn up and beat in pieces all the Ungodliness
of Wicked men, that stands in Opposition to Him whose right it is to Reign in
the Kingdoms of Men.

And we have seen the Uncircumcised Philistims to fall Heaps upon Heaps, as
they did by the hand of Sampson, who had no better Instrument of War than the
Jaw Bone of an Ass; which in outward appearance was very Contemptible; yet
standing in that living Faith which gives Victory, the Conquest is known. And
this is that Word of Faith which the Apostles preached, by which the Just live
to God, and is much more precious than Gold that perishes -- One Grain of it
(if no bigger than a Grain of Mustard Seed) is sufficient to enable for an
Encounter against the potent Enemy of the Soul: Although he come like a roaring
Lion, seeking his prey, in this Faith there is safety for the Righteous, by
which the holy men of God stood and were upheld, when they fought the good
Fight of Faith; and by which the Noble Warriors and Ancients of Israel obtained
a Good Report, and did many Valient Acts, and got Victory by and through it, by
the stopping the Mouths of Lions, quenching the Violence of Fire, escaping the
Edge of the Sword, out of Weakness were made Strong* And by this Faith, Women
received their Dead raised to Life again, etc. Heb. 11.34, 35. And others were
Tortured, not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection.

And it was by Virtue of this Living Faith, that David whilst a Stripling, and
a Keeper of his Father's Sheep, went forth against, and Encountered with Goliath
of Gath, that Great Giant, and Uncircumcised Philistim, who had defied the
Armies of the Living God, and insulted over them, because of his Greatness and
Strength; at which Saul was Discouraged. But says little David, Let no man's
Heart fail because of him; Thy Servant will go and fight with this Philistim.
Now when Saul seemed to Discourage him, David answered and said unto Saul, Thy
Servant kept his Father's Sheep; and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear,
and took a Sheep out of the Flock; and I went out and rescued the Lamb, and
slew the Lion and the Bear. And this Uncircumcised Philistim shall be as one of
them, because he railed on the Host of the Living God. Moreover, he said, The
Lord that delivered me out of the Paw of the Lion, and out of the Paw of the
Bear; he will deliver me out of the Hand of this Philistin. So David went out
against him (not with Readiness Armor; For says he, I cannot go with these, for
I am not accustomed) with his Staff and his Sling, and Five SMOOTH Stones taken
out of a Brook; and when the Philistim saw David come, he Disdained him, being
but a Boy, and for the Meanness of his Instrument of War, and said, Am I a Dog,
that thou come to me with a Staff? with other Disdainful and Approbious
Language. But David answered, Thou come to me with a Sword and with a Spear,
and a Shield: But I come unto thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of
the Armies of Israel, whom thou have defied; This Day will the Lord deliver
thee in to mine Hands, etc. 1 Samuel Chapter 17. Read throughout.

So David slew this great Giant with a Sling and a smooth Stone out of his Page,
which was but a mean Instrument, yet being handled in the Faith, and Power of
God, prevailed, and gave Israel Victory over their Enemies.

Oh! how precious is this Faith, whereby the Righteous obtain Victory over both
Inward and Outward Enemies from Generation to Generation?

This is that Faith which comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God;
which Word is nigh thee, even in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, Romans 10.8. And is
the same Word unto which Moses recommended and directed the Children of Israel,
and earnestly pressed them to the keeping of the Commandment, and the Word in
the Heart, and said, It is NOT in Heaven, that thou should say, Who shall
ascend to bring it from thence? NEITHER is it beyond the Sea, that thou
should say, Who shall go over to fetch it us? but the Word is very nigh thee,
in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, for to do it. Behold, this day I have set before
thee Life and Good, Death and Evil, Deuteronomy, Chap. 30. Verse 12, 13, 14, 15.

From whence I conclude, and am fully satisfied, that Life and Good consists
in, and is obtained by hearkening unto and obeying that Word that is nigh in
the Heart. And on the contrary, by sleighting and rejecting of it, Death and
Evil comes upon the Souls of all those who running after Empty Words and after
the Tree of Knowledge, and come not to the Guidance of that Inward WORD in the
Heart, which is able to give them Acceptance with the Lord.

For Without Faith (viz. in this Word which purifies the Heart) it is
impossible to please God; and by it we have Access unto him. But a Dead,
Historical or Notional Faith will profit none: But that which purifieth the
Heart, and works by Love, and purges the Conscience from Dead Works (of
which Christ is the Author and Finisher too) that only will profit.

And this True and Living Faith is known by the Blessed Effects and Works of
it; for as the Body without the Spirit is Dead, so Faith without Works is Dead
also, James 2.26.

And all those that are true Believers in Christ Jesus, the Lamb of God, that
takes away the Sins of the World, they come to find the Powerful Operation of
this Faith in his Blood to cleanse and purify them from all Filthiness both of
Flesh and Spirit, and hereby are made Vessels of Honor, and fit Temples for
the Lord to dwell in, being sanctified through the Blood of Cleansing, and
Washed with pure Water, and made clean thereby; so that an Acceptable Sacrifice
and a Pure Offering is offered up unto God from a clean Vessel, which is a
Sweet Savor unto him, and well pleasing in his Sight; and hereby we know that
we are of God, because we have Admittance into his Presence, and free Access to
the Throne of his Grace; so that whatsoever we ask by Faith, and in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, it is granted unto us.

And this Faith is the Gift of God, and is received and witnessed in receiving
Christ the true Light. But they that deny the Light, are Strangers to this
Faith, and so are ignorant of the Blood of Cleansing, and of that which should
reconcile them to God, and discover unto them the Mysteries of his Kingdom.

But my true desire are, that all who in any measure are stirred up, and feel
an inquiry and search begun in their Hearts after the Lord and the knowledge of
his Way, that such may receive the word of Truth into their Hearts, and that it
may be as Seed sown upon good Ground, which takes Root downward and brings
forth Fruit upward, and an Heavenly increase to God and Satisfaction and
Comfort to their Souls may be witnessed, that all old things may be done away,
the old Heavens and the old Earth, with the beggarly Elements and Rudiments of
the World, that the new Heavens and the new Earth may be known, wherein dwells
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. Oh! Prise the Day of your
Visitation and let it not slip over your Heads unregarded, lest it be said unto
you as it was to Jerusalem of Old, How often would I have gathered you as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings? But ye would not; Behold, your Habitation
shall be left unto you desolate, Matthew. 23.37, 38. Now mark, 'twas not because
they COULD not come unto Christ, (but because they WOULD not) that they were
left ungathered; there was a Sensual and Corrupt Will in them that would not be
subject to him that called them, nor bow down their Necks to Christ's Yoke, but
Stiff-necked and Rebellious were they, wherefore Christ withdrew himself, and
said unto them, Henceforth ye shall not see me, until ye say, Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord, verse. 39.

Now, consider your Latter End, and labor to make your Calling and Election
sure, that when you come to render a final Account of the Deeds done in the
Body to the Great and Mighty Judge of Heaven and Earth (before whose Tribunal
Seat of Judgment All must appear) you may receive the Sentence of PEACE, and
the Reward of WELL DONE GOOD AND FAITHFUL SERVANT, ENTER INTO THE JOY OF THY
LORD. Oh! this will be a joyful Sentence, and more Estimable than all the Glory
of Egypt-or the Treasure of Ten Thousand Worlds, where the Soul comes to
possess an Everlasting Inheritance, and a Crown of Life and Immortality among
them that are sanctified, where the Song of High Praises and Everlasting
Halelujahs is sung to the God of their Salvation, who has wiped away all Tears
from their Eyes, and Sighing and Sorrow is fled away; Which are the true
Breathings of her who desires the Everlasting Well-being of the Souls of all
People,

Isabel Yeamans.
Swarthmore, the 2d Month, 1679.
THE END.

