AN Experimental INDEX of the HEART: OR, SELF-KNOWLEDGE.

In which ( As in a Looking-glass) the civillest of men may see what need they
have of a Redeemer; and that it most deeply concerns them with all speed, to
sue out their pardon in Christ, and to rely wholly and only upon Free Grace,
for pardon and Salvation; except they prefer an everlasting furnace of fire and
brimstone in Hell, before an eternal weight of superabundant glory in Heaven,
as all (most sottishly) do, that by sin and Satan are bewitched.

Drawn up and published for the good of all, By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex,
Florilegus.

Add this as a Third Part to the Trial of true Wisdom, and those Three
Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, Entitled, A short and sure Way
to Grace and Salvation.

Sect. XXVII.
A Loose Libertine, meeting with his Friend that had lately been a Formal
Christian; he greets him as follows:

SIR, methinks I have observed in you a strange alteration, since our last
meeting at Middleburrough: not only in your behavior, company, and converse;
but even in your countenance: What is the matter, if I may be so bold?


Convert. Truly Sir, you are not at all mistaken, nor am I unwilling to
acquaint you with the cause; if you can affoard to hear it.

Soon after my return into England, I was carried by a Friend to hear a Sermon:
where the Minister so represented the very thoughts, secrets, and
deceitfulness of my heart unto my conscience; that I could not but say of him,
as the woman of Samaria once spoke of our Savior: He has told me all things
that ever I did. Which made me conclude with that Unbeliever, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
That God was in him of a truth: nor could he ever have so done, if he were not
of God. As the young man in the Gospel reasoned with the Pharisees, touching
Jesus when he had opened his eyes, that had been blind from his birth, Joh.
9.32, 33. Whereupon I could have no peace nor rest, until I had further
communed with him about my estate; for I found my self in a lost condition
touching Eternity: It faring with me as it did with those Jews, Act. 2. when
Peter by his searching Sermon, had convinced them, that Christ, whom they had
by wicked hands crucified and slain, was the only Son of God, and Lord of
glory, ver. 36, 37. And having had the happiness to enjoy the benefit of his
sage advice as I stood in need thereof; ( God having given him the tongue of
the learned, to administer a word is season to them that are weary, Isa 50.4.)
I bless God, his Word and Spirit has wrought in me such a change and strange
alteration, that it has opened mine eyes that were blind before, inclined my
will to obedience, which before was rebellious, softened my heart, sanctified
and quite changed my affections: so that I now love that good which before I
hated, and hate that evil which before I loved; and am delighted with those
holy exercises, which heretofore did most displease me; and am displeased with
those vain pleasures and filthy sins which in times past did most delight me.
Which is such a mercy, that no tongue is able to express! For till that hour I
went on in the broad way, and worlds road to destruction, without any mistrust;
whereas now God has been pleased to take me into his Kingdom of grace here,
and will never leave me, until he has brought me to his Kingdom of glory
hereafter.


Loose Libertine. What you speak makes me wonder: for I ever held you the
compleatest man of my acquaintance; just in all your dealings, temperate and
civil in your deportment; yea, I have never seen you exceed in the least, or
heard you swear an Oath, except faith and troth, and that very rarely. Besides,
you have been a good Protestant, and gone to Church all your days.


Convert. What you speak, none that know me, can contradict; nor could they
ever accuse me of any scandalous crime, or unjust act. Yea, I had the same
thoughts of my self; and should any one have told me formerly, that I was such
a great sinner, such a Devil Incarnate as I was! I should have replied as
Hazael did to the Prophet, (telling him of the abominable wickedness he would
e're long commit) What am I a dog, etc. 2 Kings 8.12, 13. And no wonder, for as
every man in his natural condition, is stark blind to spiritual objects, 1 Cor.
2.14. so the heart of man is deceitful above all things: even so deceitful,
that none but God alone can know it, as the Prophet shows, Jer. 17.10. But
because this is a truth that transcends your belief, and because it may be of
singular use to you also, to know the same: I will give you a short character
of my former condition; the which done, I doubt not but you will assent unto
what I have hitherto said, or shall further relate.


Sect. XXVIII.
First, Touching my knowledge, (I mean saving knowledge, without which the soul
cannot be good, us wise Solomon witnesses, Prove. 19.2.) It was such, (though I
thought my self wiser than to make scruple of, or perplex my self about matters
of Religion, as do the Religious: even as the King of Tyrus thought himself
wiser than Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.3.) that spiritual things were mostly represented
to my understanding false, and clean contrary to what they are indeed. Like
corporal things in a Looking-glass, wherein those that are on the right hand
seem to be on the left, and those that are on the left hand seem to be on the
right. As it fared with Saint Paul, while he was in his natural condition, Act.
26.9. which made me think and call evil, good; and good, evil; bitter, sweet,
and sweet bitter; to justify the wick^d, and condemn the just, as the Prophet
complains, Isa. 5.20, 23.

As for instance, I most sottishly thought, that I both loved, and served God
as I ought; yea, I should have taken it in soul scorn, if any one had
questioned the same: when indeed I was a Traitor to God, and took up arms
against all that worshipped him in Spirit and in truth. I was so far from
loving and serving him, that I hated those that did it; and that for their so
doing; I could also hear him blasphemed, reproached, and dishonored, without
being once stirred, or moved at it. I loved him dearly; but I could never
affoard to speak a word for him; and likewise his Children entirely, but
instead of justifiing them, or speaking in their defense, when I heard them
scoft, scorned and abused by wicked and ungodly men; all my delight was to jeer
at slight and slander them where ever I came: I more feared the Magistrate,
than I feared God; and more regarded the blasts of men's breath, than the fire
of Gods wrath. I chose rather to disobey God, than to displease great ones; and
feared more the worlds scorns, then his anger.

And the like of Christ that died for me; a strong argument that I loved
Christ, when I hated all that resembled him in holiness. Yea, I so hated
holiness, that I most bitterly hated men for being holy: insomuch that my
blood would rise at the sight of a good man, as some stomachs will rise an the
sight of sweetmeats. I was a Christian in name, but I could scoff at a
Christian indeed; I could honor the dead Saints in a formal profession; while
I worried the living Saints in a cruel persecution. I condemned all for
Roundheads, that had more Religion than a Heathen, or knowledge of heavenly
things, than a child in the womb has of the things of this life; or conscience
than an Atheist; or care of his soul, than a Beast. I had always the basest
thoughts of the best men: making ill constructions of whatsoever they did or
spoke: as the Scribes and Pharisees dealt by our Savior.


Sect. XXIX.
As, O what a poor slave did I hold the man of a tender conscience to be! yea,
how did I applaud my self for being zeallesse, and fearlesse; together with my
great discretion, and moderation: when I saw this man vexed for his zeal, that
other hated for his knowledge, a third persecuted for the profession of his
Faith, etc. For (being like Cain, Ishmael, Eliab; Michel, Pharaoh, and Festus)
I thought their Religion Puritanisme, their conscience, of sin, hypocrisy;
their profession, dissimulation; their prudence, policy; their faith and
confidence, presumption; their zeal of Gods glory, to be pride and malice;
their obedience to Gods Laws, rebellion to Princes; their execution of justice,
cruelty, etc. If they were any thing devout or forward to admonish others, that
so they might pluck them out of the fire; I conceived them to be besides
themselves: as our Savior was thought to be by his Kinsfolk, and Saint Paul by
Festus, Mark. 3.21. John 10.20. Acts 26.24. 1 Cor. 1.18. My religion was to
oppose the power of Religion; and my knowledge of the truth, to know how to
argue against the truth. (...) never affected Christ's Ambassadors, that
preached the glad tidings of salvation, but had a spleen against them; yea, I
hated a Minister, for being a Minister; especially, if a godly and zealous one,
that spoke home to my conscience, and told me of my sins; much more if he would
not admit me to the Lords Table without trial and examination: yea, then like
Ahab to Micah, I became his enemy, and hated him ever after; would impeach his
credit, and detain from him his dues. And are not all these strong evidences,
that I loved and served God, and my Redeemer as I ought? But to make it more
manifest, what a rare Christian I was:

I thought my self a Believer; yea, I could boast of a strong faith, when yet I
fell short of the very Devils in believing: for they believe the threats and
judgments contained in the Word, and tremble thereat, James 2.19. Whereas I
thought them but scar^crows to fright the simple withal: yea, I held Hell it
self but a fancy, not worth the fearing.

Because I was not notoriously wicked, but had a form of godliness, was civil,
etc. I was able to delude my own soul, and put off all reproofs and
threatenings; by comparing my self with those, that I presumed were worse than
my self: as, Drunkards, Adulterers, Blasphemers, Oppressors, shedders of blood,
and the like; counting none wicked but such. Yea, looking upon these, I admired
my own holiness; and thought my moral honesty, would be sufficient to save me.
Nor did I know wherein I had offended.

And whereas the Law is spiritual, and binds the heart from affecting, no less
than the hand from acting: I was so blind and ignorant, that I thought the
Commandment was not broken, if the outward gross sin be ^orborn. Whence these
were my thoughts, I never brake the first Commandment, of having many gods:
for I was no Papist, nor Idolater: nor the second, for I worshipped God aright:
nor the third, for I had been no common swearer, only a few petty oaths: nor
the fourth, for I had every Sabbath gone duly to Church: not the fifth, for I
ever honored my Parents, and have been a loyal subject: not the sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, or tenth, for I never committed murder, or adultery,
never stale ought, never bare false witness; nor could I call to mind, that I
had at any time coveted my neighbors wife, servant; estate, etc. And nothing
more common with me, than to brag of good heart and meaning, of the strength of
my faith and hope, of my just and upright dealing, etc. And because I abstained
from notorious sins, I thought my self an excellent Christian; if God was not
beholding to me for not wounding his name with oaths, for not drinking and
playing out his Sabbaths, for not railing on his Ministers, for not oppressing
and persecuting his poor Members, etc.


Sect. XXX.
And yet had it been so, as I imagined; admit I had never offended in the least
all my life; either in thought, word, or deed: yet this were but one half of
what I owe to God; this were but to observe the negative part of his law; still
the affirmative part thereof I had been so far from performing, that I had not
so much as thought of it. And to be just in the sight of God, and graciously
accepted of him, these two things are required: the satisfactory part to escape
Hell, and the meritorious part to get Heaven. And the true method of grace is,
Cease to do evil, Learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. The Fig Tree was cursed, not
for bearing evil fruit; but because it bare no good. The evil servant was not
bound hand and foot, and cast into prison, for wasting his Masters goods; but
for not gaining with them. And those Reprobates at the last day, shall be bid
depart into everlasting fire; not for wronging or robbing of any, but for not
giving, for not comforting Christ's poor Members, Mat. 25. So that my case was
most desperate. For though, with that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. I was apt to thank
God, and brag; that I was just, and paid every man his due: yet I never thought
of being holy, and of paying God his dues; as his due of believing, or
repenting, of new obedience, his due of praying, hearing, conferring,
meditating on his word and works, sanct^^^ing his Sabbaths, and instructing my
Children and Servants; teaching them to fear the Lord. His due of Love, Fear,
Thankfulness, Zeal for his Glory, charity and mercy to Christ's poor Members,
and the like.

I should have served God in spirit, and according to Christ's Gospel: as all
that are wise hearted do live, and believe, and hear, and invocate, and hope,
and fear, and love, and worship God in such manner, as his word prescribes. I
should have been effectually called, and become a new Creature by regeneration;
being begotten and born anew, by the immortal seed of the Word. I should have
found an apparent change wrought in my judgment, affections, and actions, to
what they were formerly. The Old man should have changed with the New man,
worldly wisdom with Heavenly wisdom, carnal love for spiritual love, servile
fear for Christian and filial fear, idle thoughts for holy thoughts, vain words
for holy and wholesome words, fleshly works for works of righteousness: even
hating what I formerly loved, and loving what I formerly hated.

But alas! I have heard the Gospel day after day, and year after year: which is
the strong arm of the Lord, and the mighty power of God to salvation; That is
quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged-sword; and yet stood it
out and resisted, Instead of submitting to Christ's call; even refusing the free
offer of grace and salvation. I have heard the word faithfully and powerfully
preached, for forty years: yet remained in my natural condition unregenerate:
without which new birth, there is no being saved, as our Savior affirms, Joh.
3.5. I had not trodden one step in the way to conversion: for the first part of
conversion, is to love them that love God, 1 John 3.10, 11, 14. I should daily
have grown in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
but I was so far from growing in grace, that I had not one spark of grace or
holiness; without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12 14. I was all for
observing the second Table, without respect to the first: or all for outward
conformity, not at all for spiritual and inward holiness of the heart.


Sect. XXXI.
Either what I did was not morally good for the matter, or not well done for
the manner; nor to any right ends: as out of duty and thankfulness to God, and
my Redeemer; and out of love to my fellow members. Without which the most
glorious performances, and rarest virtues, are but shining sins, or beautiful
abominations. Gods Glory was not my principal end, nor to be saved my greatest
care.

I was a good, civil, moral, honest hypocrite, or Infidel: but none of these
graces, grew in the Garden of my heart. I did not shine out as a light, by a
holy conversation to glorify God, and win others. Now only to refrain evil,
except a man hates it also, and does the contrary good; is to be evil still:
because honesty without piety, is but a body without a soul.

All my Religion was either superstition, or formality, or hypocrisy. I had a
form of godliness, but denied the power thereof: I often drew near unto God
with my mouth, and honored him with my lips: but my heart was far from him,
Isa. 29.13. Mark. 7.2. to 14. Matthew. 15.7. to 10. All which considered, viz.
the means which God had afforded me, and the little use I had made thereof,
left me in a far worse condition, than the very heathen, that never heard of
Christ. So that it was Gods unspeakable mercy, that I am not at this present
frying in Hell flames, never to be freed.

God has sent unto us all his Servants the Prophets, rising up early, and they
have been instant in Preaching the Gospel, both in season, and out of season:
but my carnal heart has ever been flint unto God, wax to Satan: you shall dye,
if you continue in the practice of sin, I heard: but you shall not dye, as
says the Devil, I believed.


Sect. XXXII.
Besides all this, suppose I had none of these to answer for; neither sins of
Commission, nor sins of Omission: yet Original sin were enough to damn me, no
need of any more; and yet my actual transgressions have been such, and so many,
and my ingratitude therein so great; that it might have sunk me down with
shame, and left me hopeless of ever obtaining pardon for them. As see but some
small part of my monstrous, and devilish ingratitude to so good a God, so
loving and merciful a Savior and Redeemer; that has done, and suffered so
much for me, even more than can either be expressed or conceived, by any heart
were it as deep as the Sea!

Touching what God and Christ has done for me, in the first place he gave me
my self, and all the creatures to serve for my use; yea he created me after his
own Image, in righteousness, and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the
truth, with a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed, and
happy condition. But this was nothing in comparison; for when I was in a sad
condition, when I had forfeited all this and my self; when by sin I had turned
that Image of God into the Image of Satan, and wilfully plunged my soul and
body into eternal torments: when I was become his enemy, mortally hating him,
and to my utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only enemies
sin and Satan; not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement, but a
perverse and obstinate will, to resist all means tending thereunto: he did
redeem me, not only without asking, but even against my will; so making of me
his cursed enemy, a Servant, of a Servant a Son, of a Son an Heir, and Coheir
with Christ, Gal. 4.7. But how have I requited this so great, so superlative a
mercy? All my recompense of Gods love unto me, has been to do that which he
hates, and to hate those whom he loves.

Christ the fountain of all good is my Lord, by a manifold right, and I his
servant by all manner of obligations. First, He is my Lord by the right of
Creation, as being his workmanship made by him. Secondly, By the right of
Redemption, being his purchase bought by him. Thirdly, Of preservation, being
kept, upheld, and maintained by him. Fourthly, His by Vocation, even of his
family; having admitted me a member of his visible Church. Fifthly, His also
(had it not been my own fault) by sanctication, whereby to possess me. Lastly,
He would have me of his Court by glorification, that he might crown me; so that
I was every way his. God had raised me from a beggar to a great estate: but how
did I requite him? I would not if possible, suffer a godly and conscientious
Minister to be chosen, or to abide where I had to do; but to bring in one that
would flatter sin, and flout holiness; discourage the godly, and encourage the
wicked, I used both my own, and all my friends utmost ability. Much more might
be mentioned, but I fear to be tedious.

Now argue with all the world, and they will conclude, that there is no vice
like ingratitude. But I have been more ungrateful to God, than can be expressed
by the best Orator alive. It was horrible ingratitude in the Jews to scourge
and crucify Christ, who did them good every way; for he healed their diseases,
fed their bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became man, and lived
miserably amongst them many years, that he might save their souls: but they
fell short of my ingratitude to God, in that most of them were not in the least
convinced, that he was the Messiah sent from God, and promised from the
beginning. But I have not only denied this Lord that bought me, but I hated
him; yea, most spitefully and maliciously fought on Satan's, and sins side
against him; and persecuted his children, and the truth with all my might: and
all this against knowledge, and conscience, after some measure of illumination,
which cannot be affirmed of the Jews. Yet miserable wretch that I was, if I
could have given him my body and soul, they should have been saved by it, but
he were never the better for them.


Sect. XXXIII.
Lastly, To tell you that which is more strange! Notwithstanding all this that
has been mentioned, and much more: Yet I thought my self a good Christian
forsooth; yea, with that young man in the Gospel, I thought I had kept all the
Commandments. Nor was I a whit troubled for sin, either original, or actual:
but my conscience was at quiet, and I was at peace, neither did any sin trouble
me. Yea, I would applaud my self with that Pharisee, Luke 18.9, to 15. and say,
I was not like other men: not once doubting of my salvation. I ever refused to
do what my Maker commanded, and yet confidently hoped to escape what he
threatened. Nor did I doubt of having Christ my Redeemer and Advocate in the
next life, when I had been a bitter enemy to him and his members in this life.
Here was blindness with a witness; as it is not to be believed how blind and
blackish men are, that have only the flesh for their guide; especially if they
have hardened their hearts, and seared their consciences with a customary
sinning. As I could give you for instance, a large catalogue of rare examples,
how sin has besotted men: and what starkfools carnal men are in spirital
things; be they never so wise for mundane knowledge. But least it should be
taken for a digression or excursion, you shall have a list of them by
themselves, the which I will add as an Appendix to this Discourse, or Dialogue.
In the mean time I have given you a brief of my manifold provocations, and
great ingratitude to my Maker and Redeemer (for otherwise I might be endless
in the prosecution thereof.) It remains that I should in like manner lay open
my original defilement; which is the fountain whence all the former (whether
sins of commission, or sins of omission) do flow. But touching it be pleased to
peruse that small Tract, entitled, A short and sure way to Grace and
Salvation: Or, Three Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, by R. Y.
from page 4. to page 10.


Sect. XXXIV.
Loose Libertine. If this has been your case, no wonder it has startled you;
for to deal plainly with you, as you have done with me; what I have heard from
you, makes me also tremble. For if such honest moral men, that live so
unreprovably, as you had done, go not to heaven; what will become of me? that
have been openly Profane, and notoriously wicked all my time? Yea, it
contented me not to do wickedly my self, and so damn my own soul: but I have
been the occasion of drawing hundreds to Hell with me, by seducing some, and
giving ill example to others, (the infection of sin, being much worse than the
act.) As how many have I drawn to be Drunkards, and swearers, and whoremongers,
and profane persons? insomuch, that the blood of so many souls as I have drawn
away, will be required at my hands. Yea, my life has been so debauched and
licentious, that I have brought a scandal upon the Gospel, and made it odious
to the very Turks and Infidels, Romans 2.24.


Convert. Alas! what I did that was morally good, or what evil I refrained,
was more for self ends, or more for fear of men's Laws, than for love of Christ's
Gospel. True, I went under the notion of an honest man, and a good Christian: I
was baptized into the faith, and made a member of Christ's vivisible Church: but
I was so far from endeavoring to perform, what I then promised, that in effect
I even renounced both Christ, and my Baptism, in persecuting him, and all that
sincerely professed his Name; thinking I did God good service therein, Joh.
16.2. Gal. 1.13, 14. Phil. 3.6. Nor was it for want of ignorance, that you
thought so of me: for by nature (be we never so mild and gentle) we are all
the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. and children of the Devil, Joh. 8.44. Yea,
the very best moral man is but a tame Devil, as Athanasius well notes. But it
is a true proverb, the blind eat many a fly; and all colors are alike to him
that is in the dark.


Loose Libertine. So much the worse is my condition: for my conscience tells
me, there is not a word you have spoken of your self, but I can justly apply
the same unto my own soul, and a great deal more. For whereas you have been a
moral honest man; so that none except your self, could tax you for breaking
either Gods Law, or man's: I have been so wicked and profane, that I could most
presumptuosly, and of set purpose, take a pride in my wickedness, commit it
with greediness, speak for it, defend it, joy in it, boast of it, tempt and
enforce to it; yea, mock them that disliked it. As if I would send challenges
into Heaven, and make love to destruction; and yet did applaud my self, and
prefer my own condition before other men's: saying, I was no dissembler; yea, I
hated the hypocrisy of Professors: I do not justify my self, and despise
others, like the Puritanes: I am not factious, schismatical, singular,
censorious, etc. I am not rebellious, nor contentious like the Brownists, and
Anabaptists. I am a good fellow, and love an honest man with my heart, etc. and
as touching a good conscience, I was never troubled in mind, as many scrupulous
fools are. I have a good heart, and mean as well as the precisest. Bur now I
see the Devil and my own deceitful heart deluded me so, that my whole life
hither to, has been but a dream, and that like a blind man, I was running head
long to Hell, when yet I thought my self in the way to Heaven. Just as if a
beggar should dream, that he were a King, or as if a traitor should dream of
his being crowned, when indeed he was to be beheaded; the case of Laodicea,
Rev. 3.17. the young man in the Gospel, Luke 18.20, 21. and that Pharisee,
spoken of Luke 18.11, 12.


Sect. XXXV.
Convert. It was not your case alone, but so it fares with the worst of
sinners: Only it much rejoices me, that it has pleased God to open your eyes,
to see all this in your self. For flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
you. Yea we are naturally so blind, and deaf, and dead in sin and in soul: that
we can no more discern our spiritual filthiness, nor feel sin to be a burden,
than a blind Ethiopian can see his own blackness, or than a dead-man can feel
the weight of a burden, when it is laid upon him, Act. 28.27. Isa. 6.9, 10,

And this common experience shows; for if you observe it, who more jocond,
confident and secure, than the worst of sinners; they can strut it under an
unsupportable Mass of oaths, blasphemies, thefts, murders, adulteries,
drunkenness and other the like sins; yea can easily swallow these spiders with
Mithridates, and digest them too: when one that is regenerate, shrinkes under
the burden of wandering thoughts, and want of proficiency. But why is it? they
are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. Revel. 3.1. Now lay a mountain upon a dead-man, he
feels not once the weight.

To a Christian that has the life of grace, the least sin lies heavy upon the
conscience: but to him that is dead, let his sins be as heavy as a mountain of
lead; he seels in them no weight at all.

Again, They are insensible of their sin and danger, because ignorant for what
the eye sees not, the heart rueth not. Security makes worldlings merry, and
therefore are they secure, because they are ignorant. A dunce we know, seldom
makes doubts: yea a fool, says Solomon, boasts and is confident, Prove.
14.16. neither do blind men ever blush. And the truth is, were it not for pride
and ignorance, a world of men would be ashamed to have their faces seen abroad.
For take away from men's minds vain opinions, flattering hopes, false
valuations, imaginations, and the like; you will leave the minds of most men
and women, but poor shrunken things; full of melancholy, indisposition, and
unpleasing to themselves. Ignorance is a veil or curtain to hide away their
sins: whereupon they are never troubled in conscience, nor macerated with cares
about eternity; but think that all will be well.

The Devil and the flesh, prophecy prosperity to sin, yea life and salvation,
as the Pope promised the powder-traitors: but death and damnation (which Gods
Spirit threatens) will prove the crop they will reap. For God it true, the
Devil and all flesh are liars.

When we become regenerate, and forsake sin, then the Devil strongly and
strangely assaults us: as he did Christ, when he was newly baptized; and
Pharaoh the children of Israel, when they would forsake Egypt; and Herod the
children, when Christ was come to deliver his people. Whence, commonly it comes
to pass, that those think best of themselves, that ^ave least cause; yea the
true Christian, is as fearful to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the
false is unwilling, to be driven from it. They that have store of grace, mourn
for the want of it: and they that indeed Want it, chant their abundance. None
so apt to doubt their adoption, as they that may be assured of it: nor none
more usually fear, then they that have the greatest cause to hope. We feel
corruption not by corruption, but by grace: and therefore the more we feel our
inward corruptions; the more grace we have.

Contraries, the nearer they are to one another, the sharper is the conflict
betwixt them: now of all enemies, the spirit and flesh are nearest one to
another, being both in the soul of a regenerate man; and in all faculties of
the soul, and in every action that springs from those faculties. The more
grace, the more spiritual life; and the more spiritual life, the more antipathy
to the contrary: whence none are so sensible of corruption, as those that have
the most living souls.


Sect. XXXVI.
Now for remedy of the contrary, there cannot be a better lesson for carnal men
to learn than this. All the Promises of God are conditional, to take place if
we repent: as all the threatenings of God are conditional, to take place if we
repent not. But wicked men, as they believe without repenting; their faith
being mere presumption: so they repent without believing, their repentance
being indeed desperation: and this observe, we are cast down in the
disappointing of our hopes; in the same measure, as we were too much lifted up,
in expectation of good from them. Whence these perremptory presumers if ever
they repent, it is commonly as Francis Spira, an Advocate of Padua did: and
never did any man plead so well for himself, as he did against himself.

One star is much bigger than the Earth; yet seems many degrees less. It is
the nature of fear, to make dangers greater, helps less then they are Christ
has promised peace and rest unto their souls that labor, and are ^eavy laden;
and to those that walk according to rule, Matthew. 11.29. Gal. ^.16. even place
celestial in the state of grace, and peace eternal in the ^^ate of glory. Such
therefore as never were distressed in conscience, or live loosly; never had
true peace. Peace is the Daughter of Righteousness. Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God. But he who makes a bridge of his own shadow,
will be sure to fall into the water.

Those Blocks, that never in their life were moved with Gods threatenings, never
in any straight of conscience, never groaned under the burden of Gods anger:
they have not so much as entered into the porch of this house, or lift a foot
over the threshold, of this School of repentance. Oh! that we could but so much
fear the eternal pains, as we do the temporary; and be but so careful to save
our souls from torment, as our bodies. In the mean time, the case of these men
is so much the worse; by how much there fear is the less. It faring with the
soul, as with the body. Those diseases, which do take away all sense of pain;
are of all others most desperate. As the dead Palsy, the falling sickness,
the sleepy lethargy, etc. And the Patient is most dangerously sick, when he
has no feeling thereof. In like manner, whilst they suppose themselves to be
free from judgment; they are already smitten with the heaviest of Gods
judgments; a heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.5.

In a lethargy, it is needful the Patient should be cast into a burning Fever;
because the senses are benumbed, and this will waken them, and dry up the
besotting humors. So in our dead security, before our conversion; God is fain
to let the Law, Sin, Conscience and Satan loose upon us; and to kindle the very
fire of Hell in our souls: that so we might be roused out of our security: but
thousands of these blocks, both live and depart with as great hopes, as men go
to a lottery: even dreaming of Heaven, until they awake in Hell. For they too
often die, without any remorse of conscience like blocks; or as an Ox dies in a
ditch. Yea thousands that live like Laban, dye like Nabal, (which is but the
same word inverted,) whilst others the dear Children of God, dye in distress
of conscience. For it is not every good man's hap, to dye like Antoninus Pius;
whose death was after the fashion, and semblance of a kindly and pleasant
sleep. However Saint Austin's rule, will be sure to hold; He cannot dye ill,
that has lived well: and for the most part, He that lives conscionably, dies
comfortably, and departs rich. And so you see, how it fares with the
wickedest and worst of men. Wherefore if you are truly sensible of your
wretchedness, it is a good sign, that you are in some forwardness to be
recovered; and really to become so good, as formerly you but dreamed, or
imagined your self to be. And indeed the very first step to grace, is to feel
the want of grace; and the next way to receive mercy, is to see your self
miserable. Therefore our constant, and most diligent search should be, to find
out the naughtiness of our own hearts; and to get strength from God, against
our prevailing corruptions.


Sect. XXXVII.
Loose Libertine. But is there any hope for one so wicked as I? who have turned
the grace of God into wantonness; applying Christ's passion as a warrant for my
licenciousnesse, not as a remedy; and taking his death at a license to sin, his
cross as a Letters pattent to do mischief. As if a man should head his drum of
rebellion, with his pardon. For I have most spitefully, and maliciously, taken
up arms against my Maker, and fought against my Redeemer all my days.


Convert. Do but unfeignedly repent you of your sins, and forsake your former
evil ways, and lay hold upon Christ by a true, and lively faith: my soul for
yours, God is very ready to forgive them, be they never so many, and
innumerable for multitude; never to heinous, for quality and magnitude. Yea, I
can show you your pardon from the great King of Heaven for all that is past:
the which you may read at large Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.21. to 29. and 33.11. Joel
2.12, 13, 14. Yea read 1 Cor. 6.10, 11, together with the story of Manasses,
Mary Magdelen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son: and you shall see presidents
thereof. Yea the very murderers of the Son of God, upon their serious and
unfeigned repentance, and steadfast believing in him; received pardon and
salvation. And indeed despair, is a sin which never knew Jesus. True, every sin
deserves damnation: but no sin shall condemn, but the lying and continuing in
it. True Repentance, is ever blessed with forgiveness. And know this, that Gods
mercy is greater than thy sin, whatever it be: you cannot be so infinite in
sinning, as he is infinite in pardoning, if you repent: yea sins upon
repentance are so remitted; as if they had never been committed. I will put
away thy transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, Isa. 44.22. And
what by corruption has been done, by repentance is undone. As the former
examples witness. Come and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, Isa. 1.18. Yea whiter than
snow. For the Prophet David laying open his blood-guiltinesse, and his original
impurity, uses these words: Purge me with bysop, and I shall be clean; wash
me, and I shall be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51.7. And in reason, did Christ come
to call sinners to repentance? and shall he not show mercy to the penitent? Or
who would not cast his burden upon him, that desires to give ease? As I live
says the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.

Only, apply not this salve before the ulcer be searched to the bottom: Lay not
hold upon mercy, until you be thoroughly humbled. The only way to become good;
is first to believe that you are evil: and by accusing our selves, we prevent
Satan: By judging our selves, we prevent God.

Are we as sick of sorrow, as we are of sin; then may we hopefully go to the
Physician of our souls, who came into the world only to cure the sick, and to
give light to them only, who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. God
does not pour the oil of grace, but into a broken, and contrite heart.

Would thou get out of the miserable estate of nature, into the blessed
estate of grace? and of Satan's hondslave become the child of God, and a member
of Christ? Would thou truly know thine own heart? and be very sensible how
evil and wicked it is? that so thou may have a more humble conceit of thy
self? lay to heart these three particulars: 1 The corruption of our nature, by
reason of Original Sin. 2. Our manifold breach of Gods righteous Law, by actual
sin. 3. The guilt and punishment due to us for them both. This being done, thou will see and find, thy necessity of a Redeemer. And it is thirst only that
makes us relish our drink; hunger our meat. The full stomach of a Pharisee,
surcharged with the superfluities of his own merits, will loath the honeycomb
of Christ's righteousness. This was it, which made the young Prodigal, to
relish even servants fare; though before wanton, when full fed at home. No more
relish feels the Pharisaical heart, in Christ's blood, than in a chip, But O how
acceptable, is the fountain of living waters, to the chased heart panting and
braying. The blood of Christ, to the weary and tired soul; to the thirsty
conscience scorched with the sense of Gods wrath: he that presents him with it,
now welcome is he? even as a special choice man, one of a thousand. And the
deeper the sense of misery is, the sweeter the sense of mercy is.


Sect. XXXVIII.
Then if you would be satisfied for time to come, whether your Repentance, and
conversion be true and sound; these particulars will infallibly inform you. If
you shall persevere, (when this trouble for sin is over) in doing that which
now you purpose, it is an infallible sign, your repentance is sound, otherwise
not. If thou do call to mind, the Vow which thou madst in Baptism, and do
thy endeavor to perform that, which then thou did promise: If thou do
square thy life, according to the rule of Gods Word; and not after the
rudiments of the world: If thou art willing to forsake all sin, without
reserving one: (for otherwise that one sin may prove the bane of all thy
graces: even as Gideon had seventy Sons, and but one Bastard: and yet that
Bastard, destroyed all the rest that were Legitimate, Judge 9.5.) Sin is like
the Ivy in the wall, cut off bough, branch, body, stump, yet some strings or
other will sprout out again: Till the root be plucked up, or the wall be pulled
down and ruined, it will never utterly die.

Regeneration, or new birth, is a creation of new qualities in the soul, as
being by nature only evil disposed. Gods children are known by this mark, they
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. If Christ have called
you to his service, your life will appear more spiritual, and excellent than
others.

As for your fails, it is a sign that sin has not gained your consent, but
committed a rape upon your soul; when you cry out to God. If the ravished
Virgin under the Law cried out, she was pronounced guiltless. A sheep may fall
into the mire, but a swine delights to wallow in the mire. Great difference
between a woman that is forced, though she cries out and strives, and an
alluring Adulteress.

Again, The thoughts of the godly are godly, of the wicked, worldly; and by
these, good and evil men are best and truliest differenced one from another.
Would we know our own hearts, and whether they be changed by a new birth?
Examine we our thoughts, words, actions, passions; especially, our thoughts
will inform us; for these cannot be subject to hypocrisy, as words and deeds
are.


Sect. XXXIX.
Then by way of caution know; that a child may as soon create it self, a^ a man
in the state of Nature regenerate himself. We cannot act in the least unless
God bestows upon us daily privative grace, to defend us from evil and daily
positive grace, inabling us to do good. And those that are of Christ teaching,
know both from the word, and by experience, that of the^mselve^ they are not
only weak, but even dead to what is good; moving no more than they are moved:
that their best works are faulty, all their sins deadly, all their natures
corrupted originally. You has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses and
sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Yea, we are altogether so dead in sin that we cannot stir the
least joint, no not so much as feel our own deadness nor desire life, except
God be pleased to raise and restore our souls from the death of sin, and grave
of long custom, to the life of grace. Apt we ar^ to all evil, but reprobate and
indisposed to all grace and goodness; yea to all the means thereof.

My powers are all corrupt, corrupt my will:
Marble to good, but wax to what is ill.
Insomuch, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think, much less (...)
speak, least of all to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Joh. 15.4, 5. I^ we
have power to choose or refuse the object; to do these well we have (...)
power. We have ability, we have will enough to undo our selves, scop^^ enough
hell-ward; but neither motion, nor will to do good: that must b^ put into us by
him that gives both power and will, and power to will.

Finally, Each sanctified heart feels this, but no words are able sufficiently
to express, what impotent wretches we are, when we are not sustained. So that
we have no merit, but the mercy of God to save us: nothing but the blood of
Christ, and his mediation to cleanse and redeem us: nothing but his obedience
to enrich us. As for our good works, we are altogether be holding to God for
them, not God to us, nor we to our selves: because they are only his works in
us.

Whatsoever thou art, thou owe to him that made thee: whatever tho^ have,
thou owe to him that Redeemed thee. Therefore if we do any thing amiss, let
us accuse our selves: if any thing well, let us give all the praise (...) God.
And indeed this is the test of a true or false Religion: that which teaches us
to exalt God most, and most to depresse our selves is the true that which does
most prank up our selves, and detract from God, is the false. As Bonaventure
well notes.


Sect. XL.
Now to wind up with a word of exhortation; if thou be convince^ and
resolvest upon a new course; let thy resolution be peremptory, an^ constant:
and take heed you harden not again; as Pharaoh, the Philistin^ the young man in
the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did: resemble not the ir^^ which is no longer
soft, than it is in the fire; for that good (says Gregory) will do us no good,
which is not made good by perseverance. If wi^^ these premonitions, the Spirit
has vouchsafed to stir up in thine heart an^ good motions, and holy purposes
to obey God, in letting thy sins go; quench not, grieve not the Spirit, 1 These.
5.19. Return not with the Dog to thy vomit; lest thy latter end prove
sevenfold worse than thy beginning, Matthew. 12.43, 45. O it is a fearful thing
to receive the grace of God in vain! and a desperate thing, being warned of a
rock, wilfully to cast our selves upon it. Neither let Satan persuade you to
defer your repentance; no, not an hour; lest your resolution proves as a false
conception, which never comes to bearing. Besides, death may be sudden: even
the least of a thousand things can kill you, and give you no leisure to be sick.

Thirdly, If thou will be safe from evil works, avoid the occasions; have no
fellowship with the workers of iniquity: neither fear their scoffs; for this be
sure of, if your person and ways please God, the world will be displeased with
both: If God be your friend, men will be your enemies: if they exercise their
malice, it is where he shows mercy. But take heed of losing Gods favor to keep
theirs.

Beda tells of a great man, that was admonished by his friends in his sickness
to repent: who answered, He would not yet; for that if he should recover, his
friends and companions would laugh at him: but growing sicker and sicker, they
again pressed him: but then his answer was, that it was now too late; for I am
judged and condemned already.

A man cannot be a Nathaniel, in whose heart there it no guile; but the world
counts him a fool. But Christ says, Verily except ye be converted, and become
at little children; ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.3.

Again, Satan and your deceitful heart will suggest unto you, that a Religious
life, is a dumpish and melancholy life: but holy David will tell you, that
light it sown to the righteous, and joy to the upright, Psalm. 97.11. Isa.
65.14. And experience tells, that earthly and bodily joys are but the body, or
rather the dregs of that joy, which Gods people feel and are ravished with. As
O the calm, and quietness of a good conscience! the assurance of the pardon of
sin, and joy of the Holy Ghost, the honesty of a virtuous and holy life how
sweet they are. Yea even Plato an Heathen could say, That if wisdom and virtue
could but represent it self to the eyes, it would set the heart on fire with
the love of it. And the like of a sinners sadness, as hear what Seneca says;
if there were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him, no Hell to burn
him, no man to see him: yet would he not sin, for the ugliness and filthinesss
of sin, and the guilt and sadness of his conscience. But experience is the
best informer: wherefore take the counsel of holy David, Psalm. 34.8. O taste
and see, that the Lord is good: blessed is the man, that trusts in him. To
which accords that of holy Bernard, Good art thou, O Lord, to the soul that
seeks thee; what art thou then to the soul that finds thee? As I may appeal to
any man's conscience, that has been softened with the unction of grace; and
truly tasted of the powers of the world to come; to him that has the love of
God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost: whether his whole ^ife be not a
perpetual halellujah, in comparison of his natural condition. Whence they are
able to slight all such objections, as he did: you tell me that scrupling of
small matters, is but stumbling at straws; that they be but trifles: when I
know your tongue can tell nothing but truth, I will believe you.

Fifthly, Beg of God that he will give you a new heart, and when the heart is
changed, all the members will follow after it, as the rest of the creatures
after the Sun, when it arises. But without a work upon the heart, wrought by
the Spirit of God; it will follow its own inclination to that which it
affects; whatsoever the judgment shall say to the contrary: That must be
first reformed, which was first deformed. It is idle, and to no purpose to
purge the channel, when the fountain is corrupt. Whence the Apostle orderly
bids us, first be renewed in the spirit of our minds; and then let him that
stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Yea it is Gods own counsel, to the men of
Jerusalem, Jer. 4. Wash thine heart from wickedness: that thou may be saved,
ver. 14. It is most ridiculous to apply remedies to the outward parts, when the
distemper lies in the stomach. To what purpose is it to crop off the top of
weeds, or lop off the boughs of the tree, when the root and stalk remain in the
earth: as cut off the sprig of a tree, it grows still; a bough, an arm, still
it grows, lop of the top, yea saw it in the midst, yet it will grow again;
stock it up by the roots, then (and not till then) it will grow no more. Whence
it is that God says, Give me thine heart, Prove. 23.26. Great Cities once
expunged, the dorpes and Villages will soon come in of themselves: the heart is
the treasury and storehouse of wickedness, Mat. 12.34. such as the heart is,
such are the actions of the body which proceed from it, Mat. 12.35. Therefore
as Christ says, Make clean within, and all will be clean, otherwise not, Mat.
23.26. Therefore David's prayer is, Create in me a new heart O Lord, and renew a
right Spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. do thou the like, importune him for grace;
that you may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere, in
doing and suffering his holy will: desire him to inform and reform you so, that
you may neither misbelieve not mislive; to change and purify your naure,
subdue your reason, rectify your judgment, reform and strengthen your will,
renew your affections, and beat down in you, whatsoever stands in opposition to
the Scepter of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly and lastly; if you receive any power against your former corruptions,
forget not to be thankful, yea study all possible thankfulness. For that you
and I are not at this present frying in Hell flames, never to be freed; that we
have the offer of grace here, and glory hereafter, it is his unspeakable
goodness. And there is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitable to us; both
for the procuring of the good we want, or continuing the good we have; than
thankfulness. He will sow there, and there only plenty of his blessings; where
he is sure to reap plenty of thanks and service: but who will sow those barren
sands, where they are sure not only to be without all hope of a good harvest,
but are sure to loose, both their seed and labor. Consider what has been
said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. And so much for the
Second Part. An Appendix fol lowes: wherein you have instances of all sorts:
how sin besots men.


Sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews Well-yard, 1660.


