A Coffee-House DIALOGUE: OR A Discourse between Captain. Y -- and a Young
Barrester of the Middle Temple; With Some REFLECTIONS upon the BILL against the
D. of Y.
Capt. A Young Lawyer come amongst us! perhaps you may learn something; I have
been telling these young Gentlemen you see with my by what means I could make
this Kingdom the most Flourishing Kingdom in the whole World.


P. I am sotry I am come to late to hear how so good an Effect might be so
easily wrought.


Cap. Nay Sir, you are not come too late, for I can (without any weariness) sit
here to tell it all day long, I so greatly desire the Public Good. In short
Sir, what I have been saying is this; I can plainly demonstrate how we may beat
the Dutch without fighting, pay Debts without Money, make all the Streets in
London Navigable Rivers, harbor all the King's Great Ships upon the top of an
Hill, where they shall be secured from Wind and Weather, and from an hundred
other Accidents they are else obnoxious to. All or most of this you may see
printed in a Book of mine, which I know you Lawyers are against, because it
likewise maintains a Register, which spoils your Trade; but to be Friends with
you, though I have undone you in the First Part, I have a Second Part waiting
at the Press, that will maintain you all sumptuously, if there were ten times
as many more as there are; what say you to all this young Lawyer, Ha?


P. I say you have out stripped all the Poets that ever wrote and that it is
pity the King and Council should have no more regard to your Person and
Discourses, than wise men have for Mountebanks.


Cap. Sir the Reason's plain why they mind the Improvement of the Nation no
more; hark you, the Great ones have another sort of Game to play; -- no more
of that -- you understand me.


P. Not I, I profess; I cannot be reconciled to half a Sentence joined with a
little push, a wink, a nod, a smile, or a Finger held up to the Nose; I have
hated those sort of tricks, ever since I Have read my Lord Bacon's Essays, where,
under the Title of seeming wise, (he says) such persons help themselves with
Countenance and Gesture, and are wise by signs, and when they know within
themselves, they speak of that they do not well know, would nevertheless seem
to others to know of that which they may not well speak. Therefore Sir, if you
would do any good upon me, you must speak, and not leave me to conjecture what
you can say.


Cap. Psha! I see you do not know the World: pray read this Paper.


P. A Club to consist of threescore Lords and Genletmen. Imprimis, They shall
be called the Improvers of England. Item, They shall meet twice in the week.
Item. They shall have provided for them a pennyworth of Cheese, Bread, Beer and
Mustard. A brave Treat for Lords I confess! I Will read no more, unless you tell
me how this Paper is pertinent to our former Discourse.


Cap. This is to satisfy you, that I am not only one that seem wise; for I was
Chairman of the Club, and I tell you, there were some there under my
Instructions, would have baffled all the Coise; therefore whatever you may
think on me, you see some Ingenious Gentlemen have thought me fit to be their
Instructor.


P. That any Ingenious man desired you to be Chairman, is more than I know, or
ever heard on before; But pray Sir no more of that! Tell me what you mean by
saying The Great Ones have another Game to play.


Cap. You will understand it too soon, I am sure I foresaw what is now coming
upon us, before you was born. -- We are a lost People -- a lost People! An
undone Nation, An undone Nation!


P. Still more Riddles! Good Captain what is the matter? What Is the City on Fire
at one end, and are they cutting Throats at the other?


Cap. You may sport at these things, you are but a young man, and cannot see so
far as I do: that Priest yonder, can tell you, 'twill not be long before you
must burn, unless you are resolved (as he is) to turn.


P. Do you know that Gentleman?


Cap. No, I never saw the man before.


P. How can you pretend to be acquainted with his Resolves?


Cap. What do you talk of pretend? pray who does not know that all the Clergy
of the Church of England (as you phrase it) are a Pack of -- I know what?


P. What do you mean by I know what? for my part I am very well satisfied, if
you did know what they were, you would speak of them with as much Reverence, as
you do Detraction.


Cap. Psha! I tell you they are all a parcel of Self-interested Fellows, and
Papists in their Hearts.


P. I perceive you are such an Enemy to Prerogative, that you will encroach even
upon the Almighty's, and not suffer him to monopolize the knowledge of Hearts;
but how ignorant, as well as impious this Affirmation is, will appear: for how
can they be self-interested, and for Popery? for if that comes in, there will a
great many come to share with them in their Spiritual Livings.


Cap. You are a young man, and run too fast; for any one knows, if Popery gets
once the upper hand, all the Lands taken from the Church in H. 8. time will be
restored again; though some therefore do come to share with them, yet their
Advantages will be much greater.


P. You may as well say every private man's Estate will be taken from him, and
given to the Church; for no man holds any Estate by a stronger Title, than the
Purchasers of Church Lands hold those Lands: for first they were sold by Act of
Parliament, and in Queen Mary's Days instead of abrogating that Act, it was
corroborated by another, to which the consent of his Holiness was given; and if
this be not Security strong enough, I Will be content (though I confess 'twill be
a great punishment) to write in Vindication of a Register. But Sir, to let this
Slip of yours pass, pray instruct me for what reason our worthy Divines stand
condemned in your Judgment, for Papists?


Cap. For what Reasons? Why, don't all the World know they are against Bringing
in the Bill, etc. and that they openly pray for the Duke?


P. Is this all?


Cap. All! Ay and enough too.


P. I am sorry to see you thus hurried on by a blind Zeal; for why should they
not pray for his Highness? Let him be good or bad, their Prayers are necessary;
if good, that he may be so preserved, if bad, that he may be reclaimed and
converted.


Cap. I shall not so much insist upon this; but as to the other Points, I mean
the Bill: I have a Paper in my Pocket will confound all your Divines, and all
your Lawyers put together; here, do but read, and you will be convinced.


P. What, it is Entitled A Word without Doors?


Cap. The same.


P. I have read him already; but for my part, I neither approve of the Man, nor
his Reasons.


Cap. Not the Man! Why you don't know who it is.


P. But I know he fails in his Morals, by injuriously calumniating both His
Majesty, and all the Worthy Clergy of our Church: for Page 3. he tells you,
it is the constant Practice of Churchmen to debauch young Gentlemen with ill
Principles: and, the Episcopal Sees, Deanries, etc. were the certain and
constant Rewards of such Services: such Superlative Impudence ought to be
quelled, not with a Pen, but with the Magistrates Sword. However, this is to be
said in alleviation of his Fault, what he has spoke, is so grossly false, that
no one (in their Wits) will believe him.


Cap. Pray let this alone, come to his Reasons; methinks you do not care to
meddle with them.


P. I will show you, there is not one thing, in the whole Pamphlet, worthy the
name of a Reason: For as to the first and last position, which he so much
endeavors to refute (and God knows does it boldly enough) there is no need of
them to maintain this Cause, so that the four first Pages and the four last,
(which the Gentleman is pleased to give us ex abundanti) contains only a parcel
of insignificant Stuff. As for his Instance of Reboboam, that God said This
thing was of Him, what then? Therefore he approved of the Action of the Rebels.
This looks like the Logic of one that rails at the University. Is there any
Evil in the City, and I have not done it, says the Lord; Ergo he approves of
the afflicting Instruments. He hardened Pharoah's Heart, that he might not let
the Children of Israel go; ergo he was pleased with Pharaoh for keeping them. A
brave Divine! Indeed the Church of England men and he do differ on Opinion.


Cap. Well, but he has other Instances.


P. I tell you Sir, they are all impertinent; for he has neither proved his
Cases to be parallel to ours, nor that the Actors did what they did justly; the
question between us, is not only what has, and what may be done; but what has
justly, and may justly be done; for unless he will argue, Every thing that has
been done, has been justly done (which is like his Logic) he has said
nothing to the purpose. When he can prove that William and Henry did justly
exclude Rob. who was their right and true King de Jure, he will speak to the
Point: But pray observe his Reason why Rob. was put by; because William was not
an honest man, not because Rob. was dishonest. What think you, is not this a
brave Fellow to be in Print? I so much insist Sir, upon this Term justly;
because the Supreme Authority may chance to do something unjust: (else instead
of Destroying, he will Make. Popes) for they may do something against the Divine
Law. But to be short, what think you of Strafford's Case? I hope we all know
that Act of Parliament was sufficiently repented of, because 'twas unjust. Let
us see then how it suits with our Case; Strafford received a more severe
punishment by that Act, than the Laws of the Realm had provided for such
Offenses; this was all, and here lay the injustice of the Act. If this Bill had
passed, the D. had received more severe Punishment for his Faults, than the
Laws of the Realm have provided in such Cases; either therefore, that Act was
just, or this Bill unjust. In Tricesimo Quinto of the Queen it is with good
reason provided, if any made open Submission and, Declaration of his or their
Conformity, that then they shall be discharged, of and from all and every the
Penalties and Punishments inflicted. Now suppose the D. should conform: if this
Bill had passed, it had nothing availed him; and though the meanest Subject in
the Kingdom might have taken Advantage by his Conformity, yet the D. could not;
a most unreasonable thing. Now upon the whole matter I appeal to any impartial
man, whether this Argument will not hold: All Subjects ought in reason and
justice to bear equal Punishment for equal Faults. But if the Bill had passed,
the D. had had a more severe Punishment than any other Subject for the same
Fault; Therefore, etc. We have hitherto taken it for granted the D. is a
Papist, but now let us see whether the Parliament could justly (when the Bill
was brought) take notice of him as such; I demand therefore, Had he been
legally convicted of Popery?


Cap. I cannot say that.


P. Why then, every man is supposed innocent, till he be Tried, and proved
Guilty; and I believe all people will agree to this Argument, That it is highly
unjust to Condemn any man unheard; but if this Bill had passed, the D. had been
Condemned unheard; therefore he had been unjustly Condemned. It Is certain by
the same Reason and Justice, they may make a Law to Condemn one man unheard,
they may make a Law to Condemn all men unheard; and how would you like such a
Law?


Cap. I perceive you conclude the Duke to be guilty of no other Fault but
Popery; but alas! we all know there are a great many other Offenses laid to his
Charge, and things of a high Nature too -- but no more of that.


P. Now are we to believe you have a thundering Reserve, when in truth you do
not know so much as you have spoke. Suppose him Sir, to be Actor of the most
and greatest Crimes that ever mortal man was; let him (without Favor) be
charged with them all; but let him be summoned to make his Defense, and then
from what Imputation he cannot clear himself, let him suffer for it according
to the Laws in such Cases: But that there should be new Laws made to punish His
particular Person only, or that he should be condemned unheard, are things I
will maintain (against you and all the Fanatic Crew) to be Dissentaneous both
to right Reason and Justice.


Cap. Talk what you will, I cannot believe but that the Parliament may lay the
next Heir aside: for what if he should be a Fool, or a Madman; must we be
governed by him?


P. I begin now to be weary with your Impertinence. Pray, who does not know
it is every man's Fate (according to Law and Reason) that is an Idiot, or
Madman to lose the Government of his Inheritance, and this rather fortifies
than exonerates what I have said: That Justice must be alike to all Subjects.
Therefore I hope I have fully evinced, that though the Divines are against the
Bill, (which is more than either you or I know) they are not for that
blameworthy.


Cap. Nay, talk as long as you will, I shall still be of the same mind.


P. Well, I see you are an obstinate, prejudiced Man, therefore I Will take my
Leave.


Farewell.

FINIS.

