CHYMICVS RATIONALIS: OR, THE Fundamental Grounds OF THE CHEMICAL ART
Rationally Stated and Demonstrated, By Various Examples in Distillation,
Rectification, and Exaltation of Vinor Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts, Powers,
and Oleosums; in such a Method as to retain the Specific Virtue of Concrets in
the greatest Power and Force.

In all which The Chemical Doctrines are Illustrated upon a new Hypothesis or
Spagirick Course, composed agreeable to Practical Philosophy, and the best
Authority of Art, for Mysteries treated of by Carts, Starkey, Sylvius,
Glauber, Helmont, Paracelsus, and others, are explicated and exemp^^^ified,
after a more particular and exact Manner than heretofore, and so fitted in
order for the Public Service.

In which is contained, A Philosophical Description of the Astrum Lunare
Microcosmicum, or Phospheros.

Recommended to all that desire to improve and advance profitable Truths, such
as are Real and not Hystorical. By W. Y-WORTH, Spagirick Physician in both
Medicines, and Philosopher by Fire.

London: Printed for Thomas Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple near
Temple Bar in Fleet Street. 1692.

TO THE Honored and truly Ingenious ROBERT BOIL, Esquire;.
Honored Sir,
THat which emboldened me to dedicate these our Labors to your Honor, was my
knowledge, that this Subject would have some affinity to your Curious and
Philosophical Mind, and although the Work may be too weak to answer your
excellent Parts, yet when we consider that our design is only to serve the
Public, we thought none so fit to Patronize and Encourage the same as your
self, seeing your learned Writings do manifest, that your whole design is for
the same end, and indeed those many sublime Truths, that have passed from your
Pen into the World, show your great Qualifications, and have raised your Fame
far beyond what we are able to set forth: For we can assure you, and that from
experience, that it is spread like the Romish Eagle; for in our European Travels
we have heard the same expressed from the mouth of the most learned Professors,
calling you the Phoenix of the Age, seeing your Labors have been so profitable
for Mankind; and for this reason we thought it not impertinent humbly to
present this, the rough Draught of our Hard Labors unto your Correction and
candid Censure, knowing there is none a more competent Judge than your self;
therefore if favored with your acceptance, we shall not value the Censures of
those that wholly bend their Wits to search into the depth of other Men's
Writings, with a design more to carp upon them, than any desire to be edified
thereby; these are the Misfortunes that we meet with in this pollished Age, we
mean by such that are so scholastically adorned with the Theory of Science, yet
never design to be acquainted with the Practice thereof: but letting such pass,
I shall address my self to your Honor; for that we have seen your Writings are
Practical, and that you do endeavor to uphold the Mother of Science by the
firm Pillars of Truth, and always have been found ready to promote the Labors
of such, who have had any good designs in laboring for the Public, which can
in no measure be more evident than from your infallible Demonstrations;
therefore, to apply it, the tendency of these our Labors is to stir up the
noble English Spirits to promote her Manufactory, so that the English Growths
may be exalted, and her Stores increased, by adding thereunto good Vinor
Spirits, Oils, Tinctures, Essences, Elixirs, and other excellent Specificks, as
they may be prepared from what Nature so bountifully furnishes this Island
withal, which indeed will produce what is reasonably sufficient for a true
Operator in Physic; especially if he know the Virtues of our Sal Panaristos
and Dalilah of Nature in the Fermentative Operations: to which agrees the
learned Paracelsus in his Archidoxis, where he says, that it is a mere Dotage or
Carelessness in a Physician, to neglect being a perfect one in his own Nation.
And we must make bold to tell your Honor, That there is no part of the
habitable World that affords more of the Universal Matter than England, which,
if exalted by a true Spagirick, would be very profitable to the sick, and
conducive to their former sanity: we therefore heartily wish, that your Honor
had not only the Knowledge, but full Possession thereof, that so you might not
only live long, to possess all the Comforts and Benefits of this Life, but also
passing from hence, you might have a full possession of Life Eternal, and to be
crowned amongst the Redeemed of the Lord. This in all plainness is the sincere
and hearty Desires of him who subscribes himself your sincere Friend and
Servant to command,

W. Y.

TO THE Friendly READER, By way of INTRODUCTION.
READER,
WE shall not make any Apology for publishing this Treatise, being presented to
thee as an Introduction to the Spagirick Art, which may be said to contain two
Parts, very delightful to a Philosophical Mind, sc^ the Speculative. by which
the Actions of Nature and her mysterious Operations are wonderfully represented
to every true searcher; and the Practick, so highly subservient and beneficial
to Mankind not only in relieving him from his Diseases, but also by true
Operation very conducive to give him a comfortable subsistence, whil^st in the
Vail of Misery: we mean those parts of Art, grounded upon known and practical
Demonstration, and that center upon true Knowledge in the Ocean of Nature, as
it streams forth into its various Rivulets, or as the vivifying Spirit thereof
operates in its several Classes, and as the various and particular Signatures
are known, so may various profitable Truths be propounded; amongst which, the
changing of English Spirits from one thing to another, is of principal
Consequence, and a very profitable Truth.

For if you know how by an Artificial Rectification from the Chaos of Mars and
Venus to bereave them of their Hogo and ill Tangue, bringing them sweet and
pleasant, then may you introduce a Vinor, friendly and agreeable Nature, more
healthful for English Constitutions than the foreign Brandies, and the more
especially if you make use of our Sal Panaristos, by which they are easily
brought to mellow, and to a fragrant Balsamic Nature; we then say, if you know
this, you may boldly depend on it as a Door of Entrance to many profitable
Truths.

And again, Were the English but so industrious as the Germans in this Chemical
Art, why might not the Poor be employed to gather all sorts of Herbs in their
prime, thereof to make their Essential Oils, seeing there is such great
quantity of Time, Organy, Mint, Balm, Wormwood, etc. here in England? And
again, What great quantity of fixed Salts might from hence be made, which would
be equal in virtue to any other Alkaly whatsoever? Also Spirits might be made
from these Herbs, and these united with their Oils and Salts, and so Powers
brought forth, which might be prepared in such an artificial way, as not only
to be commodious for exalting Wines, but also profitable for relieving the
diseased. Many things of the like nature might be proposed in the Vegetable
Kingdom, which for brevity sake, we shall here omit, and proceed to that of the
Mineral, because all true Art consists in a right Knowledge of the first
Sperm or Seed thereof; and therefore (O ye brave English Hearts) look well
about you, and you may find an unexpressable Treasure in this your Land, sc.
not only Lead and Tin and Iron Oar, but also Mercury, Lune and Sol, and not
only that, but also Diamonds, Rubies and Carbuncles; and that which is yet more
to be desired, sc. an Autum Potabile curing all Diseases.

Wipe your Eyes therefore, and rouse up your Intentions, and give diligent heed
to what is here said, seeing my Genius leads me to speak of so many sublime
Truths, as they are presented to us in the Scheme of their Idea's and
speculative part of Art; the which, we are well satisfied, were it put into
practice by the true Spagiricks, that know the Laws of Nature, would by degrees
manifest great and wonderful Truths, to the advancement and honor of this
Land; in order whereunto do we labor with all our might to show the drift and
end of our good Intentions, viz. to stir up the People to a search of that,
which being obtained, would give them to inherit Substance.

Accept therefore of our good Inclination, in that the greatest part of our
design is to advance some steps toward the Public Good, which ought indeed to
be backed on by such who have the Staff in their hands, and can at any time
erect or cause to be erected a public place, where profitable Truths might be
demonstrated, and registered in a Book, there to remain for the good of
Posterities to come: By such a Method might Art be so advanced as daily to
increase and raise some splendour to the Britannish Island, which being but as a
little Garden, in comparison of the Christian World, yet might it so become as
a mighty Mountain in the midst of the Nations, shining with Beauty as Mount
Hellicon; and then would her Fame spread to all the parts of the Earth, and her
Glory be sounded in many Nations, that so the wise in heart may come from far,
to see the verity of her Fame, and forced to say, as the Queen of Sheba did of
Solomon, sc. That she had not heard the one half of what she experimentally saw.

Now with the desire of what is here said, does my Spirit travail to the Lord,
that I may live to see the fulfilling hereof, as also in bodily travail to be
as serviceable as I can to the Sons of Men: In the Resolution of which I shall
conclude this Introduction, and so subscribe my self a Friend to and Lover of
all the Industrious Improvers of Art, under what Denomination soever,

Written in S. Paul's Shadwel, London; from the Academia Spagirica Nova, where
the said Art is by the Author taught in all its Parts. W. Y-WORTH, Geboortigh
tot Shipham, and Borger van Rotterdam.

Reader,
WHatever Literal Faults may pass the Press, you are desired either to Correct
or put a favorable Construction on them.

Advertisement of some new Books lately published and sold by Tho. Salusbury,
at the Sign of the Temple near the Inner Temple-gate in Fleet Street.
1. A New Art of Making above 20 sorts of Wines, Brandy and other Spirits, more
pleasant and agreeable to the English Constitution than those of France;
compliant to the late Act of Parliament, and illustrated by the Doctrine of
Fermentation and Distillation, by various Examples on the Growth and Products
of this Island. By W. Y. Medicinal Professor. 12 ves, Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

2. A new Art of brewing Beer, Ale and other sorts of Liquors, so as to render
them more healthful to the Body and agreeable to Nature, and to keep them
longer from souring with less trouble and charge than generally practiced. To
which is added, the Art of making Malt. The Third Edition. By Tho. Tryon,
Student in Physic, in 12 ves. Price bound 1 s.

3. Wisdoms Dictates, or Rules Physical and Moral for preserving the Health of
the Body, and the Peace of the Mind. Fit to be regarded and practiced by all
that would enjoy the Blessing of this World. To which is added a Bill of Fare
of 75 noble Dishes of excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh. By Tho.
Tryon, Student in Physic. 12 ves. Price bound 1 s.

4. Pythagor as Mystic Philosophy revived, or the Mystery of Dreams and
Visions unfolded, wherein the Causes, Natures and Uses of Nocturnal
Representations and the Communications both of good and evil Angels, and also
departed Souls to Mankind are theosophically unfolded. By Tho Tryon, Student in
Physic. Price bound, 1 s. 6 d.

5. Arithmetical Rules digested and contracted, made plain and easy for the
help and benefit of the Memory. Very necessary for all Gentlemen and Tradesmen,
as for Youth and Apprentices in Merchantile Affairs. By Arthur Leadbetter,
Schoolmaster in Bury St. Edmonds in Suffolk 12 ves. Price 1 s.

6. A new and exact Description of Ireland, chorographically surveying all its
Provinces and Counties, showing the exact State of that Kingdom, and all the
principal things that are necessary to be known, with 5 Maps relating thereto,
being very necessary for the right understanding the present Affairs of that
Kingdom. Price 1 s. 6 d.

7. Flanders or the Spanish Netherlands most accurately described, showing
their several Provinces, their Bounds, Dominions, Cities, Towns, etc. Rivers,
Riches, Strength, Traffic, Religion, Language, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
Universities, etc. extraordinary necessary for the right understanding of these
Parts, and the present Wars and Encampments of the Confederate and French
Armies. Price bound, 1 s.

8. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately described, with some adjacent
parts; showing the exact state of those Countries, and all the principal things
that are necessary to be known. In a large Broadside. Price 3 d.

9. Mons. Gurves Remarks upon the Dream of the late abdicated Q. of England,
and upon that of Madam the Duchess of la Valiere, late Mistress to the French
K. being the Paper the Publisher was condemned to be broken alive on the Wheel
by the Parliament of Roan. Done from the French Copy. Printed at Amsterdam, in
Quarto. Stitcht 6 d.

10. A Vindication of the Church of Scotland from the Aspersions and Calumnies
of the Jacobites and Grumbletonians. By Gilbert Rule. Price stitcht 6 d.

11. Bragadocia, a Comedy, by a Person of Quality. Price 6 d.

12. The Secret History of the French King. Done out of French. Price bound, 1
s.

13. A Collection of the famous Mr. Geo. Withers wonderful Prophecies, relating
to the English Nation and Government, many of which not yet fulfilled. Price
stritcht, 6 d.

Chymicus Rationalis: OR, THE Fundamental Grounds OF THE CHIMICAL ART,
Rationally STATED and DEMONSTRATED.
CHAP. I. Treats concerning several Rational and Fundamental Rules in this Art.
IN this Chapter we shall begin to consider the Chemical and Spagirical
Doctrines, and lay them down in those ways, that may seem most agreeable to the
Laws of Nature; but before we proceed to our Matter intended, we think it
convenient to show the Reader, what we mean by the words Chemical and
Spagirical, which some define to be one and the same; but the Definition we
give of them is thus:

By the word [Chymical] thou may understand, all such Operations as are made
in order to divide the Texture of Bodies, and to bring them into their distinct
Elements or Principles, in such a manner that the true Spagirick may separate
the pure from the impure, which (if performed in the most natural way) may
contribute much in the hastening his Operation; but here he must be very wary,
for in this action the invisible Life is often put to flight, as we have said
in the Britannean Magazine, chap. 2. where thou may see more at large.

By [Spagirical] thou may understand all such Operations, as reunite those
before mentioned Principles into a radical union, or that can restore a new
life into a conflagrated Body, according as we said in the before cited Chapter.

So that one part may be esteemed of as for Preparation, the other for
Exaltation and Perfection through the several Revolutions of Art, which cannot
be performed, but by the help of Furnaces, and diverse Utilencies, which we
shall think convenient to nominate and lay down, with a general Description of
a Laboratory, according as we shall erect in our Academia Spagirica nova, by
such a Scale and Table of Proportions, as has not been hitherto practiced by;
first we shall snew their Projection, and then their Office; as to their
Projection it is by a Scale of equal parts, which is hung up in the Chemical
Laboratory, and represented in the Table by the first Figure, which is here
described, A B C is the Quadrant, and A B the Line of Proportion, and F the
Table containing the diverse Proportions for the height, length and breadth of
the Furnaces, as thou may see in the Figure.

Now by the help of this Scale you may erect these following Furnaces, viz.
Balneums, Sand Furnaces, Open Fires, and Reverberatories, Wind Furnaces,
Digesters, Athanors, and the like.

Now a Balneum is either a large Iron Dutch Pot, or Copper Pan set in Brick, as
will be shown hereafter: Its uses are many, for being filled with Water, and
the Vessels you put in well twisted about with Hay, and tied to a leaden
Trisoot to sink them; you may there dissolve all kind of Gums, and the best way
to rectify fine Spirits from their Phlegm, and to bring over the friendly and
balsamic Virtue of Concrets fragrant, which in Sand would burn and get an evil
smell, especially if Myrrh, Alloes, Saffron or Honey be concerned in the
Composition; Now it is to be observed in the use of these Balneums, that the
Water exhaling is to be supplied with Water of an equal heat, poured through a
long Funnel, that will reach to the bottom, otherwise you endanger your Glass.

Now Ashes are a degree hotter than a B. and are for the Rectification of
Vegetable Spirits.

And Sand is a degree hotter than Ashes, and is for the Rectification of
Mineral Spirits, as Niter, Vitriol, and the like. Now observe, that in Sand you
may heat your Glass very hot, and draw Oil of Amber, and force over ponderous
Spirits, it being little short of an open Fire, and will serve well to Sublime
Mercury in: we say then, that if Iron Pots of various sizes be so placed, that
the Fire may play round them, they are excellent for drawing Spirit of
Hartshorn, Spirit of Salt, and Aqua Fortis, as well as Glauber's Furnace,
especially if you use good earthen Caps, double glazed within and without, and
more especially if you use Iron ones, for there is a great Error in this Case
committed by the common Operators; for they use Caps made of Copper, and that
does not only give the Spirit an ill tangue, but also does cause it to lose its
clearness, and, after various Rectifications, to turn red, which to prevent,
you may have Iron Caps cast very thin of various sizes to fit the Iron Pots,
with a Ring above to draw it up: for in such a Cap you may draw any urinous
Spirit as sweet as in any Glass, not only these, but you may draw Oil of Amber
in them in a most excellent manner, therefore recommended to the use of all
Artists. The Form and Manner of these Sand Furnaces, Pots and Caps are
described in the second Figure.

Open Fires and Reverberatories, are for drawing ponderous Spirits, and
subliming Mineral Flowers, and the large Reverberatories for drawing Oil of
Vitriol in quantity; the Vessel requisite to be used here is a Glass Retort
coated, or German or Earthen one.

Wind Furnace, is for the Melting of Metals, Making of Regulus, Calcining of
Metals and Salts, and if it is made according to our Directions in the Figure,
it may well serve for Cementations, and Testing and Cuppelling.

Athanors and Digesters, are of various sorts, each to be registered to various
degrees of heat, some for Distillation, others for Digestion and Circulation.
Also, if you are curious, you may have such an heat as is meet for hatching of
Eggs or maturating Sperm or Seed, which by the Philosophers was called the
Clibannical Heat: these are really necessary to make up a complete Laboratory,
with addition of those mentioned in the first part, sc. a Copper Still with its
Refrigetory, and an Alembick, the Office of which is there shown.

As we have given their Name and Office, we shall now come to show the Use of
the Scale of Proportion in Erecting Furnaces.

Example.

If thou design to build a B. or Sand Furnace, thou must first measure by the
Scale of equal parts, how many equal parts the said B. or Pot is, and then look
in the Table and see for that Number in the Line A, and look under in the Line
B, and you there have the height of the Pot, and under, in the Line C, you have
the Distance of the Pot from the Grate, and under, in the Line D, you have the
Distance from the Grate to the Foundation-work, and in the Line E, the bigness
of the Foundation-work, and in the Line F, the bigness of the Grate, room for
the Fire to play in, and bigness of the Flew, and in the Line G, the height of
the Furnace, thus explained by Figure the second, C is the Pot or B. 14 equal
parts Diameter, and 16 high, then range under to the Line E, and there you will
see the Foundation must be laid 26 Inches or equal parts, that is 14 for the
Pot, 8 for the Brickwork, and 4 for the Fire to play round the Pot, for you are
to observe, that the breadth of a Brick is thickness sufficient for any Furnace
whether the Wall be square or round: Now the Foundation being laid, then look
to the Line D, and you have the Distance from the Foundation to the Grate,
which is 10 equal parts, and then you must leave an Air-hole square, half the
bigness of this: and twice the bigness of your Air-hole must always be the
bigness of your Grate. Your Grate being laid, then look to the Line C and
you have the Distance of the Pot from the Grate, which is 9 Inches; these being
added together with the height of the Pot, give the height of your Furnace,
only adding an Inch for the Grate; so here the Ash-hole being 10 Inches, and
one the Grate, and 9 from the Grate to the Pot, which makes 20, to which add
16, the height of the Pot, that makes up 36, the height of the Furnace, which
is to be found in the Line G. Now your Door to put the Fire in must always be
half the bigness of the Grate, I mean in square and regular Furnaces. Now what
Distance you allow your Fire to play round the Pot, the Air-hole must be the
fourth part thereof, as you may see in the Table.

This Table is of great use in projecting all kind of Furnaces, but we shall
only describe three; which are represented in Figure 3d, 4th, and 5th. The
first is a Wind Furnace, for performing all the aforesaid Operations attributed
thereunto. The second is both a Wind Furnace and Reverberatory, and serves for
Testing and Cupelling, Digesting, Distilling and Subliming, and many other
Operations. The third is a Philosophical Furnace or Oven, which if rightly made
will serve for all the Intentions in Chemistry, which we will particularly
describe, beginning with Figure the second. A A, is the Foundation-work, 26
Inches; B, the Ash-hole, 5 Inches; C, the Grate, 10 Inches; D, the Door or
Stopper, 5; H, the the Balneum or Pot; E E, the Fireplace that plays round it;
A F, the height of the Furnace; G, the Retort; I, the Mouth where he closes in
the Receiver; K, the Receiver; L, the Trisoot the Receiver lies on, as may be
seen in the Figure.

Figure the third described A A, the Groundwork; B, the Ash-hole, 6 Inches; G,
the Grate, 12 Inches; C C, the Door or Stopper, 10 high and 8 broad; D D, a
hole to look in, of 4 Inches square; A E, the height of the Furnace, 36; E F,
the height of the Flew; which observe in all these Wind Furnaces, the higher
they be the better they draw.

Figure the Fourth described: A A, the Groundwork; B, a vacant Arch to put
under Coals or what you please; E, the Airhole; G, the Grate; D, the Door of
the Fireplace; F, the Hole that plays into the Cuppelling Furnace; M, the Hole
to put in the Tests; I, a Hole to clean the Furnace; K, the Flew to carry up
the Smoke; L, a large stone that covers the Furnace; P, a great Iron Bar on
which the Retort lies; Q, the Retort; R, a Fire-stone, or 14 inch Tile, that
lies over it; S, the Flew to carry away the Smoke when the Testing Furnace does
not go; T, the Receiver; U, the Trivet for the Receiver to lie on, as in the
Figure.

The Dimensions and Descriptions of the fifth Furnace: A A, is the Foot of the
Furnance 15 equal parts, and the height of the Foot from A to B 12 equal
parts; from B to B let it be 12 equal parts, but let the Virge come inward for
a Grate 11 to rest thereon; let there be a Door in the Foot from A to S 6
Inches square to take out the Ashes, and let the Body of the Furnace shut into
the Virge, as at B B, and let it be from thence 18 equal parts high, which is
from D to H, and the like Diameter, that is from I to H, and let there be a
Door in the Body of the Furnace from D to F 8 Inches square, to put in a
considerable Crucible: opposite against it let there be a Pipe of 6 Inches
diameter, and 6 long, and to convey the Fire into another Furnace, if there be
occasion; and at other times let there be a Cover, as at R, to shut it fast;
let the Body of the Furnace be of Copper, lined within with good Lute and thin
Tiles, two Inches thick the better to defend it from the Fire; let there be
within a Copper Pan, to take out upon occasion, and put in, the which may serve
for a B. let there be in the Brim a Door of 4 parts or Inches, as at e.e. and
let there be in the bottom, just above the Grate, a Pipe for the Nose of a pair
of Bellows to go in at; and let the Door in the Brim be to let down, to put out
the Neck of a Retort upon occasion; let there be a tapering Tower from I H to
P, 36 parts high, and at I H let it be 18 Inches diameter, and to shut close
upon the same; let it be to take off at L K, where let it be 10 parts diameter,
and at T U let it be 6 parts diameter, with a Cover, as at P, and a Verg filled
with Sand, by which all the heat may be kept in the small Pipe, as at O. The
Pipe of the Wind Furnace, upon occasion, when you make of it a Test or a
Cupelling Furnace, let it be to take off at X; the outside Work, as at Y Z,
must be of Boards, lined with Lattin, with Doors in it to put in small Glasses
upon several small heats: I do advise, that the inside Pipe of the Wind Furnace
be made all of Iron, and the Head of the Cuppelling Furnace also, as is seen in
the Figure.

This Oven thus ordered, will perform all the Operations that are needful in
Chemistry, let it be of what Nature soever, a Reverberation, Calcination,
Sublimation, Violent Distillation, even to draw the Oil of Vitriol, and gentle
Distillation in Sand and B. Decoction and Digestion, Putrefaction, and that by
all the several degrees of heat that are requisite thereunto.

In this Oven you may also fluo: Gold and Silver and also make the Regulus of
Mars and Venus with Antimony at pleasure; you may also Test and Cuppel with the
greatest ease and exactness imaginable; you may alter the degrees of Fire from
the vitrefying of the 7 Metals to the hatching of Eggs.

This Furnace may be wrought with Charcoal, Sea-coal, Turf, Duf-coal, and Lamps
of various sorts, beyond all that even have been done by any.

This Furnace is to be portable in all places, and may be wrought in a Lady's
Chamber, without offense, and by means of an additional Tin Box, it will drive
10 or 12 Glasses, as you please to have it in bigness, and that for the true
heat to sweat People in the Scurvy, Gout and Pox, beyond Banyons, Stoves, Baths
and Sweating-houses of what kind soever, that is for one person or two.

Forma Laboratory in Academia Spagirica nova
Printed for Tho: Salusbury in Fleet Street

Place this Fig: page:(...)



Having thus erected your Laboratory completely, which may easily be done by
these Examples: then will these following Materials be wanted; first Shovel,
Tongs for the Fire and to move out Crucibles; Poker and Rake to clean the
Grate; a Cone to cast Regulus in; Inguts of various sizes to cast Metals in;
Copper or Bell-metal Moulds for making your Test; round Irons of various sizes
to cut your Glasses; Glasses of various sorts, as Bodies, Heads, Cucurbits,
Bolt-heads or Eggglasses, Retorts, and Receivers of various sizes; earthen and
Iron Caps; Coolers, with large Globes; Pestles and Mortars both of Iron and
Glass, and many more as the experienced Operator will see wanting: and having
these he may proceed to labor, and there will represent unto him these
following distinct Operations, which are called Degrees of Working.

1. Fermentation, is a mixing of kindly Matter for Multiplication, or the
kindly seasoning or leavening of a thing. 2. Distillation, is an Extraction of
a Liquor from a Body by heat. 3. Digestion, is a Dissolving of that which is
thick into thin to be purified. 4. Circulation, is to Rectify any thing to a
higher Perfection. 5. Sublimation, is the lifting up of moist Matter to make it
more pure and dry. 6. Calcination, is the bringing of any thing to Ashes. 7.
Fixation, is to make that which is flying to abide with its body.
To which may be added these following:

Dissolution, which is to Dissolve that which is gross.

Putrefaction, is the mean to Generation; to which may be united Exaltation, in
that things are exalted to an higher degree, by evaporating the impure humors,
and congregating the pure parts.

Rectification, is a reiterated Distillation, in order to a higher degree of
perfection.

Coagulation, is a Congealing of Moisture.

Cohobation, is a repeated Distillation, by which the Liquors distilled off are
poured upon the Body or Feces, and distilled again, by which many sulphurous
Bodies are often made saline.

Now these are the 12 various Degrees of Operation which really are necessary
to be known, as an Introduction to the Spagirick Art, the Office of which will
be shown more at large in the succeeding Chapters, therefore we shall pass by
it here, and come to treat of the Nature and Office of Vinor Spirits in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. II. In which we shall first treat of Vinor Spirits, and their Office in
the Extraction of Tinctures, and some other Spagirick Preparations.
IN this Chapter we shall treat concerning Vinor Spirits, which indeed are the
most principal of the two general Classes, sc. Vinor and Urinous; for that the
Vinor Spirits do represent to us the Nature of the Callidum innatum, or the
enriched Sulphur manifested in a Spiritual Form, as the Oils do in a more
ponderous one, because by Fermentation the spirituality is separated from the
saline, corporeal and aqueous parts, which would be very hard to be performed,
was it not by the action of Fermentation; for which reason we shall now proceed
to describe the Nature and Office thereof.

We therefore say, that even common Fermentation is a wonderful and mysterious
Operation, for ripe Bodies are not only again made spiritual, but Spirits also
are by it fixed and made corporeal, therefore we shall want words fully to
illustrate this Doctrine, as it might be handled both in its natural and
artificial Office: We shall therefore define it thus, That Fermentation is the
way to Production, as is plainly manifest by the Mechanic Demonstrations the
learned Carts and his Disciples give thereof, which we shall briefly touch at
and pass on to its Office, beginning first with the Artificial, and secondly
touching at the Natural.

The Artificial Office of Fermentation, is that by which Bodies are broken and
dilated, in order to separate their Spirituality from their Corporeity, and
brought to a Vinor Spirit: for all Fruits, Treacle, Sugar and Honey, by the
addition of Herbs, Roots, Barks and Spices, through Fermentation yield a noble
Spirit, as is said in our Britannean Magazine of Liquors, to which I refer you
for satisfaction, and (God willing) in the next Impression this Doctrine shall
be there more largely treated of, and therefore omitted here.

Now Natural Fermentation is that which unites the Saline Mercurial Juice with
the Sulphur or Form of Bodies, so as to produce or uphold the Radical Moisture,
which nourishes and upholds concreted Beings, which afterward assumes to
itself by the Archeius of Nature those diverse forms, that are sufficient to
uphold the Texture of Beings, as we have said in our general Treatise of
Diseases: wherefore Artificial Fermentation is a separation of Bodies, and
Natural is a Concretion and Formation thereof: therefore it is said by the
Philosophers, that Fermentation is the Key to Generation; the manner how we
have largely treated of in Doctrina Principium; we shall therefore pass off
from the Natural, and come to speak of the Office of those Spirits that are
produced by the Artificial.

Now a Spirit we define to be the most essential part of that Body, whence
extracted, and being of a sulphurous, thin and penetrating Nature, has virtue
and power to act upon other Bodies, and attract to itself that part which is
most homogeneous to it, which generally is the sulphurous, whether Vinor,
Oleaginous, or Gummous, which are the Sulphurs in diverse forms; sometimes the
Tinctures are variously changed, and the sulphurous parts carry with them
variety of Colors, according as the internal Digestion and Concoction of
Nature is; E. G. Roses give one, Cochenele another, Turmerick, or Saffron,
another, and so various Tinctures are produced, as will be shown.

But by the way, I think it convenient to show the Operator a certain and
profitable way to prepare Spirit of Wine, so as to bereave it of all its Phlegm,
and in a way that it may be homogeneous and the more powerful in its action for
obtaining Tinctures.

Spiritus Vini Tartarisatus.
Of our artificial Brandy a Gallons; of the best Salt of Tartar lbiv, dried and
brought to a Powder in a Crucible, and before it is quite cold throw it into a
Still, and pour upon it the Brandy, and in B. M. distill off the Spirit, until
an insipid Water appears, and when almost cold remove and filter the Liquor in
the Still through a brown Paper, and gently evaporate the Phlegm, and warm the
Salt again, and put the said Spirit upon it, and rectify a second time, and so
'twill be purely freed from its Phlegm, which carefully preserve, as also the
Salt, being dried, both of which being very profitable for many Chemical and
Spagirical Operations, some of the which we shall now come to lay down. First,
Of Tinctures in general; Which is only any Vegetable or Mineral, that is well
opened, and put into a Glass, and pour three times its weight of the aforesaid
Spirit of Wine thereon, and put on a blind Head, and set in gentle Digestion
until the Spirit is rich with the Tincture, the which pour off and put on more,
as before, and when highly tinged, cant it off to the former; thus do as often as
the Spirit of Wine will be tinged, and when it remains white 'twill extract no
more: This method does well for such things wherein there is a fragrancy, or
the light Tincture desired; but for Bodies compact and virulent proceed thus:

Of Hellebore, either white or black, Eliterium, Guttagambuga, or any other of
the most churlish Vegetables, and pound them very fine, and being sifted, mix
either of them with its equal weight of the aforesaid Salt of Tartar, pound and
macerate them well in an Iron Mortar, and put them then into Sugar or open
mouthed Glasses, and sprinkle them with good White Wind, tying the Glasses
Mouths up close with a Bladder, and as fast as it drys reiterate your
moistening with White Wind, as before, to keep it of the consistency of Dough,
close compressed, and in six Weeks time they will be so macerated and overcome,
as to lose their vomitive and purgative quality, without the loss of either
taste, color, smell, or specific virtue, being by this Operation exalted; so
that now they are only Diuretic and Diaphoretick, and therefore may be taken
in a treble Dose, and will yield their pure Tinctures in the aforesaid Spirit
of Wine, whence you may conclude, that the vomitive and laxative quality of the
simple is not the radical and specific Virtues thereof: These Tinctures are
much enobled and graduated, when prepared with the Samech of Tartar, and
brought to a cristaline Salt, as shall in our Spagirick Philoso. Triumph be
shown.

To Extract the Tinctures, Gums or Rosins from Woods and Roots.
Of Jallap, or Scammony, or Briony, Guajacum, or any other that is gammous, and
being reduced to Powder, take Q. V. cover them three fingers breadths over with
the aforesaid Spirit of Wine, and 'twill extract a blood red Tincture, decant
and repeat till you have extracted all the Tincture, put all the Tinctures
together, and by Distillation call off two thirds of the Spirit, and then with
fair Water precipitate your Gum or Rosin, and wash it well, and in a gentle
heat dry it, and bring it to a consistence, and keep it for use; if from Rosin
or Jallap, 10 or 15 g. is a gentle Purge.

The Way to make Extracts.
Which is in a manner all one with Tinctures and Rosins; for if thou will make
any Extract, either simple or compound, what thou desire to take must be put
into a Glass; and first of all, take all the Tinctures of it out, and by
distillation in B. abstract the Liquors from it, till that in the Glass be of
the consistence of Honey, which may be dissolved in some proper Vehicle, or
else made up into Pills.

Another.
Of the best Alloes succotrin. vj. dissolve it in the Juice of Elder-berries;
filter all through a piece of Holland, and draw all off in B. to the
consistence of an Extract, or else let the moisture exhale in the Sun. And thus
you may make the Extract of Juniper Berries or others, either with or without
addition; but as for the abovementioned Extract of Elder, make it into Pills
with the Powder of Saffron, Myrrh and Cinnamon, and you will have a good Pill,
which has these following Virtues, powerful in the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, and
Stone. Its Dose is a Scruple, or Scruple and half, Mornings fasting.

To make the Balsamic Tincture of Elder-Berries.
Of the Juice of Elder-berries, and set it in a gentle heat for three Weeks,
till it comes a little acid, like Vinegar, then filter it through a Holland
Cloth, pressing out all that will go through, then put it into your Body, and
draw off a fourth part Phlegm, and then add to the remainder a fourth part of
clarified Treacle, and then digest and circulate so long until it comes of a
consistence of a blood-red Balsam or Tincture, which may be in 8 or 10 Weeks,
the which is an excellent stomatick Cordial, now and then taking a lick of it.

To make any of the Spirits of the first Book, Golden or Purging.
Example on the Spirit of Scurvy Grass.

Of Guttagambuga ss, Jallop j of the Spirit of Scurvy Grass lbj, put it into a
Bolt-head, and set it in a gentle heat, and let it remain there till it has
drawn forth all its Tinctures, then cant off the clear for use; some adds to
this Composition of Scamony j.

Another way thus:

Of Jallop j, Coloquint' j, Scamony j, Guttagambuga ss, or Saffron ij, Spirit
of Scurvy Grass lbij, Salt of Tartar ss, and operate as before directed.

Thus much for Tinctures.

CHAP. III. Of Essential and Chemical Oils.
IN this Chapter we shall treat concerning the Sulphurs of Concrets, sc. the
Oils which are centrally one with the Spirits, but in a more ponderous form,
because the parts are not broke by Fermentation, as they are in Vinor Spirits.
There is generally one Rule for making of Essential Oils, viz. Maceration and
Distillation; Ex. gr.

Wormwood, or any other dry Herb, pull off all the stalks, and put it into a
large Tub, and pour upon it warm Water, enough to moisten it, and two or three
handfuls of decrepitated Bay Salt, let it stand twenty four hours, and distill
it with a Refrigeratory; separate the Oil with a separating Glass, S. A.

Now observe, that some Herbs must not be over dry, as Origanum, and if its Oil
is distilled in the coldest day of the Winter, when all the Powers of Nature
are congealed with cold, and that the Still be set where the cold may have
power upon it, so as to keep the Worm and Water exceeding cold, your Oils shall
be congealed into a cristaline Salt, which I prize more than the Oils.

After the manner aforementioned you may distill the Oils of all Herbs and
Berries.

But observe, that Glauber objects against this way, saying that abundance of
it is lost in the Water and Vessels, by reason of their largeness.

Glauber's Way of Distilling Vegetable Oils, whereby a greater quantity is
acquired, than by the common Way, by a Vessica.
Fill a Gourd with Cinnamon or any other Wood or Seed, upon which pour so much
Spirit of Salt, as will be sufficient to cover the Wood, then place it with its
Alembick in Sand, and give it Fire by degrees, that the Spirit of Salt may
boil, and all the Oil will distill off with a little Phlegm: for the Spirit of
Salt does with its acrimony penetrate the Wood, and freeth the Oil, that it may
distill off better and easier: and by this way the Oil is not lost by the
addition of that great quantity of Water, in those great and large Vessels, but
is drawn in lesser Glass Vessels with addition of a little moisture.
Distillation being finished, the Spirit is poured off by Inclination from the
Wood, being again useful for the same work. And if it has contracted any
impurity from the Wood, it may be rectified; but the residue of the Spirit,
that remains in the Wood; you may recover, if that Wood be cast in the
aforesaid Furnace upon burning Coals, by which means it may come forth again
pure and clear; and by this means we lose none of the Spirit of Salt. And after
this way, by help of the Spirit of Salt, are drawn forth Oils of dearer
Vegetables, together with their Fruit, which cannot be done by a Still.

To make the Oil of Orange and Lemmon Peels.
Oranges or Lemmons, and separate the Pulp from the Peel, and while it is fresh,
cut it into bits, and put them into a Retort or low Body; and sprinkle it with
the Oil of Tartar per deliquium. Distill it in a boiling Bath by degrees, and
you will have Oil enough.

And thus you may distill Oil from Cinnamon, or any other Spices of a fragrant
nature.

Dr. Hill's way of Preparing Oils from Herbs.
Any Herb, and pour upon it any small Beer-Wort; set it in a very gentle heat,
until the smell begin to change a little toward sour, then distill it in a
Copper Still, and you shall have Oil enough.

To make Oil of Gums; first of Castor: the best way.
Castorium, (or any other Gum, as Mastick, Myrrh, etc.) cut it all into small
pieces, and pour upon them, very well rectified, Spirit of Turpentine; let it
stand several days in B. to extract, afterward distill off or evaporate the
Spirit of Turpentine, and there will remain an Oil excellently fragrant at the
bottom.

The Oil of Mastick and Frankincense, according to Glauber.
Of Frankincense or Mastick, powdered small, as much as will serve to fill the
third part of a Retort, (which must be coated) upon which pour a sufficient
quantity of Spirit of Salt, taking heed that the Retort be not filled too full,
or else the Spirit, when it boils, flows over it; then place it in Sand, and
give fire by degrees, and there will first come out some Phlegm, after which a
clear transparent Oil, together with the Spirit of Salt, which must be kept by
it self, after this a certain yellow Oil, which must be received by it self,
and last of all, there follows a red Oil, which although it is not to be cast
away, yet it is very unlike to the first, serving for outward uses, and to be
mixed with Ointments and Emplaisters, for it does wonderfully consolidate, and
therefore good in new and old Wounds. The first being well rectified, is in its
subtilty and penetrating faculty not unlike to Spirit of Wine, and may
profitably be used inwardly and outwardly, viz. in cold Effects, but especially
in the stiffness of the Nerves, caused by cold Humors, upon which follows a
Contraction; but then you must first rub the Member contracted with a Linen
Cloth, that it may be well warmed, into which then the Oil must be chafed with
a warm hand. For it does do wonderful things in such like effects of the
Nerves; as you may see more at large in P. 1. p. 5.

To make the Oil of Benjamin, according to Robert Boil, Esquire;
Benjamin, (the best is that which is most yellow, fat, unctuous and ponderous,
and not that which is white, the white not being so full of the true Gum, nor
yielding so much Tincture) and dissolve it in the pure aetherial Spirit of
Wine; filter it exactly, and put it into a tall Retort; first draw your Spirit
of Wine very gently, then the Flowers will sublime, which you must wipe out of
the Neck of the Retort with a long Feather, afterward, with a stronger Fire,
there will come over an Oil, which will smell of Empyream.

To make the Oil of Turpentine.
Of common Turpentine, and tie it up close in a Bag, and put your Bag into a
large Still, and fill it with Water, and distill with a very strong Fire, till
no more Oil will come, and after the distillation is over, separate the Oil,
and rectify it for use. Observe that your Turpentine being put in a Bag keeps
the Colophonia from burning to the Still.

Then take of the prepared Oil, and of the best Cypress Turpentine, and pu^
them into a Retort, and digest two or three days in B. and then distill in a
boiling Bath, and you will have a Spirit come over, and an Oil essentificated,
mild of taste and pure; the which separate and rectify for use.

Another way.
Of the best Venice Turpentine and Malaga Sack, ana; digest in B. seven days,
and afterward distill with a strong heat of the B. and when distilled separate
the Oil for use: Then take of this Oil, and fresh Malaga Sack, ana, and to
every lbj of Oil and j of Angelica Roots; circulate it seven days: Distill it as
before, and you will have a curious fragrant Oil.

The Chemical way to make Oil of Turpenpentine so aetherial, as to unite with
Spirit of Wine.
Calcined Salt of Tartar, or decrepitated Bay Salt, let it not touch the Air,
but whilst yet hot put it into an high Cucurbit, or uncut Body, and pour upon
it common Oil of Turpentine, the breadth of four fingers; shake them well
together, and with a very gentle Fire draw off, and there will be an Oil, and a
volatile Salt, take this Oil and pour it upon new Salt: Distill as before, and
repeat this Operation till it will unite with Spirit of Wine, which may be
tried every Distillation.

To make Oleum Pini, or Oil of Pine.
The Gum of the Pine in a Retort, with a little Salt, and there will by degrees
come over an Oil and Spirit which rectify and separate for use.

Oleum Regeneratum.
Its Preparation is shown in page 22. of the Britannean Magazine; but, however,
I shall here give it more large.

Of pure Salt of Tartar cristalized from the Oil per Deliquium, and pour upon
it of the highest rectified Spirit of Vinegar, until digest 24 hours, and then
draw off the Phlegm, and again pour on fresh Spirit of Vinegar; digest and draw
off as before, repeating this 7 times, until the Vinegar come off tipped, or as
sharp as when you put it in; so have you a Balsamic Salt, in which is
contained a Tartarum regeneratum, for that the Vinor Natures are concentrated:
Now if this is mixed up with a third part of Bole or Potters Earth calcined,
and distilled by degrees of Fire, there will come off a noble Spirit and Oil;
which Oil, being separated, may be rectified through Spirit of Vitriol, in the
same manner we have directed concerning those of the Spirit of Salt: Now the
alchalized Salt remaining in the Cap. mort. may be taken out with warm Water
and preserved for the like use.

Virtues.
The Virtues of this Oil are many, viz. for Fits, Obstructions, Agues, Fevers,
and the like; the Dose is from three to ten Drops in Sugar; and drank in a
glass of Wine. The many more Virtues and Uses of this Salt will be more largely
shown in that Chapter that treats of the Union of Acids and Alcalies.

Oleum Succinii: Or, The Oil and Volatile Salt of Amber.
Of the best white Amber, (for the yellow is not so good, and the black is
inferior to this) and mix it with clean Sand, being in course Powder, and put
it into a large coated Retort, and distill it by degrees of fire, as long as any
thing will come over. Observe, some use a little Water in their drawing of it,
or rather a little of the Spirit of the Pine. Now when the Operation is ended,
remove your Receiver, and there you will find an Oil, and an acid Water, and in
the Oil a volatile Salt, which must be precipitated from thence, and purified
by Sublimation, the Oil being rectified with Spirit of Salt, or from the Cap.
mort. of Vitriol, becomes very subtle; and yet more if once rectified from A.
R. or Salt of Tartar.

Its Virtues are many, but seeing we do intend to speak largely of them in that
Chapter that treats of Oils and Powers, we shall omit them here.

Oil of Soot and Stone-Coal.
Soot of the Chimney, (wherein nothing but Wood is burned, and that which is
fattest and greatest lumps is best) and put it into a coated Retort, and distill
by fire of degrees, and there will come over a sharp, volatile Salt, and hot
Oil; this Salt has adherence to others of the Urinous Classes, and has the
same Virtues. The Oil, without any rectification, may be externally used very
successfully for all loathsome Scabs and scald Heads, but if rectified, as
before directed, it may safely be used inwardly, which is now prescribed by the
Doctors for Hysterical Fits.

The great Lump-Coal, (called Scotch-Coal, or Stone-Coal, which from the River
of Thames is generally sold by weight) and fill a coated Retort half full
therewith, and distill it by fire of degrees, and there will come from thence a
black Oil, the which separate from the acid Water that came over the helm with
it, and rectify it by Spirit of Salt, and so there will first of all come the
clear and pure Oil, then a yellow Oil, not so sweet as the former, and the
thick and black Oil remains behind, and serves to be mixed with Emplaisters;
for it is a wonderful healer, by reason of its innate faculty: now the yellow
Oil may be yet farther once more rectified by the Spirit of Salt, that it may
become pure, white and fair: It may be exalted so as to be a most excellent
penetrating Medicine both inwardly and outwardly, and is equal in Virtue to the
Oil of Petraeolum: It is wonderful to consider what an excellent Balsam lies
hid in the Earth as an Universal Sulphur, and as Glauber says, there is
contained in Sea-Coal a precious Sulphur, no whit inferior, as to its Virtues,
to any of the most precious Oils or Balsams brought us out of the Indies.

Oil of Hartshorn or any other of the urinous Classes.
Hartshorn, Cranium humanum, Ivory, or dried Bone, or that which the Turners
leave in shaving Hartshorn, called the Pith or Blackings, and put it into a
Glauber's Furnace, or Iron Pot with a Copper, Earthen or rather Iron Cap, and
lute fast, and distill with the fire of degrees till no more will ascend, and
there will come over an Oil and a Spirit and Volatile Salt, in various figures
about the Glass, the which thou may rectify and purify, according to the
Rules already laid down: the Office of the Salt and Spirit shall be shown in
the Chapter that treats of the Urinous Spirits. The way of making these Oils
being rightly understood will introduce the making any others: and as to the
Mineral Oils they shall be treated of in the respective Chapter that appertains
to the Mineral Work, and therefore we desist from them here.

But by the way, we think it needful to tell the Reader, that Oils must be
bereaved of their floating earth and external aquacity, if ever you design they
should act to their highest degree of subtilty.

To make a subtle Spirit useful in dissolving Amber.
Of Venice Turpentine, what quantity you please, and draw the Oil and the
Spirit, which rectify apart, and let them be united with the heat of Calx
vive, and by distillation brought to a very great subtilty; then take of that
and the etherial Spirit of Wine equal parts, draw and circulate, till fully
united, and preserve for the use aforesaid. And thus we shall conclude this
Chapter of Oils.

CHAP. IV. In which we shall treat of Salts.
SAlt is the Pillar of any Body, and generally by nature is Tart, Acid,
Stiptick or Astringent, but by Art is variously altered, according as the
nature of the Agent is, that works on it; for example, We see that common Salt
has a most excellent, sublime Spirit, which preserves Beings from
putrefaction, yet by heterogeneous Agents is it mortified and variously
changed, destroyed, or exalted, which is more largely treated of in our
Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph, wherefore we shall omit it here, and come to
the demonstrative part, by several useful Examples, and first of.

Sal Mirabilis communis, Or
Salt Polycriste, which some call the Sal Mirabilis of Glauber, when indeed his
true Salt has an universal Tendency, and therefore must proceed from the
universal. Principles of Nature, whatever to the contrary some may ungroundedly
think; but however to our purpose in hand, sc. the Preparation, which is as
follows:

Common Salt and decripitate it, till done cracking, then dissolve it in clear
Fountain Water, and draw off about a fourth part thereof, and then pour in of
the best Oil of Vitriol sufficient to alter the form, and in a gentle heat
digest, and after cristalize it S.A. The like may be done with Spirit of Niter
or Allom, etc. And again, acid Spirits upon Sal Prunell. and fixed Niter does
well, and these also upon Salt of Tartar and fixed Alkalies; whose Birth we
think convenient now to show, which is indeed an artificial one.

French or Rhenish Tartar (vulgarly known by the name of Argile) and put it in
a great earthen Pot, and in a Potter's Furnace, or a Wind-Furnace, let it be
calcined to Ashes, till it looks a bluish white, the which when cold dissolve
in warm Water, and filter through a Cap Paper, and in a gentle heat draw off
the Phlegm, till a Skin appear on the top, and set it in the cold, and 'twill
shoot into Cristals, the which remove, and the remaining Liquor filter as
before, and shoot as long as any will come into a Salt; and again, these Ashes
after they are calcined, may in the Air be run per Deliquium, and then you may
cristalize as before directed; or else shoot in a gentle heat of Sand.

Observe, that from all Woods, Roots and Herbs, being dry and turned to Ashes,
you may by warm Water extract a Salt; thus is made the Salt of Wormwood,
Tobacco, and others, which are also Alkalies, little different from Tartar,
only, what there is, Tartar in virtue excels any other, and therefore not
undeservedly called the Public Family of Alkalies.

Now these are produced by the fire of Conflagration, in which the corporality
of the body fixes down with the grosser parts of the Sulphur, and so assumes a
new ^orm, yet of a caustic nature, and somewhat rough to be given as they are,
as we have largely shown in Chap. 1. of our Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph.

Thus much in general concerning the Production and Nature of Alkalies, we
shall now come to show their Association with Acid Spirits, by which they are
brought to a neutral Nature and made more friendly unto our Bodies: And first of

Tartarum Vitreolatum.
Of the Spirit of Vitreol highly rectified, and put it into a very large Glass,
and by drops put upon it Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, and you shall have a
great Ebullition; continue this pouring on by drops till the Ebullition
cease, which is a sign the Alkaly is fatisfi'd, then separate (S. A.) the
Phlegm from the precipitated Matter or white cristaline Mass, which is called
Tartarum vitreolat. it being a neutral Salt distinct from each Parent, and
although this be a Preparation inferior to some others, yet with us it is in
great esteem, because the Alkaly has lost its caustic quality, the Acid its
corrosive property, and so becomes an excellent Medicine: as not being liable
to an alteration by any Ferment in the Body of Man.

The Dose is from 10 or 15 Gr. to 20 each Morning. It cleanses the Stomach,
powerfully resolving Obstructions in the Meseraick Veins, and is properly given
as a digester, abstersive and cleanser in Fevers, Agues, Jaundies, Scurvy,
Worms in Children, and for cold Crudities in the Stomach, which are the cause
of many Diseases.

Now, by the way, we would let the Reader understand, that we are somewhat
concerned that this Doctrine is so little taken notice of; for by it Acid
Spirits are not only made sweet, but also the Alkalies by these and our Red
Wine may be made a powerful and excellent Medicine far above any to be found in
common Dispensatory, and although this Doctrine of Acid and Alkaly has been
largely treated of by that ingenious and learned Otto Tachenius, yet has he
not so clearly delivered the Practick Part of this, nor indeed has any that we
ever read done it so fully, as we wish it were, when we consider the usefulness
of it, and therefore we shall be the more large in showing our Experience
concerning the same.

Again, in like manner by pouring the Oil of Tartar per deliquium upon the
Spirit of Niter, is made Tartarum Nitratum, which is a Salt of more easy
fusion than the former, of a nitrous cold taste, being an excellent Abstersive
in burning and putrid Fevers, Gravel, Heat of Urine, Heat in the Back and
Kidneys, Heat in the Stomach, whence a hot and harsh Breath, and many other
defects, which are seated in the first and second Digestion.

Also from the Oil of Sulphur per Camp. and Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, is had
an excellent neutral Salt.

So likewise from the strong Spirit of Salt, or the strong Spirit of Vinegar,
(as was touched at in that Chapter that treats of Oils) very noble Salts are
made, which are yet in a higher degree if united with the purified and
corrected Tincture of Vegetables, in a due proportion, (the Salt being first
dissolved in a little White Wind, or other convenient Liquor) by digesting the
Salt and Tinctures till both become very clear, for at first mixing they will
be very muddy, and precipitating a light Faecula will at last be very clear,
decant this clear Liquor, that is tinged, and in a slow fire draw away the
moisture, till the known figure appear, and in a cool place 'twill cristalize
into a pure Salt tinged with the Tincture of the Vegetable, retaining its
Taste, Odor, and Virtue.

Thus out of Hellebore black or white, Opium, or any other Simple, that will
yield a Tincture in Spirit of Wine, a Salt may be made, which is called by the
name of the Vegetable, with which it is joined, as the Salt of Hellebore, Opium
or Jallop, etc. which Salts, besides their abstersive virtue, have a
super-additional and specific one, according to that of the Concret, by which
a sedulous and industrious Physician may cure many stubborn Diseases.

Thus much we observe concerning the Nobleness of these Salts, that they work
in a way agreeable to Nature, and also will prepare most excellent Menstruum's
for dissolving of Metals; and as that Famous George Starkey, in his Pirotechny
asserted and illustrated, says, they are more powerful for opening metalick
Bodies, than any other Preparation whatever, whereby Tartar can be volatized,
as will be shown in the Chapter wherein we treat of Menstruums.

Now seeing there are and have been many Conjectures, and various Opinions
concerning this Author, and his Doctrines, we think it convenient to give in
ours, from an experimental Knowledge of the Truth of his Labors, which is,
that he had a fundamental Knowledge in Philosophy, and we assert, that no Man
can be his Judge, unless a true Son of Wisdom and Child, that Nature has got
into her School, and qualified with her hidden Diaploma, with which he
certainly was, in that he trod so exactly in her steps, and had those parts as
to Medicinal Philosophy, that we honor him above most of the former Writers,
and had he not been a little short sighted in some things, his Name would have
had a lasting Renown, yea in Posterities and Ages to come; the least therefore
that we can say of him in our Writings is this, sc. that he was a Master in
Pirotechny, the Triumph of which he promised to the World, which would have
been a Key to open the Helmontian Doctrines for the good of the Sons of Art,
doubtless this Book would long since have seen the Light, had God spared his
Life, but the raging Plague, after all his Courage, took him off, by his too
venturous opening of a Body whilst hot, that died of the Plague; but, however,
I hope his Soul is at rest.

But now, seeing it is impossible for him to perform what was there promised, we
shall partly for his sake, (but more especially for Truth itself) endeavor to
supply, by giving as great a light to that which has been formerly written, as
any other Son of Art, has hitherto done, and it is not to be questioned, but
that Truth will be more cleared up, than hitherto, because (besides the
Knowledge of what they have written and set down) we have the advantage of what
Dame Experience has taught us, by exceeding hard and continued Labors in the
Fire, which always was and ever will be the true Interpreter of their Writings,
and that which adorns them also: and thus although but a Child myself, yet it is
allowed by all, that such, being set upon other Men's shoulders, can see farther
than they could; but this by the way: We then say, that the Doctrine of Acid
and Alkaly deserves a Veneration, seeing it destroys the Activity of the most
violent Corrosive, and makes them truly Medicinal; Ex. Gr.

If you pour Oil of Tartar per Deliquium upon Aqua Fortis, and distill it off,
you shall have a Salt left behind, in form of a Niter, and here the Aqua Fortis
is mortified by the Salt of Tartar and both brought to a very good Medicine.

Again, It Is to be observed, that one Acid will mortify another, and form a
Salt. Ex. Gr.

Spirit of Niter, and Spirit of Vitreol, and Cohobate upon the Spirit of Niter
three or four times, and you will have a Salt left behind, which by an ingenious
Man ought not to be disdained.

Wonder not (Courteous Reader) that these corrosive Spirits are thus mortified,
and their venom taken off, when that they were not originally such in their own
nature, but promoted by the fire to be so corrosive, which you may see by the
hand of the skilful, may be again corrected; therefore we shall state it thus,
that Aq. Fort. A. R. Spirit and Oil of Vitreol, Spirit of Salt Peter, or common
Salt, are not Poisons, but Spirits of eminent activity, which, being mingled
with Salts, Wine, Beer or Water, may be taken in a greater quantity (than alone
would be mortal) without the least danger, nay, rather they become wholesome and
medicinal.

Thus vulgar Mercury has been prescribed by the Ancients (being rightly
prepared) as a choice Arcanum, but being sublimed with Salts, becomes a
corrosive Poison; but we say, that these Salts are again mortified, by being
sublimed with new Mercury, as you may see in the preparation of that which is
called Mercurius Dulcis, which is but a frivolous Toy, yet however it is
medicinal.

We could indeed run out a large Discourse concerning Acids and Alkalies, and
their union with highly rectified Spirit of Wine, and their Office, being
brought to combination, nay, a regenerated and glorified Menstruum; but seeing
these Preparations come under the Title of Arcana Pontissitata, we shall refer
you thither for further satisfaction, as also to the Chapter of Menstruums in
this Book.

And thus much shall at this time suffice concerning Salts; but we shall
hereafter show their union with Vegetable and Mineral Sulphurs, as also with
Urinous Spirits, of which we shall now come to treat.

CHAP. V. Concerning Vrinous Spirits in general.
URinous Spirits are to be defined, Spirits drawn from the excrementitious part
of Bodies, and although they are many times used by nature, in making up of
Compounds, yet their Classes are not so general, as that of Vinor: for Vinor
Spirits and Sulphurs (which are indeed but the Sulphurs in another disguise, as
is manifest from their central unity, in the transmutation of Form) are easily
inflamable alike, being the Callidum innatum, or form of Beings, and spiritual
part of the Body, as in Chap. 1. described, and as we have said in our
Britanean Magazine, that all Fruits, Seeds and Roots will by Fermentation yield
a Vinor Spirit; wherefore in the foregoing Chapter we defined Fermentation to
be an Inlet to Production; for without it Honey or Molossus could never be
brought to yield their Vinor Spirits, nor the Countryman change his Barley into
Malt, etc.

Now in this Chapter we must define Putrefaction the Mother of Generation, for
that it is by this that Urinous Spirits are brought forth, and although not so
universal as the Vinor, yet because Nature does often make use of their
essential parts in composition, we shall define them to be matter
spiritualized, and to be in degrees of purity according as they have adherence
to the substantial or excremental part of Bodies; for in these the Form is
often precipitated, and the Universal Spirit is by them made into Earth; for as
Sandivog. says in his Treatise of Sulphur, that he took two Mercuries of a
different substance, but one original, which Saturn washed in his own Urin, and
called them the Sulphur of Sulphurs, which indeed is nothing else but the
glassy Azoth, or Vitreol of Venus Philosophical, which is the Universal Spirit
made into Earth; but more of this in its proper place.

Now under this Head or Denomination of Urinous Spirits, are those of Blood,
and the excrementitious part of the Microcosm, sc. Urine; as also all kind of
Bones, Horns and Hoofs, and many kind of Salts, as Salt Gem. Sal Armoniack, and
all Volatile Salts fixed by Acids, for all of these will give an Urinous
Spirit, and a Volatile Alkalizated Salt, as is easy to be demonstrated by an
Acid with a Sulphurous Oil, especially from Scot, Blood and Hartshorn, which
Spirits, Salt and Sulphur do represent the three distinct Principles, that are
contained in every concreted Body, and there is no being in the Universal
Fabric of Nature, whose Texture can be upheld without the union of these
Principles, nay, inpurity too; for that is it, that gives durability in the
Animal, Mineral, and Vegetable Kingdom.

Now the Union of the three Principles generates and produces a Neutral Spirit
of an Hermophroditical Nature, that is, neither Male nor Female, Acid nor
Alkaly: Now it is to be observed in all generations, that Sulphur acts the part
of the Male, and Mercury the Female, and Sulphur is that, which gives Mercury
her determinated Form and Fixation; but here first you must destroy him of his
Combustable Robes, and reduce him to a saline and mercurial Nature, then you
may for certain reckon yourself in the number of Natures most Ingenious
Scholars; the way how this is done, I have showed in my Magician's Magazine, to
which we refer the Reader as soon as it comes to light; therefore omitting it
here, shall pass on to our designed Task, sc. The Regular Progression in
Urinous Spirits.

But only, by the way, we think it convenient to add a word to prevent
Critics, and such as understand not the Foundation of Bodies, who may say,
that we have denied our Doctrine before asserted, sc. That there be three
Principles in the Concretion of every individual Being, by alleging we have
here made mention but of two, sc. Sulphur and Mercury, but by this we assent to
the Salt, which is under the Mercurial Form; for the Salt is easily converted
into Mercury, and Mercury into Salt, as is said in the Cline Bore; the truth of
which we are able to maintain against all oppositions: But let us return to

The Anatomy of Urine, and Way to be made use of in the Preparation of its
Spirit.
We say then, that Urine is a Subject containing very many Properties, which
may be many ways advantageous; for it is a wonderful Ens, not only that of the
great World, but also that of the lesser; for Man bears a symbolizing harmony
with the Universe, both in the Natural, Celestial and Intellectual World,
having in his center Immortality* for we know that God's Works are uniform, and
that every less bears some Analogy or Emblance with a greater, and Man being
the chief of all sublunary things, we may thus define him, as a Compendium of
all Forms, an Epitome of all Powers, and a comprehensive System of the
Universe, etc.

After the manner of Philosophers therefore we have treated (in our second
Debate of Trifertes Soladini) of the immortal Dissolvent under that Head,
telling that 'twas contained in Blood and Urine, but with all have defined what
that Blood and Urine is, and seeing this Subject is so largely handled there,
we shall here omit it, and come to speak concerning the Urine of sound Men, of
which Helmont gives this Encomium, where he compares it with the Immortal
Liquor, saying that in the whole System of the Universe, It has not its Fellow
or Compare, neither Sea Salt nor Fountain-Salt, Saltpeter, Sal-Gem. nor any
natural Salt whatever, no nor the Salt of the Urine of Beasts, which is not in
any wise comparable to it.

But as nothing is more easy to come by, so on the other hand, nothing is more
hard to be worked on, for he that can from it obtain a Spirit, that is neither
Acid nor Alkaly, but wholly Saline, shall have no cause to repent his time and
cost bestowed on it, especially if he work upon that of old Saturn; and that we
may contribute our Mite into the Treasures of Philosophy, we shall give our
Experience in the Preparation thereof.

The first thing you are to observe is, that Urinous Spirits are prepared
through putrefaction, as the Vinor are by fermentation, whereby the Attoms are
unlocked and set at liberty, that the fire may have power to bring it to a more
exalted state. As for Example:

The Urine of sound People, and put it into a wooden Tub, or large earthen
Pots; some do it in Glass, saying 'twill not so naturally putrify in the Wood
as Glass, and then they set it in a gentle heat, equal to that of the
Horse-belly, for the space of 6 or 7 Weeks, for in this Climate 'twill hardly
putrify sooner, then they distill a Spirit from it; others putrify it the like
time, being put three Foot deep in the Earth, and leave the Glass mouth to come
open to the Air, looking upon it as the most natural of all other ways, saying
that in the Body of the Earth is that internal heat that brings all things to
an alteration of Form or Maturation thereof; others are very busy with their
Horse-dung, and B. M. and many others, which we shall here pass by, and speak
of that which best pleases us, which is a Putrefaction in the Air; for that
will attract many Heterogeneities from it, and so 'twill become more sweet in
smell.

Take Urine thus truly putrifi'd, and put it into a Retort, and in B. or Sand
set it to work, and distill from 10 Quarts the first five, in which is contained
the spirit and volatile Salt, but that which remains in the Retort, is the Gum
or Oil, the use of which will be showed hereafter: Now the five Quarts of
Spirit must be put into a clean Retort, and you may distill from it four Quarts,
which you may afterward rectify to what height you please, by bringing of it
to a Quart or a Pint; but in every Rectification, be sure not to diminish above
six or eight Ounces at a time; and thus you obtain a Volatile Spirit and Sa^t,
which is no way inflamable.

Observe, That some both draw and rectify this Spirit from Calx vive; but
others through the Salt of Tartar.

Of this rectified Spirit lbj, of our pure Aetherial Spirit, rectified through
Tartar lbiij, and in a short time 'twill coagulate into a Volatile Salt, and if
you distill in a Body and Head, there will sublime in the Helm near half a Pound
of dry active Salt, and some Liquor will come over in a fiery form, the rest
will remain in the bottom like a stinking flat Phlegm, which cast away; to what
Liquor is come over, add fresh Spirit of Wine so much as will make it up lbiij,
and put this upon your sublimed Salt, and distill and sublime as before; and by
repeating this Operation, you will have more of the fiery Liquor come over, and
Salt sublime as before; turn this Wheel with fresh Spirit of Wine twelve times,
and the fiery Spirit will each time be increased, and your Salt will be most of
it reduced to this fiery Liquor, and this we call the Vinor Hermaphrodite, or a
Neutral Menstruum, which will extract good Tinctures from the Calx of any
Metal; but as to its Office, 'twill be treated of more at large in the Chapter
of Menstruums.

Now follows the Preparation of the Fosperus, or the Astrum lunare
Microcosmicum.
As is before showed, take Urine well putrified in a Tub, exposed to the Air
for seven Weeks, all one as you do when you're to make a Spirit of it; the
Spirit being drawn, or rather the whole being evaporated to the consistance of
Honey, in which lies the Fosperus; but the Art is somewhat difficult to get it
from thence, in two cases, the one is in making choice of a proper Agent to be
mixed therewith, and the other is the exact regiment of the Fire.

Now as to the Agent, it must not (as some have said) be Sand; but one that is
free from Salt, and consequently from the glass-making Faculty, or any thing
that will vitrifie, for if it does that, you shall never obtain the Fosperus;
but that you may, we direct you to make use of a Fire within and without your
Vessel, which is thus to be be understood; take the Sap of Urine, as before
it is said, or that of Dung and Urine putrified together, and incorporate it
with Charcoal-dust, and put it into a German Retort, and lute on a Receiver,
that is filled half full with Water, that when the Fosperus comes over, it may
immediately drop into the Water and be preserved thereby.

Observe, That you are to begin with a very small Fire, but you are to increase
it gradually into the highest degree that possibly can be made, and let it be
in such a Furnace, that upon occasion the Bellows may be used, and that the
Fire may play well about the Vessel, continuing so long at its greatest
height, till no more comes over, and you will see Flakes like Lightening, that
will come over in the Receiver of two substances, the one like a thick muddy
Water, which will sink to the bottom, the other swimming over it; separate by
inclination these two substances, and keep each by its self in a Glass, the
gummy Nature may be made into what form you please, by being dissolved in
Spirit of Sal Armoniack or other Urinous Spirits; in B. it is thereby putrified.

Observations concerning it.
It must always be kept in Water, for the Air sets it on fire.

The thick Liquor, if rubbed upon the Hands, Clothes, or Hair, they will appear
in the dark, as if all in fire, but will not burn, and if you open the Cork of
the Glass, all its vacancy will appear like the flame of Brimstone.

If you put this thick Liquor, hardened by digestion into a Gum in Oil of
Cloves or of Cinnamon, and let it remain there 24 hours, and pour off the Oil
from it into a Glass, the same Oil will as you pull out the Cork, and set it in
the Air, appear so bright, that in the dark, if it is in a large and clear Viol,
you may see to read distinctly.

If you write upon the Palm of your Hand, or upon Paper with the said Gum, what
ever you write will appear all on fire, and the Letters may be read a long time
after; but you must have a great can, that you do it softly, and to put it into
Water, as soon as you have done, for if it happen to fire 'twill burn the place
most dreadfully.

Cut a little piece of the said Gum, and lay it upon Paper, and rub it on with
the point of a Knife, and 'twill set the Paper on fire.

Put a little piece of the said Gum to steep 24 hours in Spirit of Wine, then
taking it out again, if you pour this Spirit of Wine by drops upon a Basin of
Water, you will see Flashes like Lightening, somewhat like the flame of
Brimstone, and somewhat of a purplish color.

Of the aforesaid Gum j, and in a white earthen Vessel expose it to the Air,
and the Air will set it one fire, and when it has done burning, you will have
iv. of a Spirit of Salt, which it attracts out of the Air.

If the Privy Parts be therewith rubbed, they will be inflamed and burning for
a good while after.

There are many more Experiments made of it, which we shall here pass by, and
come to consider the Nature and Texture of Urine, sc. Whether it contains the
three Principles, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, or not: but if you proceed to this
Dissection, you must not take new Urine, but such as is stale and stinking and
well putrified by nature, otherwise 'twill be very difficult to behold what is
in it by a manifest separation; but being putrifi'd you may distill and rectify
its Spirit per se, to a great height, and you will find in the Receiver (...)
volatile Salt, which will (as has been said) be coagulated by Spirit of Wine,
and therefore must be of a Mercurial Nature, proceeding from the volatile Salt
of those Concrets we eat; now the Sulphur is represented by the Fosperus, it
being a light that burns, also by the oyliness that comes over by distillation,
and after which there remains an Earth, which being so calcined you may wi^h
warm Water extract from it a Salt, which is the fixed Salt of Urine, in smell
and taste not much different from common Salt, and there is great reason it
should be so, seeing there is so great quantities of Salt taken in with our
Food; but however it does represent the three Principles, viz. Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury, as it is thus Chimically dissected; but lest some should bewilder
themselves in this point, and say for certain, that from hence then must
proceed the Universal Spirit, or Dissolving Menstruum, seeing Man is the chief
of all sublunary things.

Although we allow him to be so, yet the Universal Spirit can never proceed from
him, seeing what he receives thereof is only sufficient to uphold his Humane
Nature, and that only by being changed into various substances; and here every
Agent having obtained the end of its action is at rest, and is not as it was,
but with the Grand Medicine it is not so, but always tends to a higher
perfection, for the two first Principles; Sulphur and Mercury, are separated
from their grand Impurities, and being united to the sublimed Salt, are all
turned to a Liquor, which by the middle pure substance of old Saturn's Urine,
will be precipitated into a cristaline Earth, which may be multiplied at
pleasure; therefore it is a Secret to be kept in silence, with a thankful heart
to God, who is the giver of all good and perfect Gifts.

Here you have that, which is superior to any thing, that may proceed from
Humane Urine; for the Microcosmical or Terrestrial Fire is united with the
Macro or Celestial one, by the Act of Natura Naturarum, which operates so
invisibly, that some call it the supernatural Fire, or Spirit congealed: Now
these two being united in their purity, there is contained therein a double
Lunar Gasse, or that cold Fire, which will not unite with the Blasse or Heat of
Bodies, but displays itself like a noble Off spring, which carries with it the
true marks of its Birth, for the most burning Charcoal is divided by it into
its Principles, Oil and Earth, which afterward are changed into elementary
Water, nay it performs many more mighty Deeds, in that it is powerful in
dissolving and conquering those Bodies, which 10000 Men could not do by any
other Act, as we have plainly showed in our Trifertes Soladini; and therefore
shall omit to speak any more of it here, as also of Humane Urine, and so come
to the other particular Classes: And first,

Concerning Common Sal-Armoniack
There are various Opinions concerning its Original; one saying, it is purely
natural, and is dug up, as Salt Niter is, and so boiled accordingly into a
Salt; and others say, it is artificial, prepared from Soot, Sea Salt and Camels
Urine, which looks indeed much like the truth itself; and therefore we shall
not regard what the variety of Opinions are concerning it: for we know by
experience, that out of it is prepared noble Medicament. We shall give you one
for Example, sc.

The Spirit of Sal-Armoniack.
Of Sal-Armoniack lbiij, Calx vive lbiij, or a strong Lixivium of Potashes,
Lapis calaminaris lbiij, or rather the Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, and so
distill by fire of degrees, until it is come over, the which rectify; and so
have you a most subtle and penetrating Spirit, much to be esteemed in many
Acute Diseases: But we prefer this following before it.

Spiritus Mundus.
Of Sal Anotasier Lybianus lbiij, the white sulphurous Earth Chimically
prepared lbiij, of the Offspring of Venus lbss. all. well macerated together,
and then add in of the form and first Matter of Sassafrax lbiij, but observe
that it be essentially made; and put them into a coated Retort, and distill with
fire of degrees for 24 hours, till all is come over that will come, and then
remove it from the Receiver, and being closely luted up, digest in a chicken
hear, the longer the better; then by circulation and rectification in a Body
and Head, let the whole be united and putrifi'd, which will be in two or three
times. The Use of this will be shown in the Chapter of Oleosums: Its Virtues
are as follows:

This Spirit is of a sharp penetrating Essence, and of an airy, moist and warm
Nature; and therefore may with credit be used in many Diseases: The Dose is
from 8 to 20 Drops in Sassafrax-water. It does immediately penetrate the whole
Body, causing sudden sweating: therefore excellent in Quinsies, Pleurisies, and
other acute Diseases; it is also prevalent in opening the Obstructions of the
Spleen, and dispersing and expelling many Malignities by Sweat and Urine: It
cures the Quartan, Cholick, the Suffocation of the Matrix, and many more
Diseases.

In brief, This Spirit is a safe, sure and ready Medicine for to disperse and
expel all tough, gross and venomous Humors. Also this Spirit acts his part
externally, quenching all Inflammations, curing the Erysipelas and Gangrenes; it
allayeth the Pains of the Gout, clothes being dipped in it and applied, and
although it draw Blisters it matters not; laid to the Pulse, it is good in ardent
Fevers; and it asswageth Swellings and Pains; discusseth congealed Blood,
helps strained Limbs and benumbed Nerves; only smelled unto, it cures the
Megrim and other chronical Diseases of the Head; for it dissolveth the peccant
Matter, and evacuateth it through the Nostrils; it restores the lost Hearing,
being externally laid on with a little Instrument fit for the purpose: Also in
the Obstructions of Women's Courses, applied by a fit Instrument in a spiritual
way, opens presently, and cleanses the Womb, and makes Women fruitful, etc.
Mingled with common Water, and held in the Mouth, asswageth the Toothache,
proceeding from sharp Humors fallen into the Teeth.

A little of it applied in a Glister, kills the Worms in the Body, and
allayeth the Cholick.

This Spirit may also further be used, to many other things, especially by
means thereof many precious and effectual Medicaments may be made, as will be
hereafter described.

Observe, That after the first distillation, the Cap. mort. that remains, may
be calcined in a strong Fire, and then taken out and beat into gross Powder,
and let it be dissolved by subli, and then filter it; then add to every vj of
this Liquor or Oil, jss of the strongest and best rectified Spirit of Niter, or
Spirit of Niter consentricated, and that will cause the greater part of the
white sulphurous Earth to separate by precipitation.

And then you have a Menstruum, not corrosive, which easily dissolves Gold, and
manifests its glorious Garments, etc. Let this at present suffice, as to Sal
Anot. Lybian. but however under this Title of the Urinous Spirits, you may
understand all such as are drawn and prepared from Blood, Hair, Bones, Hoofs,
Horns and Sculls, as was before touched; of which we shall only give you two
Examples, the one of Hartshorn, the other of Cranium humanum; from the latter
of which is prepared Goddard's Drops.

Hartshorn, or Cranium humanum, and let it be put in such a Furnace as is
ordered for making the Oil, and fill your Furnace three parts full, because the
matter is dry and spongious, and will be compressed by the Fire, but if it were
liquid, the Rules in Chemistry are not to fill the Vessels or Retorts above a
third part, or at most one half full, and the Receiver being luted on, at first
you must give a gentle Fire for 6 hours, increase a little higher to the second
degree, and continue for 12 hours, and then for 6 more let it be kept to the
highest degree you can, so as the Pot may remain red the whole time; and when
the Operation is finished, you will see no more Fumes come forth which, if you
work right, will be performed in 24 hours: It comes thus; First a Phlegm with a
yellow Spirit and volatile Salt in diverse figures, and a deep blackish and
fetid Oil, and your Caput mort. black and burned, which afterward may be
calcined in a Potter's Furnace to make burned Hartshorn of; and thus are the
different qualities separated, which may be further thus operated upon: Let
what comes over remain together for about 20 days in a convenient Vessel in a
gentle heat, that so as much of the Oil, as will, may sallifie; then separate
the Oil from the Spirit and Salt by a Funnel, the which rectify through the
Spirit of Salt, as is in the Chapter of Oils taught; and what Salt is formed by
the acid Spirit must be sublimed from its impurity, and added into the first
Spirit: and then the Spirit must be rectified two or three times from its Phlegm
by the addition of the pure Salt of Tartar, and so 'twill come exceeding pure.
The Infallible Rule to know when the Phlegm begins to come, is this, the Salt
will begin to condense and fall to the bottom of the Receiver, then you may let
all cool, for the Spirit is clearly off: This is the Spirit and Salt truly
prepared, which may as yet receive several degrees of exaltation: but however
as it is, it is a subtle, penetrating and active Spirit, and operates as is said
of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, and opens those Obstructions, that are the
cause of preternatural Convulsions, and has a specific virtue in many
Diseases, and corrects volatile Poisons, and therefore highly to be valued;
for I Have known those who have gone about to poison themselves, by taking a
large quantity of Arsnick, yet this being timely discovered, the mischief has
been prevented, by giving large and repeated Doses of the Spirit of Hartshorn:
it is excellent also for those that are poisoned with Antimonial Fumes, etc.

Now we say, that if this Spirit is united with its Oil, twill be much more the
highly enriched thereby: thus, Let your Oil be drawn off from an Alkaly, and
the Spirit radically united with an aromatic Spirit of Wine, and that again
united with the Oil, by Fermentation, Circulation and repeated Cohobation,
until the Salt, Spirit and Oil arise united; and so you have an essentificated
Spirit, from Hartshorn, Cranium humanum, or what you please; and it is
observable, that here the Urinous Foetor is turned to an Aromatic Fragrancy,
and this is a Medicine upon which you may rely, where refreshment is required,
as also for strengthening the Brain and Stomach, and if aromatized with
Cinnamon or other rich Spices, so that the specific virtue be exalted to the
part afflicted, 'twill prove a rich Jewel in the hand of an ingenious Man; and
the more especially if the Principles are brought to a complete harmony through
the Diaploma of Art, as is largely shown in our Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph,
to which we refer you: We shall therefore conclude this Chapter with this
Observation, which is, That all Urinous Spirits, none excepted, are Volatile
Alkalies, as is easy to be demonstrated by their opposition to an Acid, making
the same Effervessence as a fixed Alkaly does, and also by the mortification of
an Acid; for Spirit of Urine will revive Mercury; so all Alkalies are noble
Medicines, none excepted: but there is a difference between Alkalies naturally
and those that are volatilized artificially; for these being in themselves
originally fixed, can never be so far alienated from their fixed Nature, but
that they retain a power to touch the root of all fixed Diseases, by passing
the Digestions and dissolving all preternatural Coagulations they find in the
way, etc. Concerning which we have written more largely in our Spagirick
Philosophy's Triumph, etc. to which we refer you: And so we shall end this
Chapter concerning Urinous Spirits.

CHAP. VI. Treats concerning Powers and Oleosums.
WE shall now proceed to show the Use and Office of Vinor, Urinous and
Alkalizated Spirits, by various Applications, in order to the making of various
Powers and Oleosums: beginning particularly with Aromatic Spirits, and how
they may be prepared so as to unite with Urinous ones: And first of the
Aromatic Water, called,

Aqua Anhaltina quoe and imperialis dicta est.
Of Turbith, Mastick, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Galanga, Cubebs, Bdellium, ana
j, Venice Turpentine ij, the best white Virgin Honey viij, the Roots of German
Angelica, Marjoram, small leaved Sage, Lavender, Balm, and Lignum Aloes ana j.
Having beaten and shred them small, put them into a Gallon Retort, and pour
upon them five Pints of tartarizated and truly rectified Spirit of Wine, and
add in of yellow Amber in Powder j; digest all two or three days, and then
distill, first with a gentle Fire, and toward the latter end increase it, till
all is come over; then put this distilled Spirit into a convenient Vessel, that
you may stop it close, adding thereunto of the Powder of Coral and Pearl ana j,
of the Queen of Hungary's Water lbss, and after seven days, you may upon
occasion give for Fits and oppression of Wind, two or three spoonfuls in a
Glass of Wine; but its Office of Aromatizing will be shown hereafter.

Aqua Aromatica Antipeliptica nostra.
Of our tartarizated Spirit of Wine four Gallons, Lavender, Rosemary flowers,
Rosa Solis, Flowers of the Lilly of the Valley, ana Miiij, Sage, Bettony,
Bugloss and Cowslipflowers, all gathered in their prime, ana Mj; Balm,
Motherwort, Bay Leaves, Leaves and Flowers of the Orange-tree ana, Mj. or for
want of them the Peel; digest these in a gentle heat, like that of the Sun, and
then distill; afterward take of Sassafrax vj, Citron-seeds, Peony-seeds, ana
iv, Cinnamon ij, Nutmegs, Mace, Cardamums, Cubebs, yellow Saunders, ana, ss,
Lignum Aloes j, Jujubebes new and good stoned lbss. Let them be all exactly
powdered and macerated, and put them into a Body with its blind Head, and pour
upon them the before distilled Spirit, and let them digest 14 days, and then
distill a second time: Then add to this distilled Water, Pearl prepared, Musk,
Ambergreece, Saffron, ana j, red Rose leaves j, and hang them in a Bag in the
Liquor for ten days; And then, upon occasion, you may give from twenty to
thirty drops in a Glass of Wine, in any Convulsive Fits whatsoever. For the Use
of these Spagirically, proceed as follows:

Of Sal Anotasier lybianus lbj, of the white sulphurous Earth, prepared as
before directed, the like quantity; pound them well together in an Iron Mortar,
and put it into a Retort, and pour upon it, of the best tartarizated Spirit of
Wine, either lbij or lbiij, as you will have it stronger or weaker of the Sal
Anot. lyb. and distill by degrees of fire, till all is come over, and when cold,
remove it from the Receiver, then rectify it thus: take of the Oil of common
Salt, run per Deliquium iv, and of Cinnamon macerated therein, the like
quantity, and put into a Retort, and in B. dissolve it off, and cohobate it
again thereon, and dissolve as before. Repeat this a third time, and you will have
a neutral Spirit aromatized with the Cinnamon, and is the foundation of a true
Oleosum, as also Spiritus seditivus; Also if you dissolve in this quantity ij
or iij of Camphire in B. you have a noble Cephalic Spirit; which will also
serve well to bathe grieved parts. But here proceed as follows:

Of Aq. Aromat. Antipelipt. lbij, of the Menstruum Sedativum lbiss; mix them,
then add in of the common Balsamic Uniter ij or iij of the Oil of Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Mace, Oleum regeneratum, ana ij; of the Oil of Juniper, Oil of Mints,
of Balm, ana j; Oil of Cedar ss, Oil of Oranges vj, Oil of Roses chemical j,
shake them all together, and they will incorporate and unite, and by digestion
become a noble Oleosum. The Dose is from 10 to 30 drops in a Glass of Wine;
prevalent in most Diseases incident to humane kinds.

Sal Volatilis and Oleosus.
Of the Oil of Mints, Orange-Peel, ana gr. xx; Rosemary, Mace, and Juniper, ana
gr. xij; Cloves and Anniseeds, ana. gr. viij; the best rectified Spirit of Wine
iv, Tartar ss.

Let your Salt and Oils be incorporated in a Mortar for 6 or 7 hours, and then
wash them out with your Spirit of Wine in a glass Body; digest gently for 24
hours, then distill and cohobate your Spirit two or three times, until the
Spirit and Oils be well united.

Then of Cardamums and Cubebs ana iij, (or, which I like better, Cinnamon and
Nutmegs) Roots of Imperatoria, Daucus, Coriander-seeds, Orange and Citron-Peel,
Lignum Sasafrag. ana j, Sal Anotasier Libianus ij, Salt of Tartar iss; macerate
and beat all together, except the Sal Anotasier Libianus; and then put all
together and distill with a lent Fire, and there will come over a Volatile Salt
and Spirit, which by often cohobation will unite together; then pour this
Spirit upon Salt of Tartar, so that it may swim two fingers above it, and
digest three days, until it be tinged of a Gold color.

This is an excellent Spirit, and may be given at Meals, from 15 to 30 drops in
a Glass of Wine.
Another.
Of the best Salt of Tartar and Sal-Armoniack ana lbj, of the tartarizated
Spirit of Wine from lbj to lbiv, as you please to have it in strength, and put
it into a Body that has a Verge, and lute an Head closely and exactly thereon
with its Receiver, and distill very easily on the surface of the Sand, and there
will arise a crystaline Salt of diverse figures in the Head, and into the
Receiver will come a Spirit, which Spirit being mixed with some Water, and put
to the place affected, will still the pain in the Teeth; but for the Teeth lbj
of the Spirit of Wine is the true proportion. But for the Oleosum, proceed as
shall hereafter be directed; but by the way observe, that upon the Cap. mort.
that remains after distillation, pour good Spirit of Salt, and you will have
good fusible Salt, that shall tincture Spirit of Wine as red as a Ruby. I
remember, I once poured a certain Spirit of Urine upon a highly rectified Oil
of Vitreol, and with addition of a little Salt of Tartar, I had a fusible
ingressive Salt, flowing like Butter on the Fire: Then proceed thus, of the
aforesaid Spirit lbiij, and put it into a Retort, then take of the purest Salt
of Tartar, and Oil of Cinnamon, Oil of Anniseeds, Oil of Oranges, and Oil of
Juniper ana j, grind them well together in a Glass Mortar with the Salt, and
then put them into the Spirit, and distill and cohobate two or three times, till
all is united. The Dose is the same with the former.

Another.
Of our Aq. Anhaltina lbiij, Spiritus Sedativus lbj, Oil of Anniseeds, Mint,
Balm, Juniper, ana j, Oil of Amber, Hartshorn, and Stone-coal, ana ss, the
Volatile Salt of Amber and Hartsshorn, ana ij, Spirit of Hartshorn lbss,
Camphire iij, Salt of Tartar prepared as hereafter shall be shown, iv; digest
all seven days, and then distill and cohobate till all is united. The Dose is as
the former.

The Salt of Tartar is thus prepared: Of the Oil of Tartar per Deliq. lbj,
Crystals of Tartar lbss; dissolve them therein, and evaporate to dryness.

Sal Volatilis, Aromaticus and Oleosum.
Of the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Amber and Sal-Armoniack ana, and sublime
them together, and you have an excellent Cephalic; but it may yet be higher
exalted, if you destroy the coagulating faculty of the Volatile Salt, and then
enriched by Essential Oils, such as of Juniper, Mace, Cinnamon and Anniseeds,
all put upon a butterified Salt of Tartar, and adding thereunto of our Aq.
Aromat. Antipilept. and sublime and distill as you do in making the Volatile
Salt of Sal-Armoniack, and you have a noble Volatile Salt, that may be smelled
to, as also a Spirit, which is such a Medicine as will never fail of raising
some honor to an ingenious Practitioner; it is exceeding fragrant, and
therefore may be drank in Wine at Meals. The Virtues of it are as the former.

Thus having run through various Examples in Oleosums, which are sufficient for
any one to understand how to prepare others thereby, yet we think it convenient
to add Dr. Thompson's, which Dr. Bacon bought of him, and is doubtless the
Basis of that Treatise, which he published under the Title of a Key to Helmont.

Of our butterified, Salt of Tartar iv, the Essential Oil of Amber iv, Spirit
of Turpentine v, Oil of Juniper Berries, (which is added by me) iij, all
Philosophically prepared; then incorporate your Oils and Salts in a Glass
Mortar very well, and put it into a Retort, adding thereunto of the highly
rectified Spiritus Mundus xij, of the Philosophical Spirit of the Microcosmical
World, 17 times rectified lbiss, of our tartarisated Spirit of Wine, rectified
till it becomes aetherial lbviij; being all put together, draw them over the
Helm from butterified Salt of Tartar, and spagirically unite them; and thus is
it prepared. We shall now proceed to the Medicines prepared by it: And first of
the

Elixir Proprietatis.
Of Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron (in fine Powder) ana j; pour upon them of the
Menstruum lbj, and set it in a gentle digestion nine days, then pass it through
a Filter, and so is the Medicine prepared. It has all the Virtues, and more
than can be attributed to any Elixir Propr. commune. Its Dose is from 20 to 60
drops, in Beer or Wine.

Dr. Thompson's Stomatick Tincture, or Pepper Drops.
Of this Menstruum one Gallon, of white Pepper lbj, put in whole, of
Orrice-roots ij; gently digest and separate by filtration S. A. and reserve the
Tincture for use.

Which strengthens the Stomach, destroys Thirst and abates Fevers, helps
Indigestions, and cures Surfeits, and stops all kind of Fluxes, therefore of
great consequence for the benefit of Mankind.

The Tincture Hemetine.
Of Virginia Snake-root in gross Powder iv; of the Menstruum lbj: Let this be
prepared as the Tinctura Stomatica.

This is a great Antidote against Poison, and prevents the effect of any
Pestilential Air whatsoever.

Now in the like manner may you obtain a Secret for Agues out of Jesuits Bark.
The Dose of these are as the former: but for Agues, you may give the largest
Dose, and an hour before the Paroxism.

Thus (Reader) have we taken thee by the hand, and brought thee to the pleasant
Gardens of Physic, where various excellent Specificks are, but a great
business lies in the true preparation thereof; and for the teaching of which,
we'll not impose upon the World a Doctrine, which we approve not ourselves;
that is, we admit not of the gross Body of Species, before a previous
preparation, such an one as will ripen their Crudities, and separate their
Venoms, and volatilizes by its fermentative Power the Gummosities, and yet
exalts their Balsamic Sulphurs, so that it may be radically united with the
Saline-Property, of which Nature is the Volatile Salt of Tartar, and more
principally the Sal Circulatum of Paracelsus, which will prepare such
Medicines, as will really overcome Diseases, and by their subtle, fragrant, and
balsamic Nature, are prevalent to maintain long Life; but since these are not
to be obtained by every searcher, I shall lend my hand to help such by a candid
Communication of the way of making

Potestates Succinii Nostrae.
Amber, prepared as is prescribed in the Chapter of Oils, and let the acid
Spirit be coagulated upon the butterifi'd Salt of Tartar, until the Salt is
assatiated therewith, and will make no more ebullition; then add equal parts of
the Oil of Amber, rectified through Aq. R. and a fourth part of the Salt of
Amber sublimed, the which digest in an open Vessel in a very gentle heat for
six days, and then add the double weight of all our Aq. Aro^at. Antipilept. and
lute in a Head with its Receiver, and distill off the Spirit, which carefully
keep; the Phlegm must be evaporated, and then add in half its weight of our Red
Wine, and circulate the Salt, till changed into Oil, dissolvable in Water or
Spirit of Wine, the which dulcifie with Aromatic Spirits; then separate this
Balsamic Sulphur, and by digestion unite it with its first Spirit; so is the
Powers prepared; for this is the true, right, and genuine way, to make the
Powers of any Body whatsoever.

Virtues.
These Powers of Amber are a most excellent Medicine, known to very few, for
which reason the Oil of Amber has been of so high esteem so many years; but
it is not yet by far comparable to this Spirit, because it is clothed with an
evil Earth, or heterogeneous combustible Sulphur, which hinders its union with
Water or Spirit of Wine; and till Oils are so prepared, as to unite with
either, they are not truly Medicinal, and although Cures are performed by them,
either by their Effluviums, or being dropped into Sugar and taken inwardly, yet
this is but from the Volutile Salts they contain* for their substantial parts
are not divested so, as to unite with the Serum and circulate in the Body so,
as to divide the offending matter: But this aforesaid Spirit is of such a
nature as to perform both; therefore prevalent in the Diseases of the Head,
Breast, Liver, Heart, Spleen, Sweetbread, etc. as Palsies, Convulsions,
Falling Sickness, Vertigo's, Difficulty of Breathing, Pleurisies, Consumptions,
want of Appetite, Vomiting, the Cholick and Oppressions of Wind, Rising of the
Mother, Jaundice, Dropsy, Hypochondriack Melancholy, Scurvy, Obstructions,
Fevers, Agues, Strangury, and Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys, either in Men
or Women, so general is its Operation; and therefore published for the great
service it has for Humane Kind.

The Dose is from ten to sixty drops, in a Glass of Wine, Mornings and
Evenings, or before the approach of any Fit; but if the Disease be stubborn and
chronick, then must its use be continued till relief is found.

Elixir proprietatis Helinontiae.
Aloes succotrin. Myrrh, Saffron, ana j, (for Helmont says, if you take more,
you will find it to be done in vain; his reason for it is this, because before
the Species will be mollifi'd at the top, the bottom part will be burnt; but if
you proportion your Glass (being flat at the bottom) that the Species may only
lie the thickness of a Barley-corn, you may do as large a quantity as your
Glass in this manner will contain; The Form of the Glass for making the Elixir
Proprietatis Helmontii is described in Figure 6.
for his whole intent was, that the matter might not be burned, but be wholly
opened and dissolved, circulating in the form of a white Milk, which could
never be in a small Glass.)

Let your Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron be exactly grounded into Powder and mixed
together in a Mortar, or else your Saffron may be made into round Pills, and
put them into the Glass, being strong and capacious, and let the Neck be so
strong, that it may be nipt; and set it in digestion, in a moderate heat of
Sand or Ashes, for 16, 18 or 20 days, keeping of them in a gentle circulatory
heat. [ I approve of the adding in of the Oil of fixed Niter, about ij.

Observe, not to give too strong an heat (for fear the Vessel should burst
asunder) and when the matter is all grown together like a lump at the bottom,
and the clear drops of Water begin to look like Oil in the Glass, then with an
Iron cut off the Neck; for it is enough, when it sticks to the sides of the
Glass; being open, pour to every iij, lbj of rich Cinnamon Water, or rather our
Neutral Spirit, which is the Foundation of our Spiritus Sedativus, or that
which is made by the Union of Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Wine, and
aromatized with Cinnamon; and then for the Sedativus, it is put upon Myrrh,
Aloes and Saffron, and cohobated two or three times in B. M. and so you may
this: for the moist B. will bring up the Essence of the Concrets into the
Spirit by fresh Distillations or reiterated Cohobations, which the volatile
Salt in this Menstruum will perform; and when the Operation is over, and the
Feces of little virtue, you may add to every Pint of this Liquor of Musk gr. j,
and of Ambergr. gr. iv, being ground apart, and then together, and put in
before your last Cohobation.

This Spirit being digested in a heat almost insensible for Months together,
(the longer the better) contracts a subtle, balsamic, fragrant Nature, which
relieves the Archei^s, and so conquers the fury of most Diseases. For this
faithful Communication be very thankful.

For that its Virtues are many, being prevalent in Fevers, Measles, Smallpox
and Swine Pox, and many other Diseases, concerning which we could write very
large, as also of the aforesaid Preparations, but seeing we have touched at
their Virtues in our general Treatise of Diseases, as also in our Medicina
rational. we shall omit them here, being not willing to fill the Book with
that.

The Dose of this is from 10 to 30 drops in a Glass of Wine: Now how Wines are
to be used, as proper Vehicles, you must look to my Britannean Magazine, where
we treat of Grapes.

Now, we having in this Chapter treated of Oleosums and Powers, which being
liquid things and all to be given in drops, we think it convenient for some
Palates, to add something of this nature in form of a Pill.

Pilula Anodina, Specificata and Cathartica: Or, The Friendly Balsamic Pill.

Whose Nature and Virtues are such, that it operates as Nature would have it,
in order to cleanse the Body from the root of Diseases, viz, by Sweat, Urine
and Stool, and sometimes with Vomit, and other times by insensible
Transpiration, according as the occasional matter wants to be carried off.

Of the Volatile Salt of Tarter lbij, or for want of that, the purified Butter
of Salts; Salt of Amber lbss, Opium cleansed from all its filth lbj;
incorporate these, till through ingress is made into the Opium, and it is
corrected by these Volatile Salts; then add of the Oil of Sassafrax iv, Oil of
Amber iij, of Anniseeds ij, and of Cinnamon j, spagirically opened, and
incorporate them well; then add in of Mercury lbss, so prepared as not to be
revived by the Volatile Salts, or for want of that, the corrected Flowers of
Antimony, of the Narcotick Sulphur of Venus iv, the Powder of Cinnamon and
Ginger, ana vj, the fine Powder of Liquorish sufficient to incorporate it into
a Mass, which as it drys may be moistened with Oil of Turpentine, or rather
Juniper.

Its Virtues.
It Is a most noble Preparation, and far above any that has been hitherto
extant to the World, for the Medicine is exalted to the true intension of
healing, and comes but little short of our Pil. sam. Nepen. for such is its
property, that it first works as an Anodine, and allays the enraged Archeius,
and then carries off the offending and poisonous Matter by stool or some other
most gentle way: It totally corrects and destroys the virulency of vegetable
poisons, either out or in the body; and being taken as a Corrector, shows its
effects: For if you are assaulted with the violent working of any Potion,
vomitive or purgative, twill so take it off, as to settle Nature in her due
Decorum; such is the nature, force and operation of this Pill as a Corrector.

For its prevalency will be seen in helping Nature to discharge those things
that offend her; for if you dissolve a Pill in a Glass of Mull'd Sack, and the
Patient put to sweat in Bed, 'twill immediately disperse it self through the
Body, and fortify the Fountain of Life, and so expels Poison in any part of
the Body, carrying it off by all the Emunctories, or such a way as Nature wants
to be discharged: The friendly and virtuous Nature that this Pill is endued
withal, has been for some Years demonstrated.

In fine, therefore it is prevalent in most Diseases incident to the Body; but
particularly by its abstersive Nature and apacative Virtue, it pacifies the
enraged Archeius, and by this means insinuates it self into the languishing
Fountain of Life, and performs much to the Patients content and Physicians
honor, especially in Surfeits, Colds, Coughs, Fluxes, Fevers, Pleurisies,
Calentures, Headache, Toothache, the distilling of Humors called Catarrhs,
which destroys the Lungs; also it is prevalent in the Pains of the Breast,
Tremblings of the Heart, giving the Blood a fermentation, and cleansing it from
superfluities; and therefore prevalent in the Jaundice, Dropsy, Scurvy, Gout,
and in inveterate Gonorrhea's, and several other Diseases, as may be seen by

Its Dose and Application.
For any of the aforementioned Diseases, you must take the bigness of a large gray
Pea, and drink it down with a Glass of Mull'd Sack, or hot Mace Ale; and being
in Bed, dispose your self to sweat. This does excellent in the King's Evil,
Measles, Smallpox, or Swine-Pox, to bring the Venom from the Heart.

For Agues, you may take a Pill the bigness of the largest gray Pea, and drink
it with a Pennyworth of Anniseed-water, and as much Pepper as will lie upon a
Groat, an Hour before the Fit, and sweat plentifully in Bed, drinking a little
Rosemary, Marigold or Carduus Posset Drink; this being continued three or four
times, generally takes it off.

For Swoonings and Convulsions, it must be taken in our Spiritus Prophelact.
imperialis, dilated to a Cordial; and for Virulent Obstructions, it must be
taken in White Wind every Night going to Bed.

For Fluxes and such Distempers in Women, as mightily debilitates them, is must
be taken in a Glass of Sack mull'd with Cinnamon, as before directed.

For the Gout and Rheumatisms of the whole Body, let it be taken in our Vinum
Vitae proprietatis, both dilated in a Glass of Rhenish Wine, sweating
plentifully in Bed, and drinking now and then a little Spiritus Mundus, and
bathing any grieved part with the same; this generally eases at twice taking.
It divides also the Clods of Blood, and breaks inward Imposthumes, carries off
their Matter and heals them; so it does Bruises and Squats.

Now for difficulty of making Water, the Strangury, the Stone in the Bladder,
or Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys, proceed thus: A Pint of White Wind wherein
a black Flint has been several times quenched, and then dissolve gr. xx. of
the Pill therein, and sweeten it with iij or iv. of Marshmallows, mallows, and
let it be for two Draughts, with three Hours intermission, in the most violent
pain; and so will the offending Matter be carried off.

Observe, That little Children of three or four Years old take somewhat more
that a Barley-corn in quantity, but Children under that age, about the bigness
of a Barley-corn. It may be varied in its Dose, acoording to the Wisdom and
Discretion of the Parent.

Thus much may suffice for this Chapter, we shall now proceed to that of
Menstruums, and Mineral Preparations.

CHAP. VII. Treats concerning Menstruums in general.
IN this Chapter we shall treat of Menstruums, which indeed is not so properly
called, because the world [Menstruum] signifies that which nourishes the
multiplicative Power, either in the Animal, Vegetable or Mineral Kingdom, and
therefore must be the Universal Spirit, concentrated by the sulphurous Form,
and seeing there is but one general Matter, whence this Universal Spirit is
obtained, so by consequence in the Mineral Kingdom there can properly be but
one homegeneous Menstruum, which dissolves by way of Multiplication: but this
being spoken of in its proper place, we shall omit it here: so that this is
only mentioned to prevent Critics: and seeing the word is generally understood
to be that, by which Bodies are dissolved, we shall therefore proceed: And
first of

Menstruum Vrino-acidum.
Of the highest rectified Spirit of Urine lbj, and put it into a large Body
with a narrow Mouth, and pour gently on it of the highest rectified Spirit of
Vinegar you can make, until it is assatiated, and 'twill give an insipid Phlegm,
and if the Phlegm is not insipid, you must pour on until it is; then very gently
draw off the Phlegm; and if the Salt is not well satisfied, repeat the former
Operation until it is, and then distill in fire of degrees, and lastly rectify
it; and it is not only a good Menstruum, but also an excellent Medicine for the
Diseases of the Ears, and other pares of the Body. Also if you take any of the
aforesaid Volatile Salts (that are sublimed in the Chapter of Oleosums,
especially that of the third prescription) iv, of the best Spirit of
Wine-Vinegar lbj, the which put in by little and little till the Salt is
assatiated; and then evaporate the Phlegm and put it into a Retort, and distill
by degrees of fire, at last giving a very strong one, and when cold on that
which remains in the bottom, cohobate the said Spirit, and concentrate it so,
that it may become fiery; repeat this Operation by fresh addition four or five
times, and you have a true Dissolvent for Crabseyes, Pearls, Talk, and many
other things.

Another for dissolving of Talk.
Of the S. Armon. next following, lbss, and dissolve it in lbij of the
stronger: Acet. distillatum from Wine you can get; put all into a Retort, and
distill it in Sand, and give it a strong fire at the last, and then cohobate it
anew on what remains in the bottom of the Retort; and then distill again,
repeating until a fourth time; and lastly, rectify it very well, and by it
self, and so is your Menstruum prepared.

To make your S. Armoniack.
Of the Salt of Potashes, (or for want of that, use that of Tartar) and common
S. Armoniack, of each lbj, which reduce into a Powder, and put it into a Glass;
and pour thereon the rectified Spirit of Wine iv, and lute well thereon its
Head, with a little Receiver thereunto, and distill softly on the surface of the
Sand, and there will arise a crystal Salt in the Head of diverse forms.

Of the fine sarced Powder of Talk iv, the which put into a Matrix, and pour
thereon of the aforesaid Dissolvent viij, and digest the same for 15 days, and
the whole will become like Milk, the which pour off by inclination into a
little Body, and pour on that which remains in the Matrix of your fresh
Menstruum, and digest again for 8 days, and there will arise more of the
aforesaid Milk, which add unto the other, and the which evaporate on a vaporous
B. as much as will rise, and you will have a remaining Milk somewhat thick, the
which pour into a Retort of Glass well luted, and distill in Sand by degrees,
and there will arise an Oil like that of Turpentine.

Observe, That Talk dissolved by the secret S. Armoniack of the wise, will
produce an Oil which will whiten Scarlet all white, and turns a black Hat
into a gray.

The Use of the Oil is thus:
Wash the Face twice a day, (ziz.) Mornings and Evenings, with Water distilled
from Bean-flowers; then take three drops of the Oil of Talk, and apply one drop
to the Forehead, and a drop to each Cheek; you must cover the Eyelids with a
Plaster of white Roses, shutting the Eyes, and then apply a round
Looking-glass polished, and after, being warmed over Wood-ashes, 'twill cause
the Oil to spread over the whole Face, and beautisie it for a considerable time.

You may also make a noble Menstruum from the Spirit of Urine, assatiated with
the Oil of Vitreol, and the Phlegm evaporated until a secret Sal Armoniack is
formed: the Oil of Vitreol must be well deflegmed and rectified. Ex. Gr. Of the
aforesaid Vitreol lbj, on which put by degrees Spirit of Urine highly
rectified, until there is no more action; from both will arise a sharp
penetrating Liquor, which is the Menstruum.

Also from the Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Salt may be obtained a noble
Menstruum; the like from the Spirit of Urine and Oil of Sulphur per Campan.
also from that and the Spirit of Niter; and more particularly from the Spirit
of Urine and Spirit of Verdigrease: for seeing that Urinous Spirits are but
Volatile Alkalies, they are really fixed by the Acids. Concerning which we
might fill a Treatise, but seeing these Examples are sufficient for any
ingenious person to build his Operations upon, we shall desist therefrom, and
show the way of making Acid Menstruums: And first of.

Menstruum acidum Radicale Zwelfare.
Good Verdigrease of Montpelier lbiv, finely pulverized, put it into a
Cucurbit, and pour upon it the best Spirit of Vinegar, that it may stand six
Inches above the Matter, stir it often with a wooden or glass Spatula, when
tinged with an high green, decant and pour on fresh Vinegar, and extract all
you can, till there be not above v of Feces left.

N. B. That if there remain many Feces after the fourth time of extracting; you
may let the Spirit of Vinegar and the Matter be boiled together, until it have
got all out that possibly can be got out.

All these Tinctures must be filtered through P^^^^ or a Fustian Bag, and what
will not pass, extract with new Spirit of Vinegar. [N. B.] That all the
Tinctures must be as green, and clear, as an Emerald: Put all these Tinctures
together on a warm B. M. Evaporate to a skin, and then put your Pan into a very
cold place, or in Water of S. Armoniack, to shoot for 24 hours, and you will
find there a fair blew Vitreol; then evaporate again, and shoot as before, as
long as any thing will shoot, by reiterating your Evaporation and
Crystalization.

N. B. That if your Crystals be foul toward the latter part of your Operation,
dissolve them in fresh Spirit, evaporate and crystalize as before: for they
must be all most pure and translucid.

Then dry the fair blew Vitreol between Papers, on a Furnace in a very gentle
heat, or else you will hurt them very much: you may proceed to a new
dissolution with fresh Spirit of Vinegar, until you discern that the Vinegar in
a gentle B. sends over nothing but an insipid Water.

Digest upon this well purified and dried Vitreol an alchalized Sp. V. three
fingers high, and three times distilling it off most gently each time, and
after every distillation adding fresh.

Pour this choice Vitreol, being very finely powdered into a well coated
Retort, with a large Mouth going four Inches into a large Receiver; make all
fast with a Bladder dipped in the White of Eggs and quick Lime; but first mind to
cleanse well the Neck of the Retort with a Feather. [N. B.] That the Joint of
your Retort and Receiver be very close.

Then distill in such a Furnace, as you may command all the degrees of fire.

First begin with a gentle fire for 24 Hours, to procure clear drops, so as you
may count six between each drop; at the end of four Hours will come a green
Spirit with Fumes; continue this Distillation five Hours, with a Fire of one
degree; after this, begins to come a yellow Spirit, which by little and little
turns to redness, which is the sign that the Operation is ended. The whole
Operation requires fifteen Hours to complete this Work, having had a special
care all along, and it must be done in a light place, so that you may govern it
by the Color, Drops and Fumes: all being cold, with care unlute this subtle
sulphurous Spirit, and pour it into a clean Body, with a Verge, to lute on its
Head exactly, and put it into a gentle B. and you will see your Spirit ascend,
like Spirit of Wine; increase the heat, till no more will ascend, and you have
a Spirit of more virtue than Tongue can express, whether for Menstruum or
Medicine, and that in a word we may speak our experience, whosoever shall have
recourse to this Spirit, as a sure refuge in many Diseases, that deride and
contemn the most Herculean Remedies, shall find a Medicament not to be valued
by any price whatsoever.

This Menstruum will volatilize Salt of Tartar, and dissolve Pearl, and most
other Bodies.

We shall now come to the making Acid Spirits: And first of

The Spirit of Nitre.
Of Salt Nitre, and twice as much Bole, Brick-dust or burned Clay, and frame it
into little Balls, to prevent melting, and put it into an Earthen Retort, and
distill by fire of degrees, until all is come over, and then rectify S. A. Or
you may prepare it as Glauber has prescribed it in Part I. page 23. How it may
be concentrated so, as to become a powerful Medicine, shall be hereafter shown.
After the same way may the Spirit of Salt also be drawn.

But we best approve of a Spirit of Salt made from the Liquor that runs from
the Salt, after it is boiled and lies in heaps, which is by the Salt-Boiler
called Bittern: It Is also to be had at the Salt-Merchants at Billingsgate,
running away from the heaps of Salt, which they call Brine; it is of color
yellow, fat and unctious: If this have its Phlegm evaporated away, and drawn
over with a strong fire in a Pot and Cap, and be violently forced as long as
any will come, and then rectified S. A. you have a most excellent Spirit of
Salt.

Oil of Vitreol.
Copperas, Dantzick or Roman Vitreol, and calcine it in an earthen Pan, then
pound it into gross Powder, and put it in earthen Retorts, and set it in a
Reverberatory, and lute on the Receivers, and give fire by degrees; first begin
gently till all is warm, and then increase your fire moderately for 24 hours,
so as to keep the Receiver full of Fume; thus continue to increase the fire
from 24 hours to 24 hours, for three days and nights, and at last force it over
with the most violent degree of heat that can be. When the Operation is over,
let all cool; remove and rectify the Oil from its Spirit.

For the Oil and Spirit of Vitreol, you may also work as Glauber has laid down
in page 17. of his second Part of Philosophic Furnaces.

Now with Allom and Nitre, after the same manner, may be made AF. which being
rectified, dissolve a Penny weight of Silver in an Ounce thereof, and then
casting that into lbij or iij, will give such a Ferment to it, as that 'twill
act the more kindly in dissolving and separating Gold and Silver. A. R. is
nothing else but S. Armoniack dissolved in the aforesaid AF. and this is for
the dissolution of Gold.

The Way of Trying of Oars, and the Separating of Metals, and to Refine, Cupel
and Test by Cone and Quart, will be showed under the Title of the Separation of
Metals.
Now, seeing all Acid and Corrosive Spirits are hereunto so useful, we could
not omit it here in this Chapter of Menstruums: Now it is to be observed in the
Rectification of Acid Spirits, as Vinegar, Nitre, Vitreol, Sea Salt, Salt Gem,
or any other that will yield an Acid Spirit by Reverberation, that their Phlegm
comes over first. Now seeing the true Spirit of Salt and Spirit of Nitre, are
the two Acidities we mostly esteem, we shall show the Concentration of the
Spirit of Nitre, by which it is made more powerful in Dissolution, according to
Gl. Par. II. p. 119.

And dissolve in one Pound of the Spirit of Nitre, iv of Lapis Calaminaris, put
the Solution into a Glass Viol, upon a vaporous or dry B. that the Phlegm may
evaporate by little and little, (for the Lapis Calaminaris holds all the
Spirits, and permits the Phlegm to go off) and the Spirit of Nitre will remain
in the Viol like Oil. Take one part of this concentrated Spirit of Nitre, and
half a part of Oil of Tiles or Wax, put them both in a Glass Retort well luted,
and force them out (by a Distillation in Sand) from the concentrated Spirit
into a great Receiver, and by this Operation 'twill be far more penetrative
than it was before: For the Spirit of Nitre being by concentration by the
Calaminaris freed from all its Phlegm, and seeing it is thereby become the more
attractive, and can find nothing else that it might attract, it associates to
it self all the humidity that lies hidden in the Oil, and which could not be
separated by the former Distillation, and hereby brings to pass, that the Oil
does necessarily become more subtle and efficacious, yea so penetrative, as
that it performs wonderful things, especially in the effects of the Matrix,
the which naught but very subtle Spirits can heal, and which those concentrated
Spirits can do more certainly and securely, that all the other Medicaments in
the whole World. After the same manner is the Concentration and Purification of
the other Oils to be performed. We shall now show their Dulcification; And
first of

Spiritus Salis dulcis.
Of the aforesaid Spirit of Salt highly rectified lbj, of Aetherial Spirit of
Wine lbj, pour your Spirit of Wine gently by drops on the Spirit of Salt, and
then gently digest 24 hours, and then distill in a Retort, with a large Receiver
well luted, and you shall have come over a sweet Spirit of Salt. After the same
manner is made the sweet Spirit of Nitre, which are noble Specificks in the
cure of those Diseases which are caused by Obstructions, and where the Blood is
not in a due fermentation, etc.

Oleum Vitrii and Spiritus Vini: Or Rabel 's Drops.
Of highly rectified Oil of Vitreol lbj, highly rectified Spirit of Wine lbj,
of the Tartar of Vitreol well dulcifi'd iv, all put into a Retort and distilled
over: These are the white Drops, good for Wounds, Epilepsie, and Palsy. Now if
you distill without the Tartar of Vitreol, you will have remaining a red Balsam
in the Retort, whence you may make the red Drops, by adding thereunto equal
parts of the Spirit of Wine: Digest them 14 days in a gentle heat, and then are
they prepared. Or thus:

Of the Oil of Vitreol lbj, highly rectified Spirit of Wine xij, and digest
them till they become red. After the same way may be dulcified any Acid Spirit
whatever; concerning which, we could run out a large discourse: but having
given these as clear Examples, we shall conclude the rest may be understood.

Having proceeded thus far with Acid and Alkaly and their Union for the forming
of a different Nature from either, as may be seen in the foregoing Chapter of
Salts, also the Union of Acids and Urinous Spirits, as may be seen in this
Chapter of Menstruums, also the Union of Acids and Vinor Spirits; we shall now
come to show how Acid Spirits are mortified by Alkaly, so that both may be
stilled over in a Volacile Spirit; which prepared Menstruums come under the
Title of Arcana Pontissitata: And thus may be made a noble tartarizated Spirit
of Vitreol, Nitre or any other; but for the performance thereof, true Art and
Labor is required, as also the knowledge of a proper Agent, etc.

It Is Men's short sightedness in this point, that is the cause why there is
still in the World such a great complaint amongst the Practitioners in Physic
for want of true and proper Specific Medicines: Alas! it is no wonder, seeing
the fundamental Doctrins of Nature, and the right Composition of Menstruums and
Medicines is so little understood, and much less practiced; we must confess
it is not for want of Books, for there are so many that treat of this Art, that
were they all put together, twenty Horses could not draw them, yet nevertheless
is Truth barren enough in the World, and our lofty Schoolmen look upon it as
an undervaluing to their pretended worth and gravity to be informed, although it
be from Truth it self. Will but these Men become honest and take up the
laborious part of Chemistry, they would quickly discern their Insufficiency:
for then they would see, that they had as much need of particular Directions,
Instructions and Practice, as would be required were they to undertake a
Handycraft Trade. Ex. gr. would you make a handsome Pair of Shoes, then must
you not disdain to be instructed by one that is Master of the Trade; without
disdain, the like must be in this Art, seeing it is so difficult, for that very
often Mental Theory framed in the Mind proves Dotage, when it comes to the
Touchstone of Practice: for Labor is to be made use of for the Interpretation
of all true Philosophers Writings; this is the way that I took, and all the
true Sons of Art that ever went before me.

Now the Foundation upon which every Son of Art built was a Menstruum, which
would radically dissolve Bodies, correcting and advancing their Medicinal
Virtues, of which number are all the Corrosive Specificks, as Oil of Vitreol,
Oil of Sulphur, Spirit of Nitre, Vinegar, and the like; or in short, any other
Acid Spirit: and being so prepared, they attain the Name of Acetum fortum,
Acetum radicale, as Paracelsus often calls it: Concerning which we shall give
an Example.

Of the Oil of Tartar per Deliquium crystalized, and pour upon it strong Spirit
of Vitreol, or any other Acid Spirit, until the Alkaly is assatiated, which is
known by the ceasing of the Ebullition; then dry it very well, and add of the
aforesaid Oleum Vitrii and Spiritus Vini, distilled over into white drops,
equal weight; distill it off from the said Salt, until the Salt become very
hungry, which 'twill easily be, if you add in our Reconciler, and satisfy its
thirst three or four times by adding in fresh Spirit, which distill off; the
Salt being dry, mix it with two parts of burned Clay, and distill it after the
manner of Spirit of Salt, or Spirit of Nitre, and at last, give it the highest
degree of fire, and so distill all that will come over: The Salt that remains in
the Caput Mort. may be drawn out, and assatiate it with Oil of Vitreol as
before, and repeat this Distillation with the Acid Alcalizate, till all the
Salt is brought over, by which means the Salt has lost its costive quality,
and the Oil its corrosive one, and the former volatilized, as the expert
Operator will find by reitered Cohobation or rather Imbibition.

This is a most noble Menstruum, and will dissolve Metallic Bodies by
Cohobation, which being dulcified, you may draw forth their Tinctures in Spirit
of Wine, in which their Specific Virtue lies.

Reader, We could enlarge concerning this Point, the secret Sal Armoniack of
the Philosophers, and our Sal Panaristos, but if we should here, a Snake would
lie in the Hedge, so that he might be apt to sting, for too many words would
make a thing that is plain and easy, seem hard and difficult, misty and
obscure: therefore having laid down what is sufficient for every true Spagirick
to understand in our Triumph of that Art, as also in our Trifertes Soladini,
where the Office of Menstruums is fully handled, and therefore we shall omit it
here: and so conclude this Chapter concerning Menstruums.

CHAP. VIII. Treats concerning the Mineral-work, and the Office of the General
Spirit, in reducing and exalting Mineral Bodies, and how they may be brought to
Noble Medicaments.
IN this Chapter we shall consider the Mineral and Metaline Work, as it is
represented to us by Nature, in its Ferch or first Life; also the way and
method she takes in preparing and making it ready to our hands, that so we may
be the better able by Art to manifest the Medicinal Virtues therein contained:
In order hereunto we think it convenient to lay before the Reader the manner
how the seven superior Essences were brought forth, also how these act for the
Formation of the inferior ones: For although all things receive their
Multiplication from the Power of the Universal, yet do they receive their
living Formation from the earthly Stars or internal Light of Beings, as shall
hereafter be more largely treated of; therefore we proceed thus:

Behold, in the Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, ard all things
visible and invisible, (as is said in the Scriptures of Truth) from the Hyle or
Vapor, and Chaos or confused Mountain of Water; concerning which we have
largely written in other Volumes, and principally in our Ignis Astralis
Adeptorum; but however, in short, we say thus: The Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters, and God said let there be light, and there was light, and
the light was separated from the darkness, and the light was called day and the
darkness night; so that day sprung natively from the light, as a legitimate
Heir from the Loins of his Parents, which noble Birth was illuminated with
bountious Rays from the Divine Ocean, whence its Activity proceeded, and by
which 'twas endued with its superior Purity and fermentative Virtue, as the
first active Cause in bringing forth the first Birth of the Creation, sc. Day,
that so by the light thereof things might be distinguished, as they really be:
therefore to a true Philosopher is the light most desirable.

Now in this we conceive, that in the Aurora, or Morning thereof, the first
Planet, sc. Saturn, had its original manifestation, but being not endued with
the full splendour of the day, (whence Purity proceeds) Saturnal Drowsiness and
polluted Defilements must consequently adhere unto him; and although he is slow
of motion, yet is he honorable in his House; for that he is Father of all the
rest, which by consequence must be so, for through Corruption all Generation
proceeds. And that this Generation might be the more complete and perfect, the
Omnipotent God commanded and created a Firmament to divide the Waters from the
Waters; so that the superior and heavenly Waters (being most pure, and endued
with a light, permanent and contractive Virtue) might by the beams of their
purity act in the Firmament to illuminate the inferior ones, and give them life
and motion, by animating and stirring up the aireal Spirit, which was no sooner
performed, but Jupiter, the noble Son of Saturn comes forth, with farther
degrees of Purity and aireal Splendour.

The Waters being gathered together in one place, the dry Land appeared, and
the valiant Mars became visible, and Champion like, through the fire, ascended
the Throne, next to aireal Jupiter, and Magnet like, attracts by the purity of
his Earth, what is sufficient to make the Sperm become Seed, and so it began to
corporifie, and then was the Earth able to bring forth Trees, Herbs and Grass,
which by interpretation is the most Universal Vegitable; but 'twas yet too
faint to bring out the permanent Minerals, which wanted a farther degree of
Illumination, whence Purity and Permanency proceed.

Here the all-bountious Creator made two great Lights, and set them in the
Firmament, to give light upon the Earth, to rule the Day and to rule the Night,
to be for Signs and for Seasons for Days and for Years: And the Illustrious Sol
being advanced, fills the World with the Beauty of his dazzling Rays, heating,
and illuminating the Waters with the vivifying Rays of Life, and the Earth
being strengthened, he attracts the superfluous moisture, and casts it into the
Air: This is the Office of that Potent Monarch, who has no other Consort but
Lune, whose fair Beauty (according to the Philosophers) equalizes his
Brightness, being of the same Lineage, only borrowing her light Sulphur or
heavenly Tincture from him.

Now here the inferior Waters being animated and endued with Tincture, the
glorious and half-tinged Venus became visible; and therefore has some right to
Heaven, although the Daughter of the Ocean; and in her resides much goodness; for
here the blessing of Multiplication was given, and Mercury produced, by whose
Spirit all things grow, increase and multiply; therefore is he styled, The
Universal Intelligencer and Lover of Metals and Minerals; as also, The
Communicator to Vegetables.

Now for the whole, a Storehouse is provided, sc. in the Chambers of the Moon,
who being Sol's Compere, might with her cold and feminine Ens moderate the heat
of his masculine Rays, and so temper the Gum of the Sperm in those Orbs, that
are superior to Elements: This faithful Empress always communicates to the
inferior Beings what she receives from the superior Orbs, so by a vivifying
action, Beings are kept liv^^g and virtuous.

Now the superior Essences, being all formed and strengthened by the active
Light, became visible Stars, shining in degrees of splendour, and were placed in
the Heavens to give light upon the Earth, and to dart their Virtue to the
Center of the same; for (as the Philosophers say) all their Rays meet there:
for what end, will be seen anon.

Here the inferior ones had their original; for the spiritual Forms being
elivated to the superior Orbs, and there being set to communicate Virtue to
inferior Beings; the first Rays they cast forth were endued with such vital
strength, as to form Terrestrial living Astrums; for the Earth, as then empty
of Form, could not alter those noble ones; and here the earthly Stars of
Saturn, Jupiter and Mars had their original; the heat of which, with a
perpetual influx of Rays, kindles in the Center the Archaeius or Terrestrial
Sun, which by his heat began the work of a vivifying Sublimation, and so from
the Iliastes were Venus, Mercury and Lune produced; and thus the Powers of
Demogorgon were busied in subliming the Vapor, and separating it from all
Impurities; and on this did the superior Essences stamp their own Forms, and so
came the inferior Stars to shine with beauty, and to have an unalterable and
determinated form; this is that which animates the metalick Ferch with life,
and still stamps it Progenitors impression in the Act of Multiplication, and is
in the Earth in their diverse Spheres or Orbs, being the Life of Metals, as the
Anima is in Man's Body: Thus were the Celestial and Terrestrial Stars formed,
and the Fabric of the great World finished.

Now the Almighty God created a Microcosmical World, from the purity of
Superior and Inferior Beings, and stamped thereon a Divine Seal, leaving it as
a Transcript of the original Copy, wherein Life and Dominion stood to rule over
Beings; and thus was the great Work of Creation finished, the seventh day being
celebrated as a day of rest for Man and Beast, that so the Lord our God might
therein be adored, honored, worshipped and praised for these and all other of
his mighty Works, Amen.

Now these superior and inferior Essences stood in harmony, the one to be
active, the other to be passive; the one to command, the other to obey: and so
the great World formed a Seed, representing that of which it was created, and
is that Chaos of which all Philosophers write, in which is contained the Virtue
of superior and inferior Beings; because it is a Vapor or Airy Nature, standing
in a Medium between the Celestial and Terrestrial Stars, and therefore unites
the Power of the one unto the determinated Form of the other, being the life of
the Ferch, and without which it cannot increase nor multiply; therefore we say,
that this is that spiritual Life that feeds the Metalline Spirit or Ferch in
the Metalline Shop, both with Celestial and Terrestrial Rays, for by the one it
is prepared, and by the other fixed.

By this it is clear to be discerned, that Seed had its original Birth from the
heavenly Stars, and its determinated Form from the earthly ones; therefore by
consequence, the original Life or Seed of Metals must be first spiritual, and
in that state 'twill receive the universal and multiplicative Power, and so is
altered and purified, before it is brought to any bodily state, and that this is
really so is plain, or else Metals could never be brought to a Plusquam
perfection, by a multiplication of the Light without having as yet any
determinated Form thereon, so that the Grand Essence in the Metalline Monarchy
is rather a Genus than a Species, and so acts by a virtuous Power for the
preservation of Beings; for which reason the Philosophers called it their
Heaven, their Earth, because it contains the Virtues of both; for as the
Cabalists say, it is a Mercurial Spirit, carrying all things on its wings, for
it ascends to Heaven, and descends to Hell, and dies for the Redemption of
his defiled Brethren. Hermes wonderfully describes this Universal Matter,
saying, That which is superior, is as that which is inferior for the miracle of
one thing, so vice versa, That which is brought forth above is brought out of
the Fountain, as that beneath in the Bowels of the Earth: He also says, the Sun
is its Father; the Moon its Mother, and the Wind carries it in its Belly; but
we say, not only the Sun and Moon, and the five other Celestial Essences, but
also the Sun and Moon terrestrial and light of the inferior Stars are therein
represented according to their multiplicative power, as it is given forth in the
aireal and general Spirit without any determination of Form, but what is purely
universal; and therefore must pass through the seven Spheres or Orbs of the
wise Men to come to that Essence, which stands in a septenary Number; for that
this contains Mysteries superior to others, as we have laid down in our Preface
to the Doctrine of Principles: This is that Universal Matter which the
Philosophers direct all to, that from it they may learn to know the Nature and
Condition of the Mineral and Metalline Spirit, which congealeth and forms
Beings, also dissolves and opens them again; therefore the Philosophers say,
that it shuts and opens, and opens and shuts again, and contains in it self
what is sufficient for its own perfection; therefore we advise every
Practitioner to seek the Knowledge of this Matter, (seeing so many Mysteries
are therein contained) and therefrom to prepare a Menstruum, which by the help
of a true Artist will make a Musical Harmony: for would you, Cartes-like, have
the Mechanical Reason in the Chemical and Spagirick Art, here it may be given;
or would you understand what Starkey's Diaploma is, or Sylvius's Oleosum, or
Glauber's Sal Mirabilis, having this, you have what will not only show you
these, but all whatsoever has been written by Helmont, Paracelsus, Basilius,
and others; even the Liquor Alchabest and Mercury of Philosophers, their Aurum
Potabile, and many others too tedious here to cite: Therefore we omit it at
present, (only recommending you to our several other Volumes as they pass the
Press) and proceed to our intended Task, sc. The Manuals in the Mineral-work:
And first,

Of Saturn, or Lead.
Lead is thus calcined or reduced to Ashes: Put on a Cuppel under a Muffle lbj,
ij, or iij of Lead; let it be red-hot; then cast into it ss, j, js of Tin, and
you will see the Tin mount above he Lead, and burn to yellow Ashes, which (...) be
taken off with an Iron Instrument, as long as any Ashes amount or appear on the
surface of the Lead; when no more Ashes appear, then cast in a fresh quantity
of Tin, as before, turning the same to Ashes till no more arise; continue so
long with this Incineration of fresh Tin, until the Lead and Tin be turned into
Ashes: from which Ashes, if you distill off the subtle and penetrating Sal
Armoniack of the Wise, there will form a Regulus, which by several reiterations
being brought to the Test, will leave behind it and.

Saturn being calcined and brought into Minium, you may with distilled Vinegar
extract his Salt, which being cleansed and shot in a leaden Pan, you have the
Saccarum or Sugar thereof: Good for Wounds, Ulcers and virulent Gonorrhaea's.

Glauber 's white Precipitate of Lead.

Of Lead-ashes lbj, ij, iij or more, which put in a strong well glazed earthen
Pot, then pour thereon some Wine or Ale Vinegar, or Vinegar of Honey, as much
as may overtop it an hand's breadth. Set your Pot upon the Coals, and make the
Vinegar boil.

N. B. The Ashes are to be uncessantly stirred in the boiling with a wooden
Spatula, lest they gather into one entire solid Mass; after that the Vinegar
has boiled for about half an hour, and is become yellow, and as sweet as
Sugar, you must decant it from the Ashes, and pour on more, and again boil it,
and extract more sweetness; and this labor must you repeat so often, until the
Vinegar can extract no more sweetness: then having put all these Vinegars
together, pour them gently off from the Feces, that settle in the bottom of the
Vessel; and being thus separated, filter the same through Cap Paper, or by a
Filter, that so the Liquors may be very clear, and may give you by separation,
that sweetness of the Lead which they hold up in them.

Into these clear Vinegars, therefore being put in a Glass Vessel, pour
thereinto (by little and little) as much rectified Spirit of Salt, that so the
yellow Vinegar may be turned into a white Milk, and may by little and little
settle to the bottom like curdled Cheese, from which the Vinegar, being now
become clear again, is to be removed by decanting; then put the Saturnine
Cheese in some strong Linen Cloth, and tie it hard up, and squeeze out the
residue of the moisture, and so dry it and lay it by for use. It is a most
tender Powder, of a bright snowy color, and void of all taste: for in the
Precipitation, all the sweetness being introverted by the Spirit of Salt, has
hidden it self within, which does again by this following Operation discover
its former taste.

Buy some Steel Filings at the Needle makers, and take thereof as much as you
please, dissolve them in rectified Spirit of Salt, which Solution will be
green, and be of a sweetish taste; abstract the insipid Phlegm, insipid I say,
for although it be a very strong Spirit of Salt, that is poured upon the Iron,
yet nevertheless no Spirit comes off, but only an insipid Phlegm, in the
abstraction and distillation, and the Iron retains all the acidity of the Salt,
and remains a red, sweetish, astringent Juice.

Take of this, and of the Saturnine Powder, which we taught you the making of
but now, of each a like weight, and put them into a well coated Retort, and the
Saccharum Saturni, will presently drink up the Juice of the Steel. Put the
Retort in a Vessel filled with Sand, and augment the fire by little and little,
that all the insipid Phlegm may be wholly drawn off. When it is all come off, and
acid drops begin to come, then must you apply thereunto a Glass Receiver, and
the fire is to be increased by degrees, until the Retort be thoroughly red hot,
which must continue so about an hour, or half an hour at least: by this means
the Spirits of the Salt which were in the Steel, do almost wholly come over
into the Receiver, and do carry over with them [the Spirits] of the Saccharum
Saturni, and Oil of Mars, in the form of a red Sublimate, which settles it self
in the Neck of the Retort, which sublimate; when the Retort is cold and broken,
you must take out of its Neck, and keep it from the Air; for in the Air 'twill
dissolve into a red, sweet and astringent Oil, of no small Virtues in Medicine
and Alchimy. Furthermore, as Basilius says, if from calcined Saturn you
extract the crystaline Salt with distilled Vinegar; and afterward, with Spirit
of Wine, and distill it into a red Oil. This Oil cures Melancholy, fiery Pox,
old Ulcers, and many other Infirmities besides. This Oil coagulateth and fixes
Mercury, being first precipitated with Oil of Vitreol, for all Powders and
Medicaments, which are to make Sol and Lune, must be made fix, holding in all
fiery trials.

But here you must understand the difference of the Analogy between the Magical
Saturn, and Saturn vulgar.

Now as to the molten Mass in the bottom of the Retort, resembling Lapis
Hematitis, which being separated from all defilements, will give you a red,
brittle, fusile Stone, and in some sort astringent, of great Virtues in
Medicine, and without doubt in Alchimy too, if it were but first made
constantly to abide in the fire. And ever this too, must you keep from the Air,
for it is still impregnated with the Salts, and therefore is easily dissolved.

Now when you would make use of this Stone in Medicine, break a little bit
thereof into small Powder (for it is no harder than other Salt, and therefore
does easily admit of grinding to Powder.) This Powder heals both internal and
external Wounds and Ulcers, being administered in the quantity of two, three
four, five, six, or more Grains, according to the age and condition of the
sick, and being taken in a convenient and proper Vehicle, it is highly sanative
and a stopper of Blood. Being applied externally to Wounds, it wonderfully
forwards healing; hinders all Symptoms, and fundamentally drys and cures all
Ulcers and Fistula's, if used outwardly and inwardly too.

It does most safely and most certainly help all the overflowing of the Menses
in Women, and is so excellent a Medicament in the Dysentery, Lientery, and
other Fluxes of the Belly, that its like is not to be found.

Thus have we that true and genuine Hematitis of the ancient Physicians, of
which we have many great Mysteries yet to write; but however, brevity being
designed, we must omit them; for we had not been so large, had we not highly
esteemed of the Process, and therefore what we have further to say is, that the
Sublimate in the Neck, is more powerful in virtue, than the Stone: Now we say,
that from his Preparation proceeds Arcanu^^ Minerale Nostrum, or the Sulphur of
the Boodstone, which being spagirically exalted so as to dilate in Oil of
Turpentine, stops bleeding either internally or externally to a Miracle; the
exact Preparation of which is shown in the fifth Debate of our Spagirical
Philosophy's Triumph, where also the Office of the Circulatum minimum is shown
in separating the Sulphur from the Mercury of Bodies, and principally of
Saturn, how his Sulphur is embibed, and his Body reduced to a running Argent.
vive; for which also we refer you to the use of our Sal Panaristos in Trifertes
Saladini: And so conclude concerning Saturn in this profitable Way of
Calcination, Distillation and Sublimation, etc. Of Antimony.

Antimony is indeed esteemed Lord in Medicine, therefore as Basilius says, in
c. 41. of his Elucidations, Saturn and Antimony have promised to each other a
sociable Brotherhood, because Saturn's qualities do rest in some sort on the
qualities of Antimony, in an equal concordance, therefore do we treat of them
thus: First of

Species Antimonii Russilii.
Of the best Antimony lb50, of the cold Earth Salt lbiij, mix them well
together, then flux them; being thus compounded, and having had a middle
fusion, pour them forth into a Tub of Water, wherein some of the aforesaid
Earth Salt is dissolved, or its Spirit cast: now having fluxed and projected
all the above said quantity of Antimony into the Water, then trouble and move
it, and the light parts, which is the Species, will swim in the Water, which
must be poured off into another Tub, to stand and settle, and after a small
settling, you will, by gently casting off the clear Water, find your Species in
the bottom. Note, That you add fresh Water, in the room of every Water you cast
off, to the crude Antimony, and so do till no more Species may be had: Observe,
The crude Antimony, remaining, when dried, serves for fluxing again, but you
must add the cold Earth Salt, as before.

This is a very effectual Medicine, working by the four Emunctories; it is very
safe, in that it on no wise works violently, neither does it work upon all
alike; for it works on every one such ways as Nature requires to have the
Disease thrown off; it is prevalent in Fevers and Agues and many other
Diseases, and is an excellent Antidote against the pestilential one. It Is Dose
is from ten to forty Grains, in Wine or any other proper Vehicle.

Observe, That it was the Opinion of Dr. Collance, High-Dutcher, that the great
Secret in the Preparation of this Powder, was to flux the Antimony without the
Earth Salt, which is performed by the sifted Powder of Charcoal added in place
thereof.

To draw the Salt of Antimony.
Antimony, and reduce it into a subtle Powder like Meal, and calcine it on a
small fire of Charcoal, stirring it constantly with an Iron Rod, until it
becomes white, and that it smoaketh no more, and that it may endure a good
heat; then put it into a Crucible, and run it down that it appears like to a
clear Glass; then take and grind it with distilled Vinegar, that is good, and
set it on an easy fire, and your Vinegar will draw therefrom the Tincture,
which will be of a high color: after having drawn all your Tincture, and that
your Acet. distillatum tinge no more; dry the remaining Powder, which will
become black, and grind with the same, ana, of common Sulphur, and put it into
a Crucible well luted into a good fire, and leave it there till all the Sulphur
is consumed; after grind the remaining matter very fine, and again pour thereon
fresh distilled Acet. distillatum; out of all which draw the Sal Communis, and
draw off your Acet. distillatum by distillation; then sweeten the Sal Communis
with distilled Water by reiterated Distillations, and clarify the Salt through
Sp. V. until the Sal Communis becomes very white. This Sal Communis
accomplisheth almost all the same effects as that of Sol, taking thereof but
Gr. ij. at the most, it purifieth both the Body and the whole Mass of Blood,
and destroys all prejudicial Phlegm and Humors, which cause dangerous Ulcers,
curing the Distempers of Venus, taking thereof at the most Gr. iv. with j of
the Extract of Guajacum and Sassafrax water distilled, then sweat thereon, in
Bed.

The Liver of Antimony and Antimony Diaphoretick.
Antimony and Salt Petre, and lbj, pulverize them severally, then mix and put
them into an earthen Pot, narrow at the bottom, or a great Crucible; and with a
red-hot Charcoal, fire it; and when it is cold, separate it; the red shining in
the bottom is Crocus, and the rest save for Antimonium Diaphoreticum: when the
Crocus is separated, pulverize the remainder, and weigh it, and take as much
Salt Petre as it does weigh, pulverize it, and then put in by degrees into a
Crucible placed in the fire, and let it remain glowing hot; about an hour and
half after detonation, take and pulverize it very fine, whilst hot, and then
sweeting it, by washing it well with Water, for two or three days; then cant
off the Water, and add fresh, until it is sweet; then filter it, and dry it on
white Paper, and keep it for use.

Antimonial. Lapis Prunella.

Filter and Evaporate the first two Waters, and you have a fine Lapis Prunella
Antimonialis, good in Fevers; it may be made purer by Calcination and
reiteratred Filtrations.

To make Vitreum Antimonii.
Antimony and Salt of Tartar ana, and melt them till they run to a Glass. You
may also calcine Antimony per se, as directed in making its Salts, and then
flux it into a Glass. Also from the Flowers, (according to Glauber, page 14.
Par. I. of his Philosophical Furnaces) where he says, they are to be melted
into yellow transparent Glass; neither is there taught an easier way of
reducing Antimony of it self into a yellow transparent Glass, than crude
Antimony being first sublimed, and being sublimed is melted into Glass. This
Sublimation serves instead of Calcination; by the help whereof 20 Pound is more
easily sublimed, than by the help of the other one Pound is brought into a
Calx. He commends this way both for safeness and quickness, above any other:
The Way of Making the Flowers is faithfully and exactly there set out; together
with their Office and Use.

The Antimonial Cup.
Of Antimony lbss, Sal Nitre and white Tartar ana iv, melt them till they run
to a Regulus, and so fashion it into a Cup, S. A. The most exact and best way
of forming this into a Cup, is set down by Glauber, in page 92. Par. V. of
Philosophical Furnaces; and in page 93. he gives the Proportion, which
something differs from ours, therefore make choice of which you will: for some
desire them most like a Regulus, others of nearer adherence to the Crocus; the
Use of it also being there given, we shall here omit it.

To make the Regulus of Antimony, and to separate the superfluous Antimonial
Sulphur.
Of Antimony lbss, of Nitre and Tartar ana xij, of the tops of Filings of Steel
Needles iv, put them into a Crucible, and melt them all very well, till they
flow in the Crucible like Water; the which pour forth into a Cone, and give the
Cone a twist half about, and there will form a Star very glorious; the Regulus
may be purified by being two or three times melted with fresh Niter; the
Regulus being the Mercurial part, save all the Scories, for therein is the
glorious Sulphur of Antimony; the farther Preparation and Use of which will be
shown more in the following Lines.

Glauber's way, in Part II. page 59. Of crude Antimony, Tartar, and Niter, of
each a like, powder them each apart, commix the Powders; being mixed, put them
in a Melting-Pot or Crucible, and kindle them with a live Coal, that by this
kindling they may fly up, and go into a reddish kind of colored Mass. Your Pot
being yet hot, set it into your Wind-Furnace, and melt it, that all your Matter
may flow in the Crucible, like Water; then pour it out into your Cone, and,
being cold, take it out, and separate the Regulus therefrom, and lay it by for
other uses, because it is not serviceable for the Operation here minded. Now out
of one Pound of Antimony, you will have eight Lots, or iv, of Regulus, so that of
your one Pound you will get a Regulus of iv, or the fourth part of a Pound. The
Scoria's, which will be of a reddish color, and of a fiery taste upon the
Tongue, must be again melted in the same Pot they were melted in, if it be
whole, or in some new Pot, and when they flow, put a live Coal into the Pot.
The Salt Petre will seize upon the Coal, and being occupied about, corroding
the same, will let fall the remainder of the Regulus it as yet held up. Then
the Matters being poured out into your Cone, and cool, strike off the Regulus
at the bottom with the stroke of an Hammer, and beat the Scoria's, which will
be of a red color and fiery taste, into Powder, and being thus powdered, let
the Salts be extracted [or dissolved] in the heat with common fair Water; the
which holding in them the most pure Sulphur of Antimony, do turn the Water into
a red Lixivium, in which is hidden the Medicine we seek after; and is to be
gotten thence, by the following way: For after that the Sulphur is dissolved,
by dissolving all that will be separated by the Salts or Lie, the relics or
remainder are good for nothing.

Having so done, dissolve white and purified Tartar in fair Water, in some
glazed Pot, and you will have an acid Solution; being thus hot as it is, (for when
it is cold, the Tartar will again shoot in it) pour it by little and little into
the Antimonial Lixivium, and 'twill debilitate the same, so that the Sulphur of
the Antimony will fall down to the bottom, in the form of a yellowish or
reddish Powder. When all the Sulphur is settled, separate the clear Water of the
Salt, from the Sulphur, by canting it off; then pour on some warm Water, and
wash it so often till all the Salt be gone off. Then filter it, that all the
Water may be separated, and the Powder stay in the Filter, which you shall put
upon new and dry Cap Paper, thereby to remove all the watriness, and then dry
it in the heat of the Sun.

This is an universal purging Medicament, which drives out all the malignant
Humors by all the Emunctories, sc. by Vomit, Stool, Sweat, Urine, and Spittle,
and may be very safely administered in any Disease whatever in young or old. The
Dose is from one to six Grains.

It Is no wonder there should be so many Virtues in Antimony, if you do but
rightly consider its formation and universal Nature; for were it not so, why
should Basilius Valentine write a Triumphant Chariot thereof; and in another
place say, that it deserves to be placed as a third Pillar of Medicine? Have
not also Paracelsus, and Alexander Suchten, Glauber, and Van Helmont, written
many great Mysteries concerning it? For, as Helmont says, The Flowers of
Antimony sublimed with Sal Armoniack, and the Salt again washed off, and from
those Flowers, the Liquor Alchahest being distilled, you have a Medicine that
infallibly cures all kind of Dropsies. And our Sal Panaristos produces the same
effect: But what need we to elevate our selves so high, seeing Starkey's
Febrifuge is the Sulphur of Antimony, corrected by the Circulatum minimum, or
Volatile Spirit of Tartar, which brings it to a white Powder; 10 Grains whereof
cures all Fevers and Agues; and our Species Mineralis is the aforesaid Regulus
of Antimony 3 or 4 times melted and refined, and then finely powdered, and the
Menstruum made from the cold Fire of the Eagle, distilled off from thence, or
its Body precipitated therein; and so being dulcified, you have an excellent
Medicine against Plagues, Fevers, and other Diseases, that are to be expelled
by sweat; which also operates by all the Emunctories, and cleanses the Body and
Blood from the Relics of old Diseases, as Epilepsies; also an excellent Purge
in the Gout, Leprosy, French Pox, and other most grievous Diseases, and
likewise in external new Wounds, Fistula's and old Ulcers, what-name soever
they are called by, if it be but used inwardly to purge them. Briefly, This
Medicine has scarce its fellow: So that we have no reason at all to regard
such Men as out of mere ignorance, oppose and slander Antimony in their learned
Bawlings, and say that it is nothing else but Poison, and therefore no ways
profitable. But let no body believe their Barkking, but first try the same, and
he will clearly find the contrary. For we say, that the crude solar Antimony is
corrected and dissolved by the aforesaid fire, and being dulcified and brought
to a Pink colored Species or Powder, two Grains thereof is a certain Emetick
and Cathartick, and will with pleasantness perform all whatever is said of the
former. And thus we shall conclude concerning Antimony, at this time, seeing we
have written largely thereof in our Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph; where the
Reader may discern, that we have demonstrated him as Lord of Medicine.

Of Jupiter, or Tin.
Tin being calcined as Saturn is, you may with the Spirit of Vinegar extract
its Salt; but the way we best like, is that prescribed by Basilius, thus:

Pummice-stones, sold in Shops, ^eal them, quench them in old good Wine; neal
them again, and quench as before; let this nealing be iterated a third time;
the stronger the Wine you quench withal, the better it is; after that dry them
gently; thus are they prepared for that purpose. Pulverize these Pumice-stones
subtily, then take good Tin, laminate it, stratifie it in a cementing way, in a
reverberating Furnace, reverberate this matter for five days and nights in a
flaming fire, and it draws the Tincture of the Metal, then grind it small,
first scraping the Tin-Lamins; put it in a glass Body; pour on it good
distilled Vinegar; set it in digestion; the Vinegar draws the Tincture, which
is red-yellow; abstract this Vinegar in B. edulcorate the anima of Jupiter with
distilled Water; exicate gently, and bring it to a dry Calx, which being gently
reverberated, becomes a subtle Powder, on which depends many Mysteries. This
Calx may be again sublimed with Sal Armoniack, and the Regulus being preserved,
the Sal Armoniack dulcified therefrom, the Sulphur may be separated by the
volatile Spirit of Tartar, and so distilled over into an Oil, endued with all
the Powers of Jove. And thus you have the Calcination, Sublimation and
Distillation of Jupiter; and if you desire to understand more, we refer you to
Glauber's Works, where, in Part I. page 323. he shows his Calcination and
Fixation by AF. and how he may be purged from superfluous Sulphur, Part I. page
130. also the Proparation and Making the Fulmen of Jove, in Part I. page 201,
202. and he farther says, in Part I. page 180. that Tin or Pewter may be
hardened, and brought to a delicate whiteness, so that 'twill resemble Silver
both in color and found, etc. which is by its often being melted with fixed
Nitre: But we say, If Tin is melted with the Regulus of Antimony, wherein and
are, 'twill acquire a hardness and beauty, little inferior to Silver,
especially if the Block-Tin is good.

Thus much for the noble Jupiter, whose superior Star is the Son of Saturn, who
let down Juno in a shower of Gold, himself being clothed with the Thunderbolt,
who astonishes such as do not understand his Power, Virtue and Operation;
therefore omitting to speak any farther of him, (lest we should offend his
Kingly Dignity, by extending the Pythagorean Rules) we shall proceed to that

Of Mars, or Iron.
Mars, that noble Champion or God of Battle, that conquers Alcides, and is not
to be conquered by any but Venus, and that in the pleasant Beds of Delight; he
therefore that deals the most gently by him, shall get the most from him: One
way by which he is to be calcined, is as follows.

A Bar of Steel or Iron, and heat it redhot, and clap it into a great Lump of
Brimstone that stands over the Water, and what melts and runs into the Water,
you must preserve. Continue this Operation, until you have as much of the
calcined Mars as you please the which being powdered and dulcified, is proper
for the Obstruction of the Menses in Women. The Dose is ten Grains in any
proper Vehicle; but how this Calx may be farther exalted, will be shown by and
by.

Salt of made per se.
Four or five Bars of, put them in a Smith's Forge, and quench it in distilled
Rainwater; do this so often till the Bars are wore out, the which Operation
will be very tedious, but very profitable. Now this said Water gently evaporate
in a Glass Basin, and a brownish Salt will remain in the bottom, which as
you have a quantity of, you may purify by Calcination, Solution, Filtration, and
Congelation. ' It Is excellent for sore Eyes, and being mixed with Empl. Mellif.
for cancerated Breasts; the Salt it self is also excellent for the Obstructions
in Women.

may also be dissolved with the Liquor of fixed Niter, or with the Spirit of
Niter, and more principally with the Spirit of Salt, according to the example
you have in the white Precipitate of; which Dissolution being dulcified, and
the Tincture taken out in tartarizated Sp. V. as long as any will be extracted,
you have a noble Balsamic Tincture, fully endued with the Virtues of.

Flores Martis, or sublimed.
Of the, calcined by Brimstone, as before prescribed lbj; or Lapis Hematitis
communis lbj, Sal Armoniack lbj; beat and mix them exceeding well together;
then put them into an Earthen Retort, and close a large Receiver, and give
fire, but gently at first, but increasing it from three hours to three hours,
until it is sublimed; the last three hours you must observe to give it the
strongest degree of fire you possibly can, that so what remains, may be well
calcined: It being cold, remove and break the Retort, and you shall have in the
Neck a noble Martial Sublimate; and from the Caput mort. in the bottom, you may
extract with a warm Water a Volatile Salt, the both which have many Virtues,
having some adherence to the Lapis Hematitis, but not so powerful.

The Anima of.
Of the red Vitreol Oil, or Oil of Sulphur, one part, and two parts of ordinary
Well-water; put those together, dissolve therein Filings of Steel; this
Dissolution must be filtred: being warmed, let it gently evaporate a third part
of it; then set the Glass in a cool place, and there will shoot Crystals as
sweet as Sugar, which is the true Vitriol of; cant off the Water, let it
evaporate more, and set it again in a cold place, and more Crystals will shoot;
neal them gently under a Muffle, stirring it still with an Iron Wier, then you
get a fair Purple colored Powder; on this Powder cast distilled Vinegar;
Extract the Anima of in a gentle B. abstract again the Vinegar, and dulcorate
the Anima. This is the Anima of, which has many Virtues.

Sal Calybis magisterialis.
Steel-dust, or filings, lbj, and let them be dissolved by Spirit of Salt, as
before directed, which must again be dulcified well there from, and the Powder
gently calcined under a Muffle, and then being put into a Retort, pour upon it
of the Volatile Spirit of Tartar lbij, and put in the second degree of heat and
the whole will be dissolved, and then draw off what Spirit will come over, and
carefully deflegm; put on the Spirit again, and repeat this Operation, until it
shoot into a noble crystaline Salt, the which dulcifie, and then will it give
forth its Sulphur in Spirit of Wine, or by a higher Exaltation may be brought
over the Helm in form of an Oil: All of which are noble Medicaments and far
exceeding any Preparation of Steel, that has hitherto been published to the
World, as we know by large experience; and although some would fain imitate
this Preparation, by sprinkling the Filings of Steel with the Liquor of fixed
Niter, or Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and so bring it to Dust or Powder by
means of the Air, and then prescribe it as a great Arcanum; yet we have no such
value of it, because the body of the Steel is not by such a Preparation
macerated, or overcome, as by the former, that being a way succedanous to the
Alchaest, and so commands its Balsamic and Herculean Virtues.

Prevalant in Fevers and Agues, and for opening the Obstructions of the
Pancreas, Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, and also the Urinous Passages;
therefore excellent for the Scurvey, Dropsy, and Stone, and also for the
Diarrhea and Dissentery. It Is also powerful in Women's Diseases, both in opening
their Obstructions, and likewise to stop their Overflowings: In fine, 'twill
cure those Diseases, that are not to be touched by any other Preparation of
Steel whatsoever: We have therefore faithfully communicated it to the World,
which cannot fail of doing it service; and the more especially in an Age
wherein Steel is so much made use of, and esteemed as a principal Pillar in
Medicine.

And thus much for the Calcination, Sublimation and Distillation of Mars, we
shall only add how a Bar of Iron may be broke; Thus,

Of sublimed and Sal Armoniack ana lbj, red Arsenick lbss, reduce all into a
Powder, and sublime it three times, and you will have an Oil in the
Sublimatory, which con^^^^^ ^^ke Wax in the cold; pulverize, and set it in a
Cellar to dissolve per deliquium; unto which Water add as much ordinary AF.
which being done, take some Cotton and moisten it therein, and apply it round
the Bar of Steel or Iron for twelve hours, and you may easily break it, though as
thick as a Man's Arm, by giving it a blow at the place the Cotton was applied
to.

Of Sol, or Gold.
First of its Calcination or being reduced to Calx, thus: Of Hungarian Vitreol
two parts, Sal Nitre one part, and distill therefrom an AF. in an earthen
Retort. S. A. Then take two parts of this Water, and one part of Acet.
destillatum, and distill them together in a Retort in MB. or in Sand, with a
very gentle fire, until all the Water comes off, and there remain a dry
Menstruum or Powder in the bottom: Then take of the best Antimony well powdered
lbss, and pour thereon the aforesaid Spirit, covering the Antimony two or three
singers breadth therewith; distill this in a Retort in Sand, with a very gentle
fire, until all the Water that comes out from it, by often pouring back upon
the Menstruum and repeated Distillation, has lost its sharpness, and becomes
like common Water; and this weak Water you must separate from that which comes
forth first, which yet has a sharpness, and as much as has been of this weak
Water add so much of the first Menstruum to the Water, which yet has a
sharpness; and pour it back into the Retort again, and do as before, till you
apprehend that your Liquor coming forth is full of the virtue and substance of
your Antimony, which may be perceived by its weight and whiteness, and your
Work is to be carried on as before, till the whole substance of Antimony is
come forth into a white Matter.

The Preparation of the Gold.
Of the AF. before spoken of lbiv, Sal Armoniack lbj, make thereof an AR. then
take of pure Gold j, and pour the AR. about eight or nine fingers thickness
over your Gold; and distill this in a Retort, and pour back the Water that comes
from it, and distill it again, repeating this so long, as till your Liquor has
lost its taste, and becomes as weak as Water: Then take the same quantity of
AR. and do the same several times, the oftener the better; and there will
remain in the bottom a Calx of Gold.

Of this Calx one part, and of the asoresaid Water of Antimony five parts; set
them in a digesting heat, for seven or eight days, close covered; afterward let
it be procipitated in its own proper Water of Antimony, which became so weak,
as before spoken of; then let your Powder be sweetened, and well dried, and
kept for use.

Observe, that in the Preparation of the Antimony, it must be beaten and sifted
very fine, through any Hair Cieve.

This is prevalent in the King's Evil, Grand Pox, Cancers, Ulcers, and Buboes,
with Malignant Fevers. Its Dose is four or five Grains at a time, given in
this following Decoction.

Bark of Guajacum, Sarsa-parilla, ana iv, Tartar ss, common Water twelve Pints;
boil all till the third part is consumed; then put thereunto of German
Ground Pine iv, of the Flowers of French Lavender, Marigolds ana Mj, Saffron
ij; make thereof a Decoction for the use predicted.

Another.
Of Gold-dust j, of Saltpeter lbj, of Roch-Allom lbss, of Salt vj; put them
into a Retort, and add thereunto four Quarts of Water; set it in a
Sand-Furnace, and put to it a Receiver; increase the fire, and let it boil till
it be dry; put away the yellow part of it, and beat the other in a Glass
Mortar, into Powder; put it into a Glass Body with a broad Mouth; put in three
Quarts of Water, being warm; stir it well, and let it settle two hours; then
pour off that Water, and take care that no thick Matter go off in the Water;
repeat more Water to it, and do as before, till no more Water comes that is
yellow; save the Water that is yellow, and take a good large Bolt-head, with a
long Neck, that will hold about three Quarts; pour in three Pints or two Quarts
of the yellow Water, and put in v of crude Mercury; stop it up, and shake them
one hour together, and let it settle two hours; then filter it off, and put to
it more of the yellow Water, shaking it as before, and let it settle; and thus
do till all your yellow Water is ended* then put all in to filter, and take
care that it lose not any of the black Matter; put all the Matter into a
Crucible, putting on the Crucible a little Cover, and over the same a
Charcoal-fire; calcine it till it smoke not; then take out your Matter, and
test it: This is the Powder to be exalted further by several Cohobations in a
true Sp. V. and it is then a Medicine for the Scurvey, Pox, and Gout.

To draw the TH of Metals, called Sal Sapientiae.
Fine Gold (as being the noblest of Metals) in Calx j, dissolve it in our AR.
when dissolved, evaporate the Water, till dryness appear; then pour upon the
Calx of Gold distilled Water, and boil it for two hours; cant off your Water,
and put on more; repeat this with fresh Water, till it becomes sweet, and the
Water insipid; the pour thereon more of the said Water, and evaporate the same:
Then put your Calx of Gold into a Glass, and put it into the Water of
Calcination for one hour, keeping your Water to one degree of heat; then grind
well your Calx of Gold in a Marble, pouring thereon good distilled Wine
Vinegar, putting the same into an Urinal in MB. until all the said Acet.
distillatum be evaporated away, and you will find in the bottom of your Glass a
white Salt of Gold, like Snow; and on the remaining Gold pour fresh distilled
Vinegar, and operate as before, so long as your Acet. distillatum leaves any
Salt; for you will find them always whiter: Repeat this Operation until the
Acet. distillatum will draw no more Salt; and upon the remainder pour
Rainwater, in which dissolve the same three or four times, and have a care
that there remain no more Salts, and when there remain no more Salts, it is
enough clarifi'd. This is the Essential Sublimate, and the Salt is the Sal
Sapientiae: When you have thus passed it through the Rainwater, distill your
said Water into dryness, and keep that Salt in a Vessel well stop, For it is a
most excellent good Medicine in all desperate Distempers and Diseases: This
Salt leaves nothing in the Body to offend or prejudice the same, and all
Distempers are thereby cured in three or four Weeks. Its Dose is Gr. iij, which
put into a Viol, and add thereunto one Glass of Wine, and set it in boiling
Water to dissolve in the Wine; and when dissolved, the Patient may drink it,
covering himself in his Bed, and he will sweat abundantly through the whole
Body.

To make an Oil of the Salt of Metals.

Of the Salt of Gold, or what Metal you please, and put it into a Matrix, and
seal it up Hermetically, and set it in Sand in a moderate heat, like that of
the Sun, for eight days; after increase your fire the space of eight more,
until it becomes yellow; continue thus until it is quite yellow; then increase
your fire more until it becomes brown, and continue it in that degree eight
days, until it become red; and when it is red, continue the same fire for eight
days, until it becomes of an high red, and after you may increase your fire
without fear, to what height you please; for your greatest fire cannot wrong
the same, for it is fixed; then let it cool: after that, take and grind it into
an impalpable Powder, the which put into a Body, pouring thereon distilled
Vinegar, and set it MB. and stir it every day, covering well your Vessel, and
do thus for four days; then cant off your Vinegar by inclination, being grown
cold: Reiterate your Operation three times, and that which remains in the
bottom of your Vessel cast away, for it is useless for this your said work; then
put all your Vinegar into an Alimbeck, and distill unto dryness, and thus you
will have your Matter more beautiful than before; you may set it again into
digestion with fresh Vinegar, until there remain no more Feces; then it is
enough for to draw out its Oil, when dry, which put into a great Glass well
stopped, and apply thereunto a large Receiver, all well luted, and let the bottom
thereof rest in a Vessel of Water, and give it a soft fire for four hours, and
continue your increasing of the fire by degrees, until you see the yellow
Spirits rise; then keep your fire in the same degree of heat until the Head
becomes red, and increase your fire by little and little, till the Head becomes
red like Blood; continue the same degree of fire, until redness begin to
decline; increase your fire anew, that your Vessel may be red like a glowing
Coal, and keep that degree of fire for an hour, and your Head will become white
like Snow; and then increase your fire high as you can, till your Head becomes
clear like to the first; then let it cool, and you will find in your Receiver your
Oil, which is not to be got without pains.

It Is not only good for the Scurvey, but also for most desperate Diseases
incident to the Body of Man, be they internal or externa^ (...) ^ut exceptions,
but especially prevalent in the Di^^^^^er of Venus, Ptisick, Dropsy, Gout, etc.

Its Dose is j, diffused in a Pint of White wine, to be given the Patient in a
Morning fasting, letting him sleep in his Bed, and you will see Wonders in its
Operation: The said Medicine works by Stool, Urine, Sweat and insensible
Transpiration, according as Nature is disposed, till its sharp matignant Humor
is expelled, strengthening the Patient as much as if he had eaten a good Meal,
and when you find that your Medicine operates no more by Stool, you shall not
need to give him any more than three times: For Cancers and Wolfs, you must
anoint the same with a little Oil, applying a Colwort or Cabbage-leaf, and a
Linen cloth above it; and the said Medicine will produce wonderful Effects.

The Preparation of for an Arcanum.
Of Gold in Calx or Powder j, the which put into a Realgar, to make it red-hot
in the fire, which then cast into another Realgar, in which you have heated
viij of Mercury, and this will amalgama together, the which Realgar set on the
fire, to exhale the said Mercury, which ought to be converted with a purified
Realgar on the top; and your Mercury being exhaled, dissolve the Gold in AR.
the which filter through a gray Paper, and dry the same; burn it in a Realgar,
and wash your Ashes in warm Water, and your Gold will remain in the bottom, the
which dry in a glazed Vessel, and pour thereon four fingers breadth in height
of the rectified Sp. V. to which give fire, and being consumed, your Gold will
remain thickish in the bottom, which put into a Glass Vessel, and pour thereon
fair Water, to take off some Salts, which cant off, and pour on more for three
times, and your Gold will be in subtle Attoms, the which dry of it self without
fire, and the Gold is prepared.

Then put this Gold into a Bolt head, and put thereon of the forementioned
{oil} vj, and stopping the Matrix, set it in digestion for 24 hours, and then
gently deflegm it till it is a little acid; then in a Vessel well closed, give
it degrees of digestion, till it comes to a red Antimony, then imbibe it with
more of the aforesaid {oil}; deflegm and increase your fire one degree higher,
until a redness appear, as before: and thus repeat this Operation, till the
Medicine is penetrant; after sweeten it with a true Philosophical Sp. V. and
then you have a Medicine prevalent in the Diseases of the Pancreas; purifying the
corrupted Mass of Blood in the Pox, Leprosy, Ulcers, and all other evils: The
Dose is twenty drops dilated in Spirit of Wine.

Panchymagogon or Catholicon, purging all Humors in the Body of Man.
Of Regulus of Antimony iv, of Gold ij, of Silver ss, of vj, of and ana iij;
melt them in a Crucible during one hour, adding by little and little j of
Tartar and Salt Petre pulverized together, and when the whole is in a good
melting heat, cast it into an Ingot, and you will have a very beautiful
Reguius. Take and pulverize this Regulus in a Mortar, and add thereunto of the
Mercury prepared as underneath iv, and grind and amalgamate them during two
hours, that they may be well united together; wash and take off all that which
is black, until the Amalgama becomes clear like a Star; then take your Amalgama
and put it into a Retort well luted, and distill it in an open fire, into a
Receiver half full of Water, and you will have your Mercury come over, of the same
weight you put it in. Then take the Regulus which remains in the bottom, and
melt it in a Crucible with a like quantity of fresh Regulus, which reduce into
a fine Powder, and join thereunto the Mercury past; then distill again as
before, and the Mercury will come over qualified with a double Virtue. Then
distill a third time with fresh Regulus, as before, and there will remain no
more of the Metals, than the Dross, which you may taste, to try and if any
Gold remain therein; then take of your best sublimate lbss, and sublime it
three times with the like quantity of decrepitated Salt; then take of Sublimate
ij, and of the prepared Mercury vj, and grind it for three hours with the
Regulus, that the Mercury be no more seen, [ N.B. That is, what comes from the
first joining.] Now this must be sublimed for twelve hours by fire of degrees,
and there will arise in the Neck of the Subliming-Glass a foolish Flower,
(which is Poison) which you must separate and cast away; then join that which
is in the Crown with that which is in the bottom, and sublime again anew in a
fresh Subliming Glass for six hours, and you will have a Sublimation, which
begins to come like a Crystal; throw away your Dross, and sublime again for
five, six, or seven times, and you will have a sweet Mercury, impregnated with the
virtue of all the Planets, and an excellent Purge to expel all the Humors
peccant in Man's Body. The Dose is from thirteen to fifteen or twenty Grains in
Pil. Cochiae, or Rosin of Jallop, etc. made into Pills.

How to Prepare the Mercury.
Of the Filings of Needles lbss, of Mercury drawn from Cinnabar lbss, and
amalgamate them well together in a Mortar, and then put the same into a Retort
well luted, and distill in an open fire into a Receiver half full of Water, and
you Mercury will come over into the Receiver; which revived Mercury, being
prepared, is for that first Preparation with the Regulus.

Aurum Fulmineum.
Leaves of Gold, or pure Filings of Gold, and dissolve them in a strong AR.
after perfect dissolution, precipitate with Oil of Tartar per deliq. and then
fulminate upon a fulminating Vessel made of Copper for that purpose; put on Gr.
j. with a small scope for that purpose, and be sure you put on but one Gr. at a
time, and give fire from above, and you will have a bounce, like that of a
great Gun; but be sure you stand at a distance, that it touch you not, for if
it should, 'twould hurt you; and after the bounce is over, it strikes through
the Copper downwards, where you will find it in a purple color; so do it Grain
by Grain, until you have done all, which reserve for use: Upon which circulate
our Aireal Sp. V. till it has drawn out all the Tincture; which is a good
Aurum Potabile.

Aurum Potabile.
Of the Regulus of Antimony j, fine Gold-dust ij, and flux them together with
Niter and Tartar, and reduce the Gold several times, till it all comes to a
Scory; the which dulcifie in Water or Spirit of Wine, then make this following
Menstruum.

Oyster-shells and wash them very clean, and then calcine them in an open fire,
to an exceeding whiteness: then take of them lbj, in fine Pulp, and mix them
very well with Sal-Armoniack, or an Urinous Spirit redeemed and vindicated from
its Foetor; and then distill off the Spirit, and rectify it; then take Nutmegs,
Cloves, Cinnamon, ana iv, Mace and Cardamums ana iij; then distill this Spirit
two or three times from it; then is it prepared.

Put lbj of this upon the aforesaid Calx, and digest in B. 21 days, to draw out
all the Tincture, and cant it off; and so have you a true Medicine, and a
Specific prevalent in many stubborn Diseases, fortifying the Parts afflicted,
etc.

Half and Aurum Potabile.
A Lemon, and make it hollow, by taking away the Seeds and Pulp, and put
therein Leaves of Gold, not driven to the utmost thinness, upon which pour the
Juice of another Lemon or Orange, and let the Body be covered with his Cap very
close; set it in a hot place, or by a Furnace, for seven or eight days, so that
thereby the Gold may be brought into an Oil; let the Juice be separated from
the Oil, and the Oil mixed together with the strongest Aqua Vitae, which must
sometimes be separated again from the Oils by Distilation: and to know when
it is perfect, let a little of the Oil be anointed upon a piece of Flesh, upon
which if it glides not, but pierces into the deep parts thereof, then is the
distilation and working thereof well done.

Aurum Potabile nostrum.
The Calx of Gold j, of the Volatile Spirit of our Sal Panaristos vj, and in a
small Retort, close stopped; digest in Sand six days, till it is dissolved; then
draw off the Menstruum, which preserve for the like occasion; the Calx will be
left solvable as Wax, the which dulcifie; then take of our Volatile Spirit of
Tartar, lbj, and cohobate so long thereon, till it gives forth all its Phlegm,
and the Salt is coagulated upon the golden Oil, and both become one: then with
true Spirit of Wine extract all the Tincture, and then draw off two thirds of
the Spirit of Wine, and what remains in the bottom is the Aurum Potabile.[N.B.]
The white Body that remains, after you have drawn forth your Tincture carefully
preserve, whose use shall be shown in our Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph, and
how the beauty of Venus shall allure it to that of Sol.

This Aurum Potable has the Virtues of all the aforesaid Preparations of Gold;
It cures Diseases, and fortifies the Heart; it^ general intentions are in
working and operating, in order to preserve the Body of Man in sanity. Its Dose
is from two to ten drops, in a Glass of Muscadine.

Of Venus, or Copper.
To calcine Copper, let it be made into thin Plates, and smeered over with Salt
made into a Paste with the best Vinegar; then let it be put into a great
Crucible, and set in a Wind-Furnace, and be burnt in a strong fire for a
quarter of an hour, but so that the Plates melt not; let these Plates, being
red-hot, be quenched in Vinegar, in which Sal Armoniack is dissolved, always ss
in a Pint of Vinegar; let the Plates be made red-hot again, and quenched in
Vinegar, as before, always scraping or knocking off the Scales, that sticks to
the Plates after quenching, into the Vinegar. Do this so long, till the Plates
of Copper be in good part consumed by this means: then distill off the Vinegar,
or let it vapor away in an open Vessel, and be coagulated into a most hard
stone. So thou have the best Crocus of Copper, the use whereof is great both in
Medicine and Alchymy. Many make Crocus of Copper, by extracting of it with the
Spirit of Wine, or Vinegar, as they do Crocus Martis: but we commend this way
far above it.

The Tincture of Venus.
Filings of Copper, and pour thereon good distilled Wine-Vinegar, and set it in
digestion for thirty days, in a circulatory Vessel; then pour off the distilled
Vinegar, which is colored, and add fresh, and so repeat until 'twill draw out
no more Tincture; then filter, and draw off the Phlegm with an easy fire, or
evaporate in a low Preserving Glass, until it shoots into Crystals. On which
Crystals pour fresh distilled Vinegar made warm, and then pour off by
Inclination into another Glass, and by Evaporation separate the corrosive
Crystals from a red Earth, that will remain under, which is the Sulphur:
Continue this Operation so long with fresh Spirit of Vinegar, until no more
Sulphur falls. If you burn off Spirit of Wine seven or eight times from the
corrosive Crystals, until they become sweet: Then have you a Medicine good in
Fevers, Ptisick, Consumption, Gravel, Gout, Epilepsie, and diverse other
Distempers. The Dose is five or six Grains in a Glass of Wine.

Of the Vitriol of Venus made into a Noble Medicament.
The signs of good Vitriol are, when there appears like little Diamonds,
whereof some are in form of a Piramid, and when you break them, you will see
small bright Veins, and of the color of a Saphir, and variable colors, and if
you dissolve it in Water, 'twill cause a residence, like sweet Cream mixed with
small Diamonds and Marcasites; 'twill also, being rubbed upon a Knife, tinge it
of a Copper color.

Of the best Vitriol lbxij, dissolve it in Rainwater, in Ashes; being
dissolved, filter and evaporate easily, until there arise a Pellicle; then take
it off, and set it for three or four days to crystalize in a coo^ place; then
put it into a Glass of 4 or 5 fingers high, the which set on Ashes to dry,
until the Crystals come into white Powder; then dissolve it in fresh
Rainwater, on Ashes for 24 hours, and the Water will become more green and
beautiful than before, and there will precipitate more Feces, which you must
throw away; as at the first, filter and evaporate into a Pellicle, and
crystalize as before, and reiterate this Operation, until the Vitriol have no
more Feces, and that it begins to come sweet, and you find it strong on the
tongue, and it becomes more beautiful in color than the Sky, or any other
color in the World: then keep the same close stopped in a Glass, that no dust
fall therein. [N.B.] That you lose not the greenness, for then you lose the
strength and liveliness of your Medicine.

The Vitriol thus prepared, and put it into a Matrix well luted, and put it
naked into your secret Furnace, and give it a proportionable fire, increasing
of it by little and little, from ten days to ten days; and you will see, that
your white Powder will be converted into a yellow Powder, in color like to
Gold; then increase your fire by little and little, until it comes to a reddish
color, at last like a Ruby: Then put this Matter into a Matrix, and pour
thereon the Aireal Spirit of Wine, and digest it four or five days, and pour
off the Spirit by Inclination; and thus do so long as any Tincture will be
obtained, and what remains is of no worth.

Then take all the Tinctures with Spirit of Wine, and put them into a Glass,
and distill off in MB. till your Matter is become dry; then dissolve it in fresh
Spirit of Wine, and again separate the Feces, and distill as before; repeat this
three times, each time throwing away the Feces; so is it well cleansed.

Pour on this dry Matter Rainwater distilled, and stir it with a wooden
Spatula, and ferment on warm Ashes four or five days, and thus continue with
fresh Water, till all the Tinctures are drawn out; then filter, and coagulate
in MB. and dry it by degrees in Sand; and so you have the beautiful and exalted
Sulphur of Venus, proper against many Distempers incident to Man's Body, as
well as those of the Pancreas.

The Sublimations of, or Ens Veneris.
The Colcothar of Dantzick-Vitriol, and dulcifie it with warm Water, from all
its Salt, till no more sharpness come forth; then dry it over the fire very
well: thus you may do by the Cap. mort. of AF. made from the best
Dantzick-Vitriol and Indian-Niter; then take either of these so served lbij, of
the best Sal-Armoniack lbij, and grind them well together in an Iron Mortar;
then put them in an earthen Retort with a large great and long Neck, and set
them in an open fire; put on a great Receiver, lute fast, and give fire gently
by degrees, till all is warm, and then sublime it from three hours to three
hours, till all is come up, which will be in twelve or fifteen hours time;
observing the last three hours, to give it the most violent degree of fire:
when all is cold, break the Retort and take the Sublimate out of the Neck,
which may again be ground with fresh Colcothar, and repeated a second time, and
so a third, until it comes from a golden to a rubifi'd Color.

It Is as a general Abstersive in the Body of Man, powerful therefore in opening
Obstructions, curing Rickets in Children; it is also prevalent in Agues,
Fevers, Pleurisies, Calentures, Measles and Purples, or any other acute
Disease, wherein the Life is eminently threatened. The Dose is from six to
twelve Grains, Mornings and Evenings.

Species Veneris gradus Aureosa.
Of the best Dantzick-Vitriol lbiij, and make a Solution in distilled
Rainwater, and filter the Solution very exactly* or take the Chaos of Vitriol
and Sal-Armoniack, and extract its Salt, the which digest and vaporate off to
an aurifi'd Powder, the which preserve: Either of these may be precipitated
into a Sulphur by the well decocted Salt of Tartar, the which dry very
carefully; and then put them into a Retort, adding thereunto equal weight of
the best Spirit of Vitriol, but unrectifi'd, and digest it till the Spirit give
off all its Phlegm; then put on half the quantity of the said Spirit of Vitriol,
and digest as before, and so do as long as Phlegm will come; then will true
Spirit of Wine force it through a Retort by Cohobations, till all is elivated;
then fix it down again upon the aurifi'd Powder, so long as it will drink in
Spirit, and send off Phlegm; then dulcifie, and so is the Noble Medicament
prepared.

Which is prevalent in Fevers, Agues, Dropsies, Gout and Stone, having an
Anodine and pacative Virtue with it, by which the fury of the enraged Archeius
is allayed, working in a way only succedanous to our Narcotick Sulphur of
Venus, or Ens vitae Mettallorum, whose Preparations are shown in our Spagirick
Philosophy asserted; to which you are referred. The Dose is from five to ten
Grains, Mornings and Evenings, in a proper Vehicle.

Of Mercury, or Quicksilver. First the Magnet of Mercury.
Of Mercury sublimate iv, put it into a Cucurbit of Glass, pour thereon the
best Spirit of Urine (vindicated from its filter, that coagulates Spirit of
Wine, by its high rectification) enough to swim four fingers breadth over it,
give it two days digestion, and in a lent heat distill, and most of the Spirit
will come over in Phlegm, and the Animal Spirits of the Urine will unite
themselves with the Mineral Spirits of the sublimate Mercury: put new Spirit of
Urine upon what remains in the Cucurbit, digest and distill, as before,
repeating this with new Spirit of Urine, till it comes off as strong as you put
it on. Then pour upon it four fingers breadth of pure Essential Oil, or rather
the Mineral Oil, which is essentificated with being opened by the Circulatum
Minimum; and digest them two days, then distill with a very lent heat, and an
Aquacity will come off insipid; pour upon the remaining Matter new Oil or
Sulphur; digest and distill, as before, and repeat this, as you did the Spirit
of Urine, till the Sulphur of Mercury, or what other Oil or Sulphur you think
best, come off, as strong as it went on, [and hoc est pondus Naturae] having
distilled it to a dryness: then increase the fire to sublime what will arise,
and Terra foliata will ascend, and the remaining Feces throw away.

Of this Terra foliata x, of Gold j, give them a strong fire, and the Salt
working on the Gold will come into a viscous and heavy Water, and will reduce
all the Mercury of Sol and of all other Metals: The Sulphurs being taken in
true Spirit of Wine, is prevalent in the Pox, Gout and Stone. The Dose is from
15 to 30 drops, and sweat thereon.

The white Precipitate of Mercury.
Of Mercury j, and dissolve it in A. F. ij, with Water and Salt twenty four
hours; precipitate it into a white Powder, decant the Water, and reiterate this
Work three times, or you may filter it, then wash the Precipitate in fair
Water, till it be sweet, and dry it or burn it with Spirit of Wine, to make it
sweet. S. A.

Mercurius Dulcis Diaphoretic. and Cathartic.
Of Mercurius Sublimat. lbj, Argent. vive xij, grind them very fine in a Glass
Mortar, until the Quicksilver appear not; then put it in an Urinal or
Subliming-glass, and place it in a Sand-Furnace; make a gentle fire under it,
for an hour or two; then increase the fire, for the space of five or six hours,
or until it is sublimed; then take it out, and separate the black Matter in the
Neck of the Glass or Viol, and cast it away; and when cold, grind again, and
sublime as before* then take it out, and keep it for use, if sweet on the
Tongue, or else do it the third time. Observe to stop the mouth of the
Subliming glass with Cotton.

To make Mercurius Praecipitat. per se.
Of Mercury lbj, and put it in a Bolt-head, and gently close the mouth for two
or three days, to let out the Gass; then nip it up, and give it fire by
degrees, and cover the body of the Bolt-head with Sand, and 'twill daily be
more and more used to the fire, so must the fire be gradually increased for
five or six Months time, till it comes to a red Precipitate. A Dose of which is
from five to ten Grains, to be taken in the Scurvy, Pox and Gout.

Observe, that if this Precipitate is sweetened in Spirit of Wine, it may be
higher advanced, by cohobating on it the spiritualized Sulphur of Venus, until
they embrace each other; and then it becomes succedanous to our Arcanum
specificat* Metal. of which we have written largely of in our Spagirick Phil.
Assert.

The sweet Oil of Mercury.
Of red Precipitate lbss, and wash it well in Cordial Waters, as Suebius or
Carduus Benedict. then dry the Powder, and put it into a Bolt-head, and pour
thereon of the radical Vinegar under mentioned two fingers in height, cause it
to boil, and 'twill all dissolve into Water, and if it be not all dissolved,
put on more of the said Vinegar, and boil it as before, until all be dissolved,
except the Feces, which remains in the bottom, which is the Feces of the
Mercury; then pour off the Vinegar by inclination, or filter it; put it into an
Alembick, and distill it off in MB. and then will you have in the bottom a pure
white Salt, the which dissolve in distilled Vinegar, and evaporate away with a
moderate heat, until a Pellicle arises, the which cause to crystalize.

Then take those Crystals, and dry them easily, and put them into a Glass, and
pour thereon of our Aireal Spirit of Wine four fingers above it; then set it in
MB* or in Horsedung, for twenty five days, and 'twill come into a Mucilage, the
which put into a Retort, and distill easily, and you will have an insipid Water;
increase the fire, and there will arise white Fumes, and somewhat will sublime
into the Neck of the Retort, the which return into the Retort, and distill as
before; repeat the same three times, and the whole will turn into a clear Oil;
Prevalent in the Distempers of Venus, Dropsies* Quartans, etc. The Dose is from
four to six drops in Canary, Conserves, or Syrups, every other day, until a
perfect Cure.

The radical Vinegar, that dissolves this Mercury.
Of Honey and decrepitated Salt ana lbj, mix them, and cause them easily to
boil to dryness, the which reduce into a Powder, and put it into a Retort, and
pour thereon of good distilled Wine-Vinegar, and distill and cohobate three or
four times, and it is prepared.

Another sweet Oil of Mercury.
Of Mercury sublimat. lbss, and dissolve it in lbij of Aireal Spirit of Wine,
adding thereunto of the Spirit of Salt ij; digest it for eight days, then
distill on Sand, giving a strong fire, toward the last, and keep that which
passes or comes over; then add fresh Wine-Spirit, and Spirit of Salt, as much
as is needful for dissolving the Matter, and digest as before for eight days,
and repeat the said Operation for four or five times. [N. B.] That there will
remain a black Feces: Then take all the Liquors that are past, and digest them
in a double Pelican fifteen days; then distill on a vaporous B. all that may
ascend, which will be only Flegms, and there will remain in the bottom an Oil,
which is scented like Amber, the which put into a Retort, and give a good fire
of digestion, and there will come over an Oil as clear as Crystal, and of a
sweeter smell than that of Civet.

Its Dose and Virtue. For the Stone and Gravel, take Gr. iv. or v. in
Sassafrax-water, in the time of the most violent pain: For a Clap or inveterate
Gonorrhoea and Pox, with Ulcers, whether inward or outward, in any part of the
Body or Face; take it in a Glass of Sack, drinking after it a good draught of
that Decoction, prescribed with the Preparation of Antimony and Gold.

Mercurius Praecipitat. and Diaphoretic.

Of Vitriol and Niter ana lbj, Spiritus Vini lbj, Verdigrease iv; mix the
whole, and put it into a Retort, and distill it off easily to a dryness; then
take of that Water lbj, and add thereunto of Mercury drawn from Cinnabar lbss;
and put it into a luted Matrix, and set it on an hot fire of digestion, to boil
four days; then put it into a Retort, and distill to a dryness, and return the
Mercury into the same matter again, and pour thereon of the fresh Menstruum,
and boil as before for four days; and repeat this four times, and the last time
distill with a strong fire, and you will have a Mercury precipitate as red as
Blood, the which wash and edulcerate with Cordial Water, sc. Suebius or Carduus
Benedictus, and being dry, circulate in Spirit of Wine, and then draw off your
Spirit of Wine by distilation, and reverberate it in a Reverberatory.

The Dose thereof is from 3 to 5 or 7 Grains, in Conserve or Cordial Water, and
drinking a Glass of Canary after it: Prevalent in the Scurvy, Pox, etc.

Arcanum Mercuriale and Catharticum.
Of well purged Mercury lbj, of our concentrated cold Fire of the Eagle lbiij,
put them into a very high Retort, and distill off the Menstruum, and the Mercury
will become fixed and very-red, far beyond what may be performed by AF. or
Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, or any other Acid whatever: This
Arcanum may be dulcified from its saltness by distilled Water, and then it
becomes an excellent Medicament, prevalent in the Pox, King's Evil, Cancers,
Ulcers, and all such loathsome Diseases. The Dose is 1, 2, 3, or 4 Grains at the
most. [Observe, That this is inferior to our Arcanum Specificat. Metal. that
having a Mineral Sulphur introduced, as you may see at large in our Spagirick
Philosophy asserted, where its Virtues are largely treated of.]

Of Lune, or Silver.
Lune (as you have before heard) is the Wife of Sol, and is endued with the
perfect purity of the four Elements, only wanting the Sulphur of Sol for her
perfection, which is that indeed wherein the Medicinal Virtue mostly resides;
but seeing that she is attributed to the Head and cold and moist Diseases, we
shall prescribe this Preparation of her as follows.

Pillula Lunaris, or th of.
Of the best burnt Silver Lace, or such like, as much as you please, and of the
cleansed Spirit of Niter four times as much, and put them into a Glass Body,
and let it remain there till all the Silver be dissolved; and when dissolved,
evaporate all the superfluous moisture, till it has a good Cream on the top;
then set it by to cool, that the Crystals may shoot; then put the Crystals into
an open mouthed Glass, and dry them in a Sand Furnace, till all the stinking
Spirit of the Menstruum be dried away, always keeping it stirring with a stick,
but let it not stand too hot, for that will make the Crystals to flow: then
make them up into Pills with Crumbs of White-bread, when dry. Then dissolve
Alloes succotrina in the Juice of Roses, or Senna-water, and when the Pills are
too dry, dip them into it, and lay them thus dipped in a Glass again to dry, and
keep them in a Dish in a dry place, in the Powder of Liquorish, and in a
well-stopt Glass, that they may not dissolve.

Virtues.
Good for all Pains in the Head, sore Eyes, foul Stomach, Dropsy, Palsy, and
many other stubborn Diseases. The Dose is from six to nine Grains.

The Sublimations of Lune.
Of the Calx of Lune iv, of the Volatile Spirit of Tartar lbj; distill in a
Retort, and the Spirit that first comes, carefully save; desiegm the remainder,
and again pour on more Spirit, and operate as before; and thus do, till the
sign appears; and then sublime with a very strong degree of heat, and the
Sulphur of the Lune will pass up with the Volatile Salt of Tartar, into one
Noble Medicament, which is prevalent in all Diseases whereunto Lune can be
attributed. [Observe, The Caput mont. white Body or Mercury that remains in the
Retort, carefully to save.

The Distillation of Lune, or Luna Potabilis.
Lune, and calcine it into sine Attoms, or laminate it into thin Plates, and in
a Crucible take off the Metallic luster, and put it into a Retort, and pour
thereon three times its weight of the Volatile Spirit of our Sal Panaristos,
and stop it close, and set it in the heat of a B. and in few days the Lune will
be dissolved in the Liquor without any sediment; the Liquor being then
distilled therefrom, leaves it in form of a fusible Salt; upon which often
cohobate the Liquor, and 'twill be made volatile and come over in distinct
colors: Now the Liquor may be separated from it, being putrified for a Month
in B. and then distill in fire of the second degree, and the Lune will come
over, leaving the Liquor behind: The Mercurial Body may be separated, and the
Sulphur is that Fifth Essence, which cures all Lunaticks.

Let thus much suffice for the Preparation of Minerals at this time, seeing the
more high Specific Medicines are largely treated of in Our Spagirick
Philosophy Asserted; as also in Our Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph; and the
Arcana in Our Trifertes Soladini: so that we love not fruitless repetitions,
this only being designed as a general Course or Compendium of the many
voluminous Writings, and those that are desirous to be satisfied in the
Practick Part of Chemical Operations, whether in the Schrodarian Pharmacopoeia,
or in the Cartesian Mechanical Demonstrations, or in the Helmontian Doctrines,
may apply themselves to us, where they may be instructed in any, or every one
of these, being three distinct Courses.

Chemical Observations and Recollections, by way of Conclusion.
WE have in this Treatise first laid down necessary Rules in this Art: 2dly,
The Way of advancing Vinor Spirits, and their various Uses. 3dly, Concerning
Oils, and how they are to be purified. 4thly, Concerning Salts. Now, by the
way, it is requisite to observe, that in the Oils and Salts is the Medicinal
Virtue of any Concret, and therefore in the fifth place have we proceeded to
the Anatomy of Urine, and so to the Reconciling of these, in order to prepare
Powers or Oleosums; then to the preparing of Menstruums and Metallic Medicines.

Now you are to observe, that the Excellency of their Virtues lies in their
Saline and more principally in their Sulphurous Qualities, for the Central
Mercury of Bodies is a peerless Ens, and will not stoop to any thing, but the
Grand Elixir, by which it is bettered, and that only by means of the Universal
Sulphur, which is a Domissal of Light, having its original from the Fire, and
therefore the Rays of Light shine there, as also in every true Specific,
wherein Sulphur is exalted [by it.] These (in the Medicinal Monarchy) are the
true Aurum Reginae in comparison to others, the which every true experiencer
will find by undeniable Demonstrations; we could indeed lay down many and
particular Observations concerning both, but we are afraid if our Light should
really appear, that the Momes and Carpers of the Age would howl against it, as
the Wolves of Assyria against the Moon; but such we advise to seek amongst the
Vulgar Slops for a Dish to appease their greedy Appetite; for ours is designed
only for the true lovers of Art, to whom the Asteria will shine, as long as the
heavenly Phoebe does, even from Generation to Generation: for as he comes to be
darkened, she shall be turned into Blood, the fullness of whose Tincture is
aurified, and fixed in all trials, that greedy Saturn can no more make prey on
it; for we say it is an Emblance of the Divine Paradise, in the Center of which
is the Tree of Life, whose Leaves are for Healing the Nations, without Money or
Price: This we are now speaking of, is that part of Art which is grounded upon
true Knowledge of Created Beings, and when Manner how the Transmutation of Form
will come about; for we say, that Mortality must put on Immortality, both in
the lesser and greater World; and here all the swelling Notions of Man's
Wisdom, as it stands in the Corruption and Elementary Nature, must be destroyed
and burnt up with the Fire of Regeneration, as all things at the last day by
the general Fire of Conflagration; and as Man must come into the Innocence,
that thinks no guile, so will the World into Purity; and then the Glory of
Light will appear in its luster, which no Man now can behold, and live, and
therefore says the Text, in Exodus, Chapter 20. ver. 21. That Moses drew near to
the thick darkness, where God was. Thus is it plainly evident from Scripture,
that the very Fountain of Light has made use of the Vails of Darkness, in
order to hide the unspeakable Glory of his Light: For it is said in the Psalms,
He has made darkness his hiding place. Why then may not the highest and most
perfect of all Medicines be veiled over with black Garments, seeing Light it
self is so covered; which, that it is really so, is well known to the Sons of
the Cabalistical Wisdom, as we shall more largely show in other Volumes; and
although our Philosophy is but as a Mite, yet will it increase the Treasury,
being a good Coin and bearing the Stamp of the Great and Famous Hermes;
therefore (ye Sons of Art) in the mean while accept thereof, until we can have
while to tender our larger Coin, and then we know, that many will give us a
free discharge, for performing our Duty in that Discipleship, where the People
wait for the restoration of all things, that true Art may shine on the mighty
Mount Hellicon in the midst of Nations, that her Sons may come from far, and
her Daughters from the ends of the Earth, to sit down at Wisdom's Gate, in the
Temple of which is the Ministration of Life, where the Unity of Spirit and Bond
of Peace is known, in the Frame of which are Prayers offered to the living God,
that he will hasten what was promised by the Prophet Zephaniah, Chapter 3. ver. 9.
sc. An universal turning of the People to a pure Language, or Lip, and in that
day a consent therein: when the Lord shall be King over all the Earth, one Lord
and his Name one, Zechariah 14. and the 9th. And in the mean while we travel
with a desire of seeing the same fulfilled.

FINIS.
The general Contents of the Chapters of this Book.
CHAP. I. Treats concerning several Rational and Fundamental Rules in this Art.
CHAP. II. In which we shall first Treat of Vinor Spirits and their Office in
the Extraction of Tinctures and some other Spagirical Preparations. CHAP. III.
Treats of Essential and Chemical Oils. CHAP. IV. In which we shall Treat of
Salts. CHAP. V. Concerning Vrinous Spirits in General. CHAP. VI. Treats
concerning Powers and Oleosums. CHAP. VII. Treats concerning Menstruums in
General. CHAP. VIII. Treats concerning the Mineral-work, and the Office of the
General Spirit, in reducing and exalting Mineral Bodies, and how they may be
brought to Noble Medicaments.
Catalogus Medicinarum Chymicaruns and Spagiricarum: OR, A Catalogue of
Chemical and Spagirical Medicines, being a Table of the Principal Contents of
this Treatise.
Preparationes Spirit.
SPiritus Vini Tartarizatus, Page 16 Spir. Cochleariae aureos. and purg. Page
20 Spir. Ether. Terebinth. Page 31 Spir. Vini and Urin. Page 47 Aqua Anhaltina
quae and Imperialis dict. Page 59 Aqua Aromatica Antipelipt. Nostr. Page 60
Spir. Sedativus, Page 61
Preparat. Tinct. Resin. Extract. and Balsam.
Tinct. Hellebor. Elet. vel Gut. Gambug. Page 17 Resm. Jallap. Scammon, vel
Bryon. Page 18 Extract. Rud. ibid. Extract. Sambuci, Page 19 Balsam. Sambuc.
ibid.
Preparat. Oleor.
Oleum Abscinth. Page 21 Oleum Origani, ibid. Oleum Cinnamonic. vel cujusvis
secund. Glaub. Page 22 Oleum Citr. Cortic. Page 23 Modus preparandi Olea ab
Herbis sec. Dr. Hill, ib. Oleum Castor. opt. Page 24 Oleum Mari and Thur.
secund. Glauber ibid. Oleum Benzoin. secund. Boil, Page 25 Oleum Terebinth,
Page 26 Alius, ibid. Oleum Terebinth Ether. Page 27 Oleum Pini, ibid. Oleum
Regeneratum, ibid. Oleum Succinii, Page 28 Oleum Fuligin. and Lap. nigr. Page
29 Oleum C. Cervor. and Gran. human. Page 30
Preparat. Sal.
Sal mirabilis Communis, Page 32 Tartar. Vitriolat. Page 34 Tartar. Nitrat.
Page 35 Tartar. Sulphurat. Page 36 Tartar. cum Spir. Sal. ibid. Tartar. cum
Acet. Pp. ibid. Sal Specif. Hellebor. Op. vel Jallap. ibid. Sal Tart. cum A. F.
Page 39 Sal Nitr. cum Ol. Vitr. ibid. Sal Anotasier Lyb. Nostr. Page 61
Preparat. Urin. Spir.
Spir. Urin. Rectificat. Page 46. Sal Ur. coagulat. cum Spir. Vin. ibid. Astrum
Lunare Microcosmicum, or Phospheros, Page 47 Spir. Sal Ammoniac. Page 53 Spir.
Mundus, ibid. Spir. C. Cervor. Page 55 Spir. Cran. human. ibid.
Preparat. Potest. and Oleof.
Oleosum generale Nostr. Page 61 Sal Volatile. and Oleos. Sylvii, Page 62 Sal
Volatilis and Oleos. Nostr. Page 63 Alius, Page 64 Sal Volat. Aromat. and
Oleosum, ibid. Potestates Thompsonii, Page 65 Elixir Proprietatis and Oleosum,
Page 66 Tinct. Stomatica and Oleosum, ibid. Tinct. Hemetina and Oleosum, ibid.
Potestates Succinii Nostr. Page 68 Elix. Proprietatis Helmontii and Oleosum,
Page 70 Pilula Anodina Specif. and Cathart. or the Powers of Bodies oilified
and concentrated into a friendly Pill, Page 72
Preparat. Menstr.
Menstruum Urino-acidum, Page 77 Menstr. Neutrale, for the dissolving of Talk,
Page 78 Menstr. Urinos. cum Ol. Vitr. Page 80 Menstr. Acidum radicale Zwolfare,
Page 81 Spir. Nitr. Page 83 Oleum Salis, Page 84 Oleum Vitriol. ibid.
Aquafortis, Page 85 Aqua regia, ibid. Spir. Sal. dulc. and volatile. Page 87
Spir. Vitr. dulc. and volatile. ibid. Menstr. Corrosivum Specific. Page 89
Arcanum Pontissitatum, or Sp. Sal. Tart. volatilizat. per Acid. Page 90 Sal
Panaristos, Page 91
Preparat. Saturni.
Calx Saturnii, Page 110 Precipit. album Glauber. Page 101 Oleum Saturnii, Page
103 Saccharum Saturnii, Page 100
Preparat. Antimonii
Species Antim. Russellii, Page 105 Sal Antimonii, Page 107 Hepar. Antimon.
Page 108 Lapis Prunella Antimonial. Page 109 Vitreum Antimonii, ibid. Poculum
Antimoniale, Page 110 Regulus Antimon. Stellat. ibid. Regulus Antimon. Glaub.
Page 111 Antimonial. Panchymagogon, ibid. Arcanum Antimonial. Helmontii, Page
113 Panacea Antimon. or Starkey 's Febrifuge, ibid. Species Mineralis Nostr. or
our prevalent, triumphant, Antimonial Emetick and Catharick.
Preparat. Jovis.
Calx Jovis, Sal Jovis, ibid. Anima Jovis, Page 115 Oleum Jovis, ibid. Fulmen
Jovis, ibid. Jupiter durat. Argent. similis, Page 116
Preparat. Martis.
Calx Martis, ibid. Sal Martis, Page 117 Flores Martis, Page 118 Anima Martis,
ibid. Flores Mart. cum Saturn. Page 103 Sal Calybis Magisterialis Nostr. Page
119
Preparat. Sol.
Aurum Fulminans, Page 131 Aurum Potabile Sylvii, Page 132 Aurum Potabile
Nostr. Page 133 Arcanum Solare Page 128 Calx Solaris Page 121 Sal Auri [alias]
Sal Sapientiae, Page 124 Oleum Solare, Page 126 Mercur. Aur. Page 131
Preparat. Veneris
Calx Veneris, Page 134 Vitriolum and Sal Veneris, Page 136 Species veneris
gradus Aureosa, Page 139 Ens Veneris, Page 138 Tinctura Veneris, Page 135
Narcotic. Sulphur Veneris, Page 140 Ens Vitae Metallorum, ibid.
Preparat. Mercurli.
Magnesia Mercurii, ibid. Precipitat. Mercurii album, Page 141 Mercur. dulcis
Diaphoretic. and Cathartic. Page 142 Mercur. precipitat. per se, ibid. Oleum
Mercurii, Page 143 Alium, Page 145 Mercurius Praecipt. and Diaphoretic Page 146
Arcanum Mercuriale and Cathart. ibid.
Preparat. Lunae.
Pilula Lunaris, or Salt of Lune, Page 147 Sublimat. Lunae, Page 148 Luna
Potabilis, Page 149
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any Person is desirous to be furnished with these, or any other of the
Authors Medicines, whether Chemical or Spagirical, let them apply themselves to
him or Tho. Newton, Chymico-Medicus, at the Academia Spagirica Nova, in (...).
Paul's Shadwell, London. Or John Spire, Chemical Physick^, at Horsly-down,
Southwark.


