A Full DISCOVERY Of the First PRESBYTERIAN Sham-Plot. OR A LETTER From one in
LONDON, TO A Person of Quality in the Country.

By Andrew Yarranton.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange. 1681.

A Full Discovery of the first Presbyterian Sham-Plot, etc.
Honored SIR,
YOU seem to be much concerned (as you well may) at the present state of
Affairs amongst us; and to wonder that the Scene should be so suddenly changed,
and the Popish Plot be turned into a Protestant and Presbyterian Plot. This
Riddle, no doubt, astonisheth many others as well as your self; the Errand
therefore of these Lines is to attempt the solving of it.

Two things I shall premise, to which I promise my self I shall have your and
every sober Man's Concession. The first is, That the Papists have long designed
the subversion of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom: They look upon
England as the great Bulwark of that which they call the Northern Heresy; as
that Roman of old resolved it into a Maxim, that Carthage must be destroyed,
so the Romanists of late, have universally agreed that England must be ruined,
or restored to the Communion of the Church of Rome. I could easily recount the
several efforts they made in order hereunto, in the Reign of Q. Eliz. K. James
and K. Charles the First, as also during the Interregnum, but this would swell
my Letter, and make it too Volumnious: I shall only therefore consider the
Methods they have meditated, for the bringing of this about since the
Restoration of his Majesty that now is, and some of these you will find in
what follows. A second thing I take for granted is this, That the Papists have
little hope to enslave this Nation, and bring it to their Lure, so long as it
is compacted and united together; Great Britain's Situation and Union together
make it impregnable. But Machiavil's Aphorism, Devide and Rule, is well known
to the Jesuits: Discord therefore is the great thing they have endeavored
amongst us, especially in matters of Religion: A Kingdom is easily set on Fire
by a Coal from the Altar: how successful they have been in this Essay for these
twenty years past-hath been both the Observation and Lamentation of many.

The King at his first entrance (to his praise be it spoken) took a prudent
course to obviate this Mischief, he first passed an Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity, wherein he conjured all his Subjects to follow his Example, in
forbearing and forgiving one another.

After this he issued out his gracious Declaration touching Ecclesiastical
Affairs, which was so full of Concessions and Condescensions, that the
Ministers about London presented him with a gratulory Address; yea, the House
of Commons gave him hearty. Thanks for it: and had they past that Declaration
into an Act of Parliament, it had probably cemented, tho not every individual
Person, yet the greatest part by far of all the Protestants throughout the
Nation. But some, both of the Clergy and Laity, that bore the greatest, sway
rejected it, and so His Majesty's good and peaceable Intentions proved
Abortive. These Men (by whose Instigations you may imagine) instead of an Act
of Union, resolve upon an Act of Uniformity, which they could not but know
would prove the greatest Bone of Contention that ever was in the Nation: And
some of the leading Churchmen were heard to say, they would have an Act so
framed, as should reach every Puritan in the Kingdom; and if they thought any
of them would so stretch their Consciences as to be comprehended in it, they
would insert yet other Conditions and Subscriptions so as that they should have
no benefit by it. But the King and Parliament (they feared) were not yet fully
prepared for the passing of such an Act: thereupon a contrivement is set on
foot to make a Presbyterian Plot. And this was the first of that nature which
they took in hand. And because it never was taken notice of by some, and
forgotten by others, I shall therefore set it down at large; which I can the
better do, because I was a great Sufferer therein: and what I relate, if
occasion be, I can prove by Letters, and many living Witnesses.

This Sham-Plot was laid in about 16 Counties of England; But I shall write
principally of that part of it which was executed in Worcestershire, the Month
of November, in the year 1661. Several Letters were drawn up and delivered by
Sir John P -- to one Richard N -- his Neighbor, to carry to one -- Cole of
Martly about 4 Miles from Wocester, who is now living. This -- Cole, according
to instructions, delivers a Packet of Letters to one -- Churne of
Witchinford, who also is, or lately, was alive, and dwelt near Martly. This
Packet of Letters was carried by Coals and Churne unto Sir John P -- (from whom
it first came.) And before him Churne makes an Affidavit, that going early in
the Morning to his Labor he struck his Bill upon a Hedge to cut a Thorn, and
by and by; on the other side of the Hedge, he espied a Scotch Pedlar, putting up
Letters hastily into his Pack, and being affrighted (as he supposed) he left
that Packet behind in the Ditch, and went down a Lane leading to Colonel John
Birch his House.

This Oath being made, and the Packet delivered, as aforesaid, and opened, it
presently appeared that there was a Conspiracy on foot to stir up Rebellion in
the Kingdom, and to raise an Army for that purpose; and that Capt. Andrew
Yarranton was to command a Party in those Parts; for which purpose there were
several Letters directed to him from some Ministers, and others: Particularly,
one from Mr. Richard Baxter, Minister of Kederminster, Mr. Baxter then at
London.
intimating that he had provided a considerable Body of Men, well armed, which
should be in readiness against the time appointed. Another from Mr. Ambrose
Sparry the then Minister of Martly, intimating, that he had ordered him 500 l.
which was lodged in a Friends hand, No Man so covetous of the then Clergy.
(not named) and should be ready for him whenever he sent for it. Several
other Letters, and treasonable Papers, were pretended to be in that Packet; all
which occasioned the raising the Militia of that County; and the City of
Worcester was filled that night with Horse and Foot: Early the next morning,
about two of the Clock, an Officer, with a Troop, Nov. 9.
come to Mr. Yarranton's House, and seeing Lights in most of the Windows; for a
season he made a halt; but anon he drew near to the House; and demanded
entrance; Mrs. Yarranton told him she would open the Doors, provided he would
come in with no more than two Persons besides himself; to which he assented.
And when he was come into the House; he demanded of Mrs. Yarranton, where her
Husband was? She answered, He was not at home. The Officer replied, He was at
home the Evening before: She told him, He was; but he is now gone to one Mr.
Mitchel's House at Hitinton: But to let you see that he knows the Design you
come about, he has left his Man with a Horse ready sadled to conduct you to
him. Some of the Party being Volunteers out of Worcester, observing the words
and deportment of Mrs. Yarranton, went presently home again; amongst whom was
Mr. Winter Hains an Apothecary, and since Mayor of Worcester, and still alive,
who has often said, that very instant he smelt the Design. The Officer, with
his Party, was brought by Henry Cowell, Mr. Yarranton's Servant, to the House
of Mr. Mitchell; where finding the said Yarranton, the Officer told him, He was
his Prisoner, and must go along with him to Worcester; and about ten a Clock
the same day they all entered the City, where all the Trained Bands of the
County were up in Arms. The same day several other Persons were secured, as Mr.
Ambrose Spanry Minister of Martly, near which place the Sham-Packet was
pretended to be found. Mr. Henry Osland Minister of Bewdly; Mr. Edward Osland
of the Rock; Dr. Jackson of Kederminster; Mr. Moore Minister of Worcester; Mr.
Bryan Minister of Old Swinford; Captain Wells, Cap. Wells living now at
Bednalgreen. Mr. Vicars now living in Smithfield
Mr. Henry Baldwin, Mr. George Wilson, Mr. John Vicars, Mr. Mekine, all four of
Worcester: with some scores more, which I forbear to mention, all which Persons
were disposed of into several Prisons or Places of confinement, so that they
could not speak one with another, having Sentinels always standing at their
several Doors. Amongst the common People there was a great noise of a horrid
Plot, a Presbyterian Plot, and they were so confirmed in the belief of it, that
the several Prisoners, as they marched with their Guards through the Streets,
were greatly reviled and affronted.

All things continued in this posture for the space of ten days; after which
time the Trained Bands would continue no longer, they were grown a little
sensible of the Sham: And upon their departure, the Deputy Lieutenants, out of
their great clemency, discharged all the Prisoners then in custody, except Dr.
Jackson, Mr. Sparry, Mr. Henry and Mr. Edward Osland, Capt. Wells, and --
Yarranton; only they must pay their Fees, and find good Security, not to go
five miles from their Habitations, without leave first obtained from the Lord
Lieutenant, or two Deputy Lieutenants, to appear when they were sent for, and
in the mean time, to keep all the King's Laws, Ecclesiastical and Civil. This
done, Mr. Sparry, Dr. Jackson, the two Oslands, and Mr. Yarranton, were ordered
to be kept close Prisoners in several Chambers of the George Inn in Worcester;
Jo. Shuler. Marshal.
so that no Person whatsoever must come or speak to either of them but in the
presence of the Marshal. The Trained Bands being gone, as was said before, to
their several Homes, care was taken for the securing of these Criminals, by the
dignified Clergy of Worcester, together with some of the fattest Clergymen of
the County, who provided about 60 Foot Soldiers, which they armed, and paid,
as some of them said, with double pay; which Soldiers were to attend, as
Sentinels, in their turns, upon each of the Prisoners, and the rest to keep a
Court of Guard in the Town Hall of Worcester. These were commonly called the
Clergy Band; and they had for their Captain, one Mr. William Sheldon of
Stoke-Prior, who has, of a long time, as it is said, belonged to the Rules in
Southwark.

I cannot omit the acquainting you with one renowned Act of Chivalry, that was
done in this Church-Court-Guard. It hapened that there came to Worcester a poor
old Man, to enquire after the Welfare of Mr. Henry Osland his Minister, and
speaking with one of these Soldiers, the Soldier liberally charged Mr. Osland
with being a Traitor, a Rebel, a Plotter against the Government, with some
other hard Names; he stoutly defended his Minister, and said he was an honest
peaceable Man, and he could never believe he was concerned in any Treason, or
Plot against the Government. The Church Militant-Man in great Wrath laid hold
of this poor old Zealot; and carried him to the Court of Guard: he that then
presided in that Court Martial was also a Church Officer, and no meaner Man
than an Apparitor; he commanded the old Man to be tied Neck and Heels together,
charged him with having a Hand in this Presbyterian Plot, and threatened him
with severe usage unless he would make a Confession. The old Man bore all this
with great Patience, answering him never a Word, which so enraged this Man in
Authority, that he put lighted Matches betwixt his Fingers, and burnt them to
the very Bone: and all this was done to force a Confession from him of a
Presbyterian Plot. The Name of the Person thus tortured is Roger Waldern of
Bewdly, who (for ought I have heard to the contrary) is still alive, and
carries about him the sh^^vel'd Skin, which was caused by those burning
Matches betwixt his Fingers; and so are many others alive, which saw him in his
Misery, and contributed their help to the healing of his Hands. Now if so small
an Officer of the Church as an Apparitor, durst be so hardy as to act such a
piece of Barbarity, contrary to all Law and Conscience, what may we fear and
expect from those of a greater Figure, if once they come to have Power in their
Hands? But this is a digression.

This feigned Plot was not only laid in Worcestershire, but in other Shires and
Counties of England, as I hinted before; I could fill many Sheets of Paper, if
I pleased, with Particulars: But give me leave to inform you only of some
Passages in Oxfordshire which respect to this Plot, which fell out about the
same time. There dwelt in Oxford one Mr. Matthew Martin, Mr. Martin, Brewer, in
Oldstreet.
who was then Town-Clark there; he is now a Brewer in London, and in good
Reputation both for Estate and Integrity. There came one Evening to his House
in Oxford, a Stranger with a Letter, who had no sooner delivered it, but he
withdrew and went his way: when Mr. Martin had opened it and a little
considered the Contents, he took a prudent course to carry it to the Mayor, as
you will hear by and by, and to do it immediately; for had he tarryed a Night or
an Hour, it might have been found about him, and then Oxford had quickly been
as full, or fuller, of Plotters and Prisoners than Worcester: The Copy of this
memorable Letter I here insert word for word.

Mr. Martin,
I Pray will you warn all these Men to be all in their Arms, upon Wednesday
next in the Night; you know already where they must meet. There will come into
Oxford two hundred Men all in their Arms, you know who does Command them. Dr.
Greenwood has sent to Mr. Combs the Barber, to get his Party of Scholars ready
that night; and I have sent to Mr. Hickman to get his Men ready at the same
time; and Dr. Owen has sent to Mr. Fogge to get his Men ready at the same time;
and Dr. Gawin has sent to Mr. Duke the Barber, to get his Men ready at the same
time; and I have sent to Mr. Cornish to get his ready at the same time; and I
have sent to Dr. Connaught to get his Men ready; and all the Scholars are to
meet in Dr. Roger's Garden: And pray send the Blunderbusses thither, for I
intend to be there my self: and I pray give the Bearer hereof five pounds out
of the Stock: and I pray remember me to the six Men unnam'd. Five Counties are
to rise that Night without fail: I need write no more to you. The Word is, God
is the Word, and pray tell them all so.


In this Letter was a List of the Persons Names, he was to warn, and it is as
follows.

Mr. Wikes Mr. Langly Mr. Cave Mr. White Mr. Lane Mr. Williams Mr. Fifill Mr.
Townfend Mr. Pitman Mr. Burrows Mr. Pawling Mr. Walker Mr. Williams Mr.
Jennings Mr. Short Mr. Griffin Mr. Newman Mr. Quelch Mr. Phillips Mr. Phillips
Mr. Banks Mr. Prince Mr. Tindall Mr. Tindall Mr. Carter Mr. Carter Mr. Sadler
Mr. Weller Mr. Edwards Mr. Dawes Mr. Drinock Mr. Berry Mr. King Mr. Carter Mr.
Wix Mr. Siper Mr. Quelch Mr. Tomes Mr. Barnes Mr. Fifield Mr. Campion Mr. Lloyd
Mr. Dodwell Mr. Nixson Mr. Spur Mr. Spensar Mr. Hodgkins Mr. Sheen Mr. Bowel
Mr. Seal Mr. Painter Mr. Rogers Mr. Painter Mr. Rogers Mr. Duke Mr. Asting Mr.
Archman Mr. Gelman Mr. Titmons Mr. Lark Mr. Hands Mr. Newman Mr. Newman Mr.
Nixson Mr. Nixson Mr. Fulks Mr. Fulks Mr. Adkins Mr. Adkins Mr. Nichols Mr.
Nichols Mr. Nichols Mr. Bowel Mr. Adkins Mr. Houghton Mr. Houghton Mr. Green
Mr. Wiance Mr. Luing Mr. Ryland Mr. Nixson Mr. Bett Mr. Stinson Mr. Foge Mr.
Hombes Mr. Adams Mr. Adams Mr. Andrews Mr. Foye Mr. Jennings Mr. Langly Mr.
Langly Mr. Phillips Mr. Porter Mr. Alworth Mr. Millar Mr. Prince Mr. Cave Mr.
Tongue Mr. Tongue Mr. Tongue Mr. Achman Mr. Winkeil Mr. Bunch Mr. Digbee Mr.
Fifeld Mr. Fifeld Mr. Adkins Mr. Bro Mr. Tredwell Mr. Bland
The Mayor of Oxford immediately dispatcheth a Messenger, with an account of
these transactions to the Lord Falkland, who was then a Member of Parliament,
and I think, Lord Lieutenant of the County: the Copy of the Mayor's Letter, I
think meet also to be here inserted.

My Lord,
I Do not love to give your Lordship any unnecessary trouble, yet in regard, I
perceive that by occasion of a Letter left with Mr. Martin our Town-Clark, on
Monday night last, there is a great noise made as if there were an intended
rising, and meeting of armed Men in this City this last Night, which I thought
might possibly come to your Lorships Ear: I thought it therefore my duty for
the preventing of misreports (the first discovery of it being made to my self)
to give your Lordship this true and full account of the whole matter: On Monday
night last, about eight or nine of the Clock there comes a young Man to the
Town-Clark's House, and desiring to speak with him, delivers him a Letter,
which he said one gave him on the Road between Tetsworth and Oxford, the
Town-Clark desired him to stay till he looked from whence it came; the young
Man pretended great haste, and while he turned to the Candle to open the
Letter, the young Man slipped out of his Doors, The Town-Clark no sooner read the
two first Lines of it, but said, somebody had designed evil toward him; and
while he read on his Letter, called for his Man and a Lanthorn, and so soon as
it came, went to Captain Griffins to show him what he received: not finding him
at home; he repaired to me; told me how the Letter was left with him (showing
it to me) desiring me to send to seek out Captain Griffin, that he might see
the Contents of it: which accordingly I did, and he coming to me, we together
perused the Letter, and the List of Names enclosed: and considering them both
with the Circumstances, we presumed it to be at the worst, but a design to try
or to entrap the Town-Clark; we could not but commend his discretion in the so
timely a Discovery, for the clearing of himself. I have enclosed a Copy of the
Letter in such English as it is written, and a Copy of the List of Names, and
because diverse of them may be unknown to your Lordship, I take leave to tell
you that some of them bear Arms in your Lordship's Company of Foot; others of
them are Persons of known Fidelity to his Majesty, and far from what this
strange Letter would suppose: tho there is a mixture also of some others with
them. The Town-Clark has made proof of the manner of his receiving the Letter,
and his immediate Discovery, which I hope will acquit him in your Lordship's
Judgment, as it does in ours. My Lord, I was in my self fully persuaded, that
there is nothing of such weight in this business, as that it was worthy giving
your Lordship any particular account of it: Yet upon further thoughts, I
conceived it safer to err by overdoing, than to adventure on your Lordship's
censure for coming short of my Duty: If I have made the Relation too tedious to
your Lordship, I humbly crave and hope for Pardon.

For I am My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Faithful Servant.


A like Letter and Account was also sent to the Recorder of Oxford, one of
their Members in Parliament, who immediately showed it to one of the
Secretaries. And thus this pretty Project miscarried in Oxford, through the
Providence of God, and the prudent Management of the Discoverers, to the great
regret (no doubt) of those who had cunningly enough contrived it. I cannot learn
they made any further progress in it, save only that two Deputy Lieutenants
sent next day for Mr. Martin, and threatened at first to commit him to Custody,
but by and by they dismissed him, with this Injunction, Not to go out of the
City within fourteen days, without special License. And that very night came
into the Town many of the Militia, who kept Guard for two days in the City.

It Is high time now that I return to Worcester, and give you an account of the
forementioned Plotters, in close Confinement there. Dr. Jackson, by the
assistance of Sir R. C. gets his Enlargement: Sparry, and one of the Oslands,
moved, that they might be bailed, or brought to Trial, but could obtain
neither. Yarranton, and the other Osland, were altogether passive and silent,
waiting to see what issue God in his Providence would put to these arbitrary
and extrajudicial Proceedings; and it was not long ere they were strangely
delivered: The manner was thus: On the 2d of April, 1662. the Person that was
employed (as I have showed you before) to carry the Packet of Sham-Letters
from Sir J. P. to one Cole of Martly, acquaints his Brother how he came by the
said Packet: His Brother, immediately upon this Discovery, repairs to Mrs.
Yarranton, and informs her of it. She went to Worcester, and prevails with the
Marshal's Maid to deliver a Paper to her Husband, wherein was a Relation of the
whole Matter. This being done, Mr. Yarranton having perused this Paper, and
being thereby let into the knowledge of this malicious Design, he ordered six
Actions to be immediately entered against some of those that brought him to
Prison. And the next day, (being Saturday) in the time of high Market, he took
two Bed-staffs in his hands, and broke all the Windows in the Chamber where he
was confined, and which looked toward the Street: Upon which the Town was in
an Uproar, and a Multitude of People crowded before the Chamber, The George in
the High Street.
in the broad Street, to know what the Matter was. He told them, how he and
others were maliciously and wrongfully imprisoned, that he could give an
account of the Contrivance of this Plot, and who were the Contrivers of it. On
the Wednesday following, the Lord Lieutenant, and six of his Deputies, came to
the Town, and sent one Fulk Fisher (an Officer of theirs) to Mr. Yarranton, to
know the reason of his misbehaving himself in the place of his Confinement: He
sent them word, He did it on purpose, that he might be brought the sooner
before them, to make a discovery of the Presbyterian Plot, which was so much
talked of, the which he was ready and willing to do. After some Debate between
the Lord Lieutenant and his Deputies about this Matter, it was at last
resolved, that Yarranton should be brought before them; which was done. There
he offered to discover to them the whole Plot, how it was laid, and by whom,
and for what ends: He desired that the Doors might be set open, for he had many
Friends and Witnesses without: He prayed also, that he might have Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and he would write down the whole Matter, for Words might be wrested to
other Intents than they are spoken. This was a while debated, but in Reason it
could not be denied; and Mr. Yarranton no sooner began to write, but the Lord
Lieutenant, and Sir J. P. left the Room, and went down the Back-Stairs, and
after followed the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants; only Esquire Bromly of Holt
stayed behind. He (it seems) was no way privy to this Design, and told Mr.
Yarranton, that he was sorry with all his Heart to see such things practiced,
to the disturbance of honest Men, and the dishonor of the Government. The
Enemy having thus fairly quitted the Field, Mr. Yarranton demanded of the
Marshal, what he had further now to say to him: The Marshal only made it his
Request, that he would not trouble him for holding him so long in restraint,
forasmuch as he was a poor Man, and had many Children, and did only follow the
Orders of his Superiors in what he had done: Mr. Yarranton told him, he did
freely forgive him.

These dangerous Plotters being now at liberty, they depart every Man to his
home, and were never prosecuted, or further questioned about this Matter. There
was no need of that, for the Contrivers had now obtained their End, which was,
To possess the King and Parliament, that it was absolutely necessary to make
some severe Act against this restless Sort of Men, who not contented with the
King's gracious Pardon, were always plotting to disturb the Government.
Accordingly, when the Parliament met together, on the 20th of November, 1661.
(to which time they were Adjourned) the King makes a Speech to them, wherein
are these Words:

My Lords and Gentlemen, I am sorry to find that the general Temper and
Affections of the Nation are not so well composed as I hoped they would have
been, after so signal Blessings of God Almighty upon us all, and after so great
Indulgence and Condescensions from me toward all Interests. There are many
wicked Instruments still, as active as ever, who labor night and day to
disturb the Public Peace, and to make all People jealous of each other. It
will be worthy of your Care and Vigilance, to provide proper Remedies for
Diseases of that kind; and if you find new Diseases, you must study new
Remedies. Let us not be discouraged; if we help one another, we shall with
God's Blessing master all our Difficulties. Those which concern Matters of
Religion, I confess to you, are too hard for me; and therefore I do recommend
them to your Care and Deliberation, which can best provide for them. I shall
not need to recommend, or put you in mind of the good Correspondence that ought
to be kept between you for the Good of your selves and me, and the whole
Kingdom; and I may tell you, it is necessary for us all. You will find, whoever
does not love me, does not love you; and they who have no reverence for you,
have little kindness for me.

Thus far his Majesty proceeded, and from this last Passage of his it may be
understood, that they are none of the King's Friends, nor are they of his mind,
who in Words or Writing do cast Contempt on the Parliament. No sooner was the
Parliament in their Geers, but Sir J. P. one of the Knights for Worcestershire,
with open mouth, informs them of a dangerous Presbyterian Plot that was on
foot, and that many of the chief Conspirators were now in Prison at Worcester.
The like Information was given by some of their Members, that served for
Oxfordshire, Herefordshire, Staffordshire, and other Places. Yea, this was the
general Vogue, as may appear by the printed Pamphlets of those Times. Hereupon
a Bill of Uniformity in the Church is excogitated, and carried on in the
Parliament, and past that Session. Few durst be so hardy now, as to make
opposition against it, tho I am informed it was carried at last but by two or
three Votes; but of that I am not certain. However, out it comes, and above two
thousand Ministers are ejected upon it, which caused the greatest Division that
ever was in a Kingdom, and was the Foundation of all those Miseries we have
since felt or feared. Here the Jesuit (who stood behind the Curtain) gained his
Point, and the unthinking Episcopal Man was the Cat's Foot that he made use of;
so zealous were the Prelatical Clergy in promoting this Bill, that they spared
for no Pains or Cost to effect it.

I could wish it were a little enquired into, what Leases the Dean and Chaplain
of Westminster, granted of the Manor of A. betwixt the 8th of May, and the
20th of November, 1661. unto any Person or Persons, that may be justly
suspected to have a hand in contriving or carrying on the aforementioned
Sham-Plot. Also that the like Enquiry might be made of the Grants of the Dean
and Chapter of Worcester, about the same time, and that it may be made appear
in whose Name such Leases were taken, and what they paid for them.

I have done with the first part of this Presbyterian Sham-Plot, when I have
added a Passage or two more concerning Mr. Yarranton. As soon as he was
discharged (as before) he goes up to London, and prevails with the Lord of
Bristol, to acquaint the King with the great Wrong he had received, and with
the wicked Contrivance of some of his Ministers by Sham-Plots, to divide the
King from his People, and his People from one another. Hereupon an order of
Council was directed to the the Deputy Lieutenants of Worcestershire, that were
then in and about London, to appear before the Council, and to give an account
of this matter, They seemed to clear themselves from being concerned therein,
and desired such as were in the Country might be consulted; the next post they
inform their Brethren in the Country, how Matters stood before the Council, and
that the Lord of Bristol did patronize Mr. Yarranton, upon this Sir J. W. one
of the Deputy Lieutenants, hastens up to London, and brings with him one Hales
Now living in Tenbury.
(an Attorney, his Kinsman and Tenant.) Which Hales, with the Constable of St
Mary Overies, and one Halborne a Water-man (now living in Pepper-Ally in
Southwark) arrested Mr. Yarranton (when he was bowling in Winchester-Park) for
High Treason, and being farther assisted by some of the Horse Guards then in
Southwark, conveyed the said Yarranton in Halborn's Boat to White Hall; where
he was that Night in Custody, but on the Morrow, the Earl of Bristol sent the
Kings Privy Seal to a Friend of Mr. Yarranton's, who brought it to him, wherein
it was declared, that it was the King's Pleasure he should travel where he
listed, and not be molested by any Person whatsoever, without a special'
Warrant from the King. A little after Sir Kenelm Digby (Chancellor to the
Queen Mother) sends for Mr. Yarranton, and was very earnest to know from him
the bottom of this pretended Plot. He relates the whole matter from the
beginning to the end to Sir Kenelm Digby, upon which Sir Kenelm produced two
Letters from Paris, signifying, that they were of Opinion in France, that we in
England were taking one another by the Throat again, which inclined that King
to join with the Dutch against the English, which after a little time came to
pass. These two Letters are to be seen, as being lodged in a safe Hand, after
the death of Sir Kenelm by his Executor. Mr Yarranton seeing how Matters went
in London, resolved to return again into the Country, where he prosecuted Major
Wild, and others for imprisoning of him wrongfully, but within six Months after
a Design is laid by some of the Criminals in the former Sham-Plot, to subborn
Persons to swear against him, that he had spoken Treasonable Words against the
King and Government, the Witnesses were one Dainty, (a Mountebank, formerly an
Apothecary in Darby) who afterward acknowledged that he had 5 l. for his
pains; the other Witness lived in Wales, and went by two Names. This was done
at the Assizes in Worcester; the Bill being found by the Grand Jury, Twisden
then Judge.
Mr. Yarranton put himself upon his Trial, and tho he did not except against
any one of his Jury, yet upon a full hearing of the Case they presently
acquitted him, which was a great Disappoinment to the designing Gentlemen. The
Clarke the of Peace (Mr. Parker) and the Officers belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Court, were not a little disgusted; for now the Sham-Plot was
discovered, which had brought a great deal of Grist to their Mills, for tho the
Innocent Papists were connived at, the turbulent Fanatics were punsh'd by
wholesale, both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Court.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I know you did expect from me, that I should have given you an Account of the
particulars of the several Transactions as to the Shamplot, which was acted in
Warwick, Gloucester, Hereford, Salop, Stafford, Cheshire, and Lancashire, both
as to the Persons imprisoned, the day when, and by whom, and how it was managed
by the Plotters, but I must beg your Excuse: for that Matter, and all its
wicked Intents, and what Evil it has been the occasion of propagating in this
Nation, I understand is ready for the Press, being faithfully collected by
several Persons who were great Sufferers in that Affair.

FINIS.

