THE PROOF OF A Good Preacher.

The right Art of Hearing.

That good Counsel, is seldom well taken.

That wilful Offenders, are as witless as wicked.

With An Apology for wholesome Truth, how distasteful soever.

By J.F.

LONDON, Printed by William Leybourn. 1661.

Good Counsel, seldom well taken: WITH An Apology for wholesome Truth, be it
never so untoothsome, etc.
SECT. I.
PHilosophy teaches, that admonitions and corrections are the chiefest offices
of love: That it is the only true love, which to profit and do good, fears
not to hurt and offend: That to connive at our friends faults, is to make them
our own. That sharp reprehension is the healing of the soul; and that love to
the soul, is the very soul of love. Whence Euripides exhorts men to get such
friends, as would not spare to displease them. Whence Scipio the Elder, when
his friends for so doing turned his enemies, was able to say, I have given my
enemies as great cause to love me, as my friends. And indeed he that loves not
such a friend, hates himself. And commonly, he that will not tell us of our
faults, will be very ready to tell others of them: whereas one that is
faithful, will speak of our faults to our face, of our virtues behind our
backs. But see farther the sweet fruit of sharp reprehension; Suppose one
should be stung by a Be, (when asleep) whereby he is delivered from a Serpent,
which otherwise had stung him to death: Has he cause to complain? And not to
chide a friend, lest we offend him, is to let him drown, rather than catch him
by the hair. Wherefore give me such a friend as Photion, who when a friend of
his would have cast himself away, suffered him not, saying; I was made thy
friend to this purpose. All which is found Divinity, neither wants it
Scripture-seal to confirm it. Not to admonish our brother, is to hate him, as
the Holy Ghost witnesses, Levit. 19.17. But to scorn our brother should
admonish us, is more to hate our selves; in that open rebuke is better than
secret love. And for that the very wounds of a lover are faithful, and better
than the kisses of an enemy, Prove. 27.5, 6. Yea, experience teaches, that no
friend is so commodious in this case as an enemy; because he tells us of that,
which otherwise we should never be so happy as to hear of.

Nevertheles, resolved sinners scorn reproof: Admonition to them, is like goads
to such as are mad already: or like pouring oil down the chimney, which may set
the house on fire, but never abate the heat; which is not for want of
ignorance: for by refusing to hear in this case, they become (like Amaziah)
wilful murderers of their own souls, as wise Solomon affirms, his words are,
He that refuses admonition is brutish, and destroys his own soul, Prove.
12.1. and 15.32. yea, he goes further, and says, A man that hardens his neck
when he is reproved, shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured, Prove.
29.1. and 1.24, 25, 26. of which you have most remarkable and dreadful
examples, 1 Samuel 2.25. 2 Chronicles. 25.16, 20.

Sect. 2. Nevertheless, how few are there so wise, as to take admonition well?
For, Reprove a scorner (that is, a fool) and he will hate thee; reprove a wise
man, and he will love thee, Prove 9.8. To which we may add Prove. 22.3. A wise
man foreseeth the evil, (that is the evil of Hell, says Bernard) and
preventeth it; but fools go on and are punished.

Now that these Bruits and Soul-destroyers, may the better be known to
themselves and others, and the greatness of their folly and madness, together
with what a world of them there are amongst us, (for to be wise, according to
wise Solomon's description, is the portion but of a few, as daily experience
witnesses.) I will paint them out in a small table, or map; and so expose them
to view.

In the first place you shall know them by this mark: A man no sooner tells them
of a fault, but it works in their brains as yeest in a barrel, until they have
requited their Admonisher with a mischief; being like gunpowder, to which you
no sooner give fire, but they fly in your face. Admonition may move them to
choler, never to amendment. Who when they have heard an untoothsom truth, like
waters after a tempest, are full of working and swelling against their
Admonisher. We read that in the Law of jealousies, if the suspected wife were
guilty, that drank of the bitter waters of trial, she would presently swell, if
otherwise, she was well enough. And it is a sure sign the Horse is gauled,
that stirs too much when he is touched; so when they swell against their
Reprehender, and hiss like Serpents, if we trouble their nests never so
little, you may justly conclude them guilty persons. For no greater sign of
innocence, when we are accused, than mildness, as we see in Joseph, Genesis
39.17.18. And Susannah, Susan. ver. 42, 43. And Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.15, 16.
Neither is there a greater symptom of guiltiness, than our breaking into
choler, when we have any thing laid to our charge: witness Cain, Genesis 4.9.
that Hebrew which struck his fellow, Exodus 2.13, 4. Saul, 1 Samuel 20.32, 33.
Abner, 2 Samuel 3.8. Jeroboam, 1 Kin. 13.4. Ahab, 1 Kin. 22.27. Amaziah, 2 Chronicles.
25.16. Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.19. Herod the Tetrach, Luke 3.19, 20. The men of
Nazareth, Luke 4.28, 29. The Pharisees, John 8.47, 48. The High Priests and
Scribes, Luke 20.19, 20. And the like touching a man's wisdom and humility.
Plato being demanded, how he knew a wise man, answered, When being rebuked he
would not be angry, and being praised he would not be proud. And to this
accords that of the wise man, Prove* 11.2. and 19 ^1. But for one that is so
wise, there is a thousand of those fools I am to decipher, who with Balaam will
grutch to be hindered in their way to Hell, and fly upon those that oppose
their perdition: even such as think it better to fry everlastingly in a furnace
of fire and brimstone in Hell-flames, than to inherit a celestial and eternal
Kingdom, and weight of superabundant Glory in Heaven, to enjoy a Paradise of
pleasure, where are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can
ever enter into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. This is most men's
depth of brain, and thus it fares with all wilful and impenitent sinners. But
how has the Devil bewitched them? Is it possible that the reasonable soul of
man (not professedly barbarous) should be capable of such a monster? Certainly
if I did not know the truth and probate of it, by occular and experimental
demonstration from day to day, I could hardly bring my understanding to believe
it!

But to make this further appear, though I have small hope to prevail with the
parties themselves (for they that have no reason, will hear none; and he that
learns of none but himself, has a fool for his Teacher.) Guilty sinners will
swell against their reprehender, innocent souls will be cheered and cleared by
it, Numb. 5.21, 22. Resolved offenders being reproved, in stead of penitence
break into choler, fury sparkles in those eyes which should gush out with
water, and in stead of embracing the counsel, will rage at the Counselor.
Crossed wickedness proves desperate, and in stead of yielding, seeks for
revenge of its own sins upon others uprightness: whereas if another simple
fidelity shows it self in reproving the honest-hearted, he loves his Monitor so
much the more, by how much the more he smarteth, allowing of truth as well when
it hurts him, as when it helps him.

But unsound flesh loves to be stroked, the least roughness puts it into a
rage; a festered conscience will not endure a drawing plaster, a putrid and
scabbed limb delights to be scratcht and rubbed, foul faces would have false
glasses: Diomedes must have a crooked shoe for his wry foot: Caligula must be
adored as a God, forsooth, though he live like a Devil, poisoning his uncle,
and deflowring all his sisters. Thorns must be touched with a gentle hand, not
grasped; these ulcers must be no further searched into, than the dead flesh
reaches, for if you but touch them to the quick, you shall quickly hear of it,
and be sure to smart for it.

Sect. 3. But to bring this home to you of this place, with whom my business
lies; for hitherto I have but spoken in the air, as the Apostle speaks, or
only paved a way to my intended matter, or at uttermost but given you a
Preparative before hand, as Physicians do to their Patients, that their physic
may work the more kindly, your Pastor has for many years preached in the
Metropolitan City, where they are more civilized and better bred, without any
clamor; yea, with much approbation: for they enterteined him as Lot did those
Angels, that came to fetch him out of Sodom: but you enterteine him as
coursely, as the Ammonites did David's messengers. Nor did the Devil ever so
rage in this rude place, as he has done since his preaching has awakened your
consciences, and by the looking-glass of the Law, and light of the Gospel,
shown you the deformity and filthiness of your souls. A notable argument that
Satan fears he shall be routed, and his Kingdom more shaken in your quarters,
than has fallen out in former times, or by the preaching of any that have gone
before him, for he daily rages more and more amongst you. As for instance, at
first he was opposed by a few simple Sectaries, and that was no small honor to
him, as Hiram told Austin in the like case. But now his preaching against
drunkenness, deceitfulnes, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, ignorance, formality, and
such other common sins, has brought all the parish about his ears; not alone
the wit-foundered Drunkard, but the civil Justiciary, the formal Hypocrite, the
ignorant Animal, and all sorts of impenitent sinners. And why? But because the
virtue and efficacy of Gods word, which is quick and powerful, and sharper
than any two-edged sword, to divide between the soul and spirit, joints and
marrow, as it is Heb. 4.12. has discovered and made manifest to your selves
and others, the very secrets and most inward intents of your hearts. Insomuch
that your consciences are forced to bear witness against your selves, that you
are the parties to whom he speaks, as if he named you, or each of you in
particular, as you have an instance, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Heb. 4.12. whence your
guilty consciences suggest, that he aims at you in particular, though he names
none, when indeed it is only the prerogative and spirituallity of the Word
above all other writings, to discover the hearts, and speak home to the
consciences of all that hear it delivered with power and authority. As for the
Messenger, the truth of his heart gives him boldness to profess before him who
only knows it, that he strives against no man but his strife, malignes no man
but his malice, envies no man but his envy, as Hierome speaks. Yea, he could
be more glad to see any man's (even his greatest enemies) amendment, than his
punishment. This (I say) is the genuine reason, why hundreds of you fret, and
chase, and fume, and swell, and storm, and rage, and are ready to burst again
when you hear him. Your sins and deformities are so discovered and detected,
your presumptuous confidence of being Christians good enough, and of your going
to Heaven so questioned, that your peace is disturbed, and you will be revenged
of some body.

It is observable, that when our Savior sent forth his Apostles to preach
abroad in the world, having first taught them the way, his words to them were,
Behold, I send you forth, as sheep amongst wolves, Matthew. 10.16. Are not you
these wolves? not only wolvish, but mere wolves; yes, you are, and will be,
until the Gospel shall have wrought a change in your hearts and natures, Hebr.
10.16. Acts 15.9. and 20.29. Again, Matthew. 7.6. he says, Cast not your pearls
before swine, lest they tread them under their feet, and turning again all to
reut you. Are not you those unreasonable beasts and swine? If not, who are?
Yea, you are more brutish than a swine, or any other unreasonable creature.
For whereas Christ by his Ministers, would reconcile you to God, as Joab did
Absalom to David, by the woman of Tekoah; you cry they come to torment you
before the time, Matthew. 8.29. Your case is just like his in the Gospel, that
called himself Legion, who having been possessed with Devils a long time, was at
length very loath to part with his guests: yea, he thought himself tormented,
when Christ came to cast out them, and save him, Mark 1.24. Luke 8.28.

Sect. 4. Now what course do you take to be revenged of him? For this makes you
hate him above measure, mis-construe his actions and intentions, rail on him,
slander him, curse him, withstand and contrary his doctrine, watch for his
halting, combine together and lay plots how you may do him the most mischief,
which is all you are able to do: for else you would bring him before the
Magistrate, imprison, smite, wound, and put him to death, as the Jews served
Christ, as I could show you from a world of testimonies and examples out of the
Word. See only John 16.2, 33. Matthew. 24.9. Matthew. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 12.51,
52, 53. and 21.16, 17: But our comfort is, you have not so much authority as
malice; resembling the Serpent Porphyrus, which abounds with poison, but can
hurt none, for want of teeth. Though your punishment shall be never the less;
for good and evil thoughts, and desires, in Gods account, are good and evil
works, and shall so be judged in that Court of Justice where is no partiality.

But since you cannot do as you would, you will do what you can; as it fared
with Zoilus that common slanderer, or as it does with the Devil, Revel. 12.15.
For if the Law binds your hands, yet you will be smiting with your tongues; and
if the Law so keeps you in awe, that you dare not smite him on the mouth, as
the High Priest did Paul, Acts 23.2. Yet you will do what you dare, you will
smite him with the mouth, as Ziba did honest Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16.3. And the
like touching his maintenance, because you cannot out him of his living, you
will defraud and rob him of his means and livelihood, and neither pay him a
penny your selves, nor suffer others, so far as you can help it, which is a plot
to pluck up all religion by the roots: For how should our Pastors feed our
souls, if we feed not their bodies? How should the lamp burn, if we take away
the holy oil that should maintein it? and in case it burn not, there will be
but a dark house. So that to expect that Ministers should preach without
maintenance, is as if you should shut a bird into a cage, give her no meat, and
yet bid her sing.

Never the less it pleases you, that you can (as you think) displease him, and
withal pleasure your selves in saving your silver, little dreaming what you
do; for look but narrowly into it, and you shall see that this is not only
persecution, theft, sacrilege, murder of bodies and souls, of provoking God
to send a famine of his Word, and the like: but you become by it guilty of high
treason against God, in thus using his Ambassador, and against Christ and all
his members, as I have elsewhere made manifest. Though it is wicked enough for
you to impeach his credit, asperse his spotless name, and take away his
reputation, that so none else may hear him, or regard what he delivers, which
is a wickeder plot than your blind souls are able to discern. Besides, A good
name (says Solomon) is better than a good ointment: and to be chosen above
great riches, Prove. 22.1.

Indeed his life is so well known, that all the harm you do him is, but as a
candle to a white wall: that may much black it (among such Sensualists as your
selves) but cannot burn it, though that be too much, for a man's good name is
like a milk white ball, that exceedingly gathers soil even with tossing.

Nor can he expect to fare better, so long as he tarries with you, where Satan
has his throne, in a place that mostly consists of Swearers, Drunkards, and
Drink-sellers. He has by his powerful preaching raised the Devil in many of
you, but it will be hard laying him again: yea, once to expect it (when God
has given men over to their own lusts) were an effect of frenzy, not of hope.
For can he with Crabronius, be ever pudling in a wasps nest, and think to
escape their stings? Or be still blowing in the dust, and not endanger his
eyes? It is no way possible. For, he that touches pitch shall be defiled
therewith. He that reproves a scorner, purchases to himself shame: and he
that rebukes the wicked, gets himself a blot, Prove. 9.7, 8. See Jer. 18.

Though I speak not this to dis-hearten him, whom God has placed over you: for
Gods glory we are bound to redeem with our own lives. And a conscionable
Minister is like David, who would venture upon a Bear, rather than lose a Lamb.
Or Jacob, who would endure heat by day, and frost by night, rather than neglect
his flocks. Or Moses, who would fight with odds, rather than the Cattle should
perish with thirst. Only a Balaam wants this mercy.

Nor can I wish him to spare you ever the more, by delivering himself in a
gentler tone; as you, like the men of Bengala, would have only words of down
and honey, have him speak nothing but pure ro^es, preach unto you Peace, peace,
and prophecy of wine and strong drink, then should he be a welcome Prophet to
you: But this were to fulfill the proverb, Like Pastor like people, Hos. 4.9.
Yea, this were, for the blind to lead the blind, that both might fall i^to the
ditch together, Luke 6.39. Alas, the fault lies not in the Word, nor in his
delivering it, but in the wickedness of your hearts that are the hearers: who
like the Spider, will suck poison from the self same flower that the Be does
honey. Nor will any truth (be it never so untoothsome) offend any, but ill
minds, Michah 2.7. Yea, even the same words that are lansets to a bad man's
conscience, will be as balm to penitent sinners. The Word being like some
mighty wind, that bears over tall Elms or Cedars, with the same blast that it
raises a stooping Reed, Exodus 20.21.

Sect. 5. Every good line of Gods Word, adds sinew to the virtuous mind, and
withal heals that vice which would be springing in it: The very judgments of
God to a good man, are sweeter than the honey and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10.
But alas, the same report, wherewith the spirit of Rahab melts, hardens the
King of Jericho, Josh. 2. Sergius Paulus was converted, Elymas obdurated at the
same Sermon, Acts 13. Yea, even the same face of the Judge, without any inward
alteration, is seen with terror to the guilty, with joy and confidence by the
oppressed innocent, The same rod that brought plagues to the Egyptians* brings
deliverance to Israel.

But I dare refer the case to thine own conscience to determine, (if the
custom of sin, and the god of this world has not totally blinded thee) where
the fault lies, and who is to be blamed in this particular? Is the Physician to
be blamed for the pain of his Patient, or the disease? The Surgeon or the
wound, which he endeavors by all means to cure? Yea, what is the genuine
reason, why the worst men and members of a Parish evermore regard a good
Minister least? complain of his bitterness, and seek by all means to remove
him? Is it not because they are feet, and legs, and thighs, and arms out of
joint, and so cannot endure the touch of the Surgeons hand, and the acrimony
of his medicines. Alas, every good Physician h^d rather cure a disease by sleep
and diet, than by Scammony and Castorium: but an intemperate sick man makes a
cruel Physician And in case the disease be desperate, he must use the extremity
of physic. Nothing will ease the Pluresie, but letting of blood: and to such
as are sick of a dead Apoplexy, they are forced to give a double quantity of
physic, or their faculties will not be awakened. Which is the very case of
these desperate sinners, who if they wanted not brains, would in stead of
complaining be thankful. The Physician and Surgeon heals us not without
pain, and yet we reward them. Yea, had any of you but a leg, or an arm
putrefied and corrupt, you would even give money, and think your selves
beholding too, to have them cut off, because it is the only way and means to
preserve the whole body. And if so, what love and thanks can be too much, that
is expressed to them who would (would you give them leave) pluck you out of
Satan's clutches, and bring you to life eternal? Nor can he ever be thankful to
God; who is not thankful to the Instrument, or means, by whom God does, or
would do him good.

Besides, it were a breach of Justice, not to proportion the rebuke to the
crime: For, for a Minister to use gentle reprehension, in case of capital
offenses, that is in case of thefts, rapines, sacriledges, adulteries, and
incests, to say to his people, as Eli to his sons, Why did you so? Is no other
than to shave that head which deserves cutting off. For as it is with ill
humors in the body, that a weak dose does but stir and anger them, not purge
them out; yea, if physic be not strong enough to purge out choler, it
increases choler; the humors it would have purged and expelled (if it had
been strong enough) it inflameth, exasperateth and sharpeneth. And as the Sun
in the Springtime breeds agues, and other distempers, because it stirs
humors and does not waste them; so it fares with sins in the soul. An easy
and gentle reproof does but encourage wickedness, and make it think it self so
slight, as that rebuke imports; which is to patronize evil in stead of
reproving it. And experience shows, that cold Preachers make bold sinners.
However, such being like ill Archers, that draw not their arrows up to the
head, seldom convert these sinners.

Nevertheless, resolute sinners would have dissolute Teachers; would have the
Law according to their lives, not their lives according to the Law. That
pleas^th them which is sweet to the sense, not that which is wholesome to the
conscience, as the Holy Ghost informs us, Isa. 30.10. 1 Kings 12.8. Mich. 2.11.
Like wanton children, they care not to be mended, but to be commended: He that
praises them, pleases them.

But woe to such Preachers, as shall heal the hurt of these people with sweet
words, saying, Peace, peace, and give them comfort (as Jezabel did Ahab, 1
Kings 21.5, 6, 7.) when they rather deserve a curse, Jer. 8.11. For this is no
other than gilded treason, like that of Hazael to his Master, who told him
with his mouth that he should recover, when on the morrow he stifled him with
his hand, and a wet cloth, 2 Kings 8.14, 15. Whence the Holy Ghost brands all
flattering Preachers, that sow pillows, for false Prophets, Jer. 8.11. And
indeed it is but a Mountebank trick, to heal an ulcer, and leave in the core. A
good Physician, either for soul or body, first tells the state of the disease
with its symptoms, and then prescribes; and in prescribing, first pulls down
the body with purgatives, and then raises it with cordials. And take this for
a rule, such as fear God, and are Ministers of his sending, will think is better
to lose men's favors than their souls, and be sure to discharge his conscience
from the burden of any ones blood, Ezekiel. 3.18. and 33.8. Yea, an ingenious
Patient should be so wise as to know, that the stomach should rather be pleased
than the palate: and experience tells us, that those things (for the most part)
that are least pleasing, are most wholesome. Rue is an herb most bitter to the
taste, yet in regard of the virtue which is in it, we usually call it Herb of
grace. And Physicians find, that though Mithridate, of all other Electuaries it
be the most distasteful, yet of all others it is the most wholesome. And so it
fares touching spiritual truths. Whence a good Preacher cares not so much to
stroke the car, as to strike the conscience: being like a good Physician, who
gives sharp medicines, and bitter potions, that he may make sho^t diseases, and
procure sound health. The true method of preaching, and the likeliest way to
undeceive the deceived, and (with blessing from above) to pluck sinners out of
Satan's snares is: for a Minister to deal with his hearers, as the Prophet did
by Hazael, when he plainly told him the abominable wickedness of his heart, and
what evil (even beyond belief} he should shortly do or execute, had he been
wise enough to have been warned thereby. Or as Nathan did by David, when he so
cunningly made him pronounce sentence of death against himself. Or as Jonah did
by the Nin^vites, when with that short thundering Sermon of eight words, he
converted that great City. Or as Peter by his Converts, when he told them they
were the men, that had crucified the Lord of life. Or John Baptist by Herod,
and all that came unto him. Or as Christ by the woman of Samaria, when he so
represented the very thoughts of her heart unto her conscience, that she was
forced to confess, He has told me all things that eve^ I did. Or as he did
with Saul, when he spoke to him from Heaven, which wo^ds made him tremble, and
fall to the earth with astonishment. Which makes one of the Fathers say, that
The crown of Preachers is the tears of their hearers. And Saint Basil, that
Sha^p reprehension is the healing of the soul. And Chrysostom say to his
hearers, If I make you smart give me the more thanks for it. Nay, says Busil,
It may well be feared, that Ministers open not the word aright, when wicked men
kick not against it. And Luther was of that judgment, tha^ he thought if
Ministers should preach the word as they ought, they should stir up all the
Furies of Hell against themselves.

Sect. 6. Now what is the reason, why down right truth is so unpleasing to
carnal minds? when none can deny, but it is by far the more wholesome. It is
this, All men love the light as it shines, but as it discovers and dir^cts, the
most of men hate it None so bad, but they can away with pleasing truths, and
promis^s of mercy. Or let the Minister walk in generals, and labor more to
fill the head with knowledge, than the heart with grace; to please the sense,
than speak to the conscience, by driving an application close home to them in
particular, touching some one sin of theirs (which is the soul of preaching) so
long they will like him; yea, he is a fair and good Church*man, a great
Scholar. But let him act the part of Boanerges, thunder out the judgments of
God against sinners, let him do as God commands Ezekiel to do, Ezekiel. 4.4.
Answer them according to their Idols, preach to their necessities, press them
to holy duties, reprove them for their unholy practices, make known to them
what evil consciences they have; then they turn their backs upon him, and hate
him to the death; as Ahab did Eliah and Michaiah; Herod and Herodias, John
Baptist, the Jews, our Savior; and the Galatians, Paul. See Amos 5.10. yea,
they will say, Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not meet that
he should live. The case of all incorrigible, and cauterized sinners; as well
the covetous as the riotous; the civil, such as seek to fill their chests, as
those that are all for satisfying their lusts, For let a Minister but rowze and
raise them out of their security, saying, Awake thou that sleep, and stand
up from the dead, all are instantly about his ears. Then the wit-foundered
Drunkard cries out, saying, He subverts the state of the world, and troubles
our City; then the covetous Oppressor is ready to tell the Prophet (as the
Sodomites Lot) Away hence, he is come alone as a stranger, and shall he judge
and rule? then the whole Rabble (furiously raging together against the Lord,
and against his Anointed) conclude peremptorily, that a piece of a pulpit, and
half a Benefice, is too much for such an unquiet spirit, such a
Fire-???slinger. As let Paul but touch Demetrius his Copyhold, preach down his
profit, he and all of like occupation will rore out of measure, Acts 19.28.
Wherein they show as great policy, as did the Sodomites, who made haste to
turn out Lot and his family, that fire and brimstone might make haste to
destroy them.

A guilty conscience loves application as dearly as a dog loves a cudgel. Sore
eyes cannot endure the light of the Sun, nor Bankrupts the sight of their
counting-books* nor deformed faces of the true glass. A man were as good take
an Elephant by the tooth, or seek to rob a Bear of her whelps, as go about to
make them better. For let a Minister charge them from God, like rusty or
ill-wrough^ pieces, they will recoyl in his face; and like Serpents, not only
be deaf to his charming, but turn their tails to sting him. Wherein they
resemble the mad man, that wounded his Physician, while he was administering
physic to him for his recovery. They more seek for a rag to cover their sins,
than for a plaster to heal them: as it fared with David, while he slept in that
foul sin of adultery, 2 Samuel 11.5, 6, etc.

Now if they are so startled and terrified at the Ministers telling them of one
or a few sins, what will they do when Satan, and the Searcher of hearts, shall
lay open all the sins that ever they have committed, and spread them before
them? If it be so dreadful to hear of what they shall suffer, if they repent
not, how terrible will it be to feel it? The Law wasp-like stings shrewdly, but
Satan that Hornet will sting worse a great deal. But if men will be warned by
the former, they may prevent the latter: only these want that we commonly call
reason; therefore, like children and cowards, they rather shut their eyes, and
choose to feel the blow, than to see and endeavor to avoid it. Owoful wretches!
that had rather be everlastingly damned for their sins hereafter, than endure
to hear of them now, to their eternal comfort. But I hope better things of some
amongst so great a number.

Gods truth, if you mark it, would cry down men's sins, as preaching would have
done Demetrius his trade: and therefore ^o marvel, if the Tradesmen of
iniquity are up in arms against the Gospel, as Demetrius was against Paul. And
did not the Gospel cross their sins, they would not cross the Gospel: but the
waves do not beat or rore any where so much, as at the bank that restrains them.

The Pharisees could not endure Jesus, because he came to break their customs,
Luke 6.2. The Masters of the Pythonesse, Acts 16.21. objected this against Paul
and Silas, that they did teach contrary to their customs. For this cause was
that uprore at Ephesus, Acts 19.26. to 31. Paul had never become their enemy,
but for telling them the truth, and dealing so plainly and roundly with them.
And why did more than forty of the Jews bind themselves with a curse, neither
to eat nor drink till they had killed him? Acts 23. not for the evils they
found in him, but for the vices he reproved in them. By all which it appears,
that obstinate sinners are as witless as wicked: and that they would, if they
durst, deal with their faithful Pastors, as the Jews did by Stephen, who in
their blind zeal were so furious and merciless, that they put him to death, for
showing them the way to eternal life, and stoned him for a Blasphemer against
God and his Law, who was a man full of faith, and power, and of the Holy Ghost,
Acts 7.55, etc. It has ever been the manner of wickedness, to be headstrong
in the pursuit of its own courses, impatient of opposition, cruel in revenge of
the opposers. The great spite and spleen therefore, that men bear to the Word,
must be wreaked upon the Minister, he must be hated, outed, and persecuted:
yea, if they durst, they would stone him to death, as the Jews did Stephen: for
as their hearts brast for anger, as they gnashed at him with their teeth when
they heard him, Acts 7.54. so fares it with these touching their Minister. But
in the meantime, what horrible, what hellish ingratitude is this, if it be
looked upon with an impartial eye? Are not these the very worst of monsters? O
you sottish Sensualists, what can you allege for yourselves, or against your
Minister? Is he any other to you, than those three Messengers were to Lot? that
came to fetch him out of Sodom, that he might not feel the fire and brimstone
which followed, Genesis 19. Or than the Angel was to Peter, that opened the
iron-gates, loosed his bands, brought him out of prison, and delivered him from
the thraldom of his enemies? You show just as much reason in it, as if those
blind, deaf, diseased, distracted, possessed, or dead persons spoken of in the
Gospel, should have railed upon our Savior for offering to cure, restore,
dispossess, recover and raise them again. And are like those wicked, witless,
and ungrateful Jews, Judge. 15. who when God, in great love, sent Samson to
deliver them from the slavish thraldom of their enemies; they in requital bind
him, (in whom all their hope of deliverance lay) and deliver him up to those
enemies that kept them under, to the end they might slay him, and still make
slaves of them. Here is your case right: Are you not ashamed to be such Sots?
Were there ever such fools, or frenzy men did commit a greater folly? For
shame think of it before it prove too late, before you have sinned away all
hope of mercy: In the mean time, as our Savior said of his murderers,
Father, forgive give them, for they know not what they do: so may your Minister
say, adding thereto that prayer of Stephen when they stoned him: Lord, lay not
this sin to their charge, Acts 7.60.

Sect. 7. But that I may, if it be possible, fetch tears from your eyes, and
blood from your adamantine hearts, I will yet acquaint you with that which is
worse, and more considerable than all, I pray mind it: All the indignities and
wrongs that are done to Christ's Ministers and Ambassadors, redound to him; and
he that traduceth, or any way wrongs a Minister, for the discharge of his
place, his envy strikes at the image of God in him, and he so takes it, as a
world of places show. He that despises you, despises me, 1 Samuel 17.45. Isa.
^7.23. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. Revel. 16.9, 11. Psalm.
89.23. To spurn at the Messenger, is to strike at the image of God, whose
message it is. What says Paul, 1 Cor. 7.10 I have not spoken, but the Lord:
and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Acts 9.4. that he persecuted him
(though in Heaven) so they who resist any truth delivered out of the Word, do
resist God himself, and not his Messenger. But see further what you do, by what
your fellow-persecutours have done before you. With such impatience does a
gauled heart receive admonition, that when God himself came to reprove Cain for
killing his brother Abel; he had no sooner spoke these words, Where is Abel thy
brother? but he returns to God himself this churlish answer, Am I my brothers
keeper? Genesis 4.9. Again, the Scribes, Pharisees and Elders, were filled full of
madness against our Savior, and communed one with another, what they might do
to Jesus, and how they might destroy him, (the which you would also do, if he
were your Minister, and now upon earth) for being so bitter, Luke 6.11. (For if
you cannot away with the light of a candle, you would much less endure to look
upon the glorious Sun.) Now if God himself was so served, if Christ's own
doctrine could not escape persecution, no marvel if his Messengers cannot. Here
then is some comfort for your Minister, Honey out of a Lion. Nor is it his
shame to suffer what Christ suffered, nor your honor to do as Cain, Judas, and
the rest did, as Cyprian speaks.

But secondly, take notice what our Saviors counsel is to his Ministers, when
his holy precepts and prohibitions, do either harden men as the Sun hardens
clay, and cold water hot iron: or else inrage them, as a furious mastiffe-dog,
is the madder for his chain. What his counsel and method is, may be seen both
by testimonies and examples not a few. As, Cast not your pearls before swine,
Mat. 7.6. Into whatsoever city you shall enter, if they will not receive you,
go your ways out into the sreets of the same, and say, Even the very dust
which cleaves on us of your city, we wipe off against you, for a witness
unto you. Notwithstanding know this, that it shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah at the day of judgment than for you, Luke 10.10, 11, 12. Those mine
enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay
them before me, Luke 19.27.

And that this is an evident sign of one that shall eternally perish, is
plain, Pro 29.1. read the words and tremble, A man that hardens his neck
being often reproved, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. See
more Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, to 33. Whence it is the Prophet tells Amaziah, I know
that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have
not obeyed my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25.16, 20. And that the Holy Ghost, speaking of
Eli's sons, says, that They would not hearken unto, nor obey the voice of
their Father; because the Lord was determined to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2.25.
Yea, it is an observation of Livie, that when the destruction of a person, or a
Nation is destined: then the wholesome warnings both of God and man, are set at
naught. And in reason, that sin is past cure, that strives against ^he cure.
Herbs that are worse for watering, Trees that are less fruitful for dunging
and pruning, are to be rooted out, or hewn down. Even salvation it self will
not save those, that spill the potion, and sling away the plaster. When men are
the worse for Gods endeavor to better them; the best and only way is, to
leave them to their Judge. Those Beasts we cannot master, we must give up. If
Babylon will not be cured, she must be left to her self, given up to
destruction without further warning. My people would not hear my voice (says
God) and Israel would none of me, Psalm. 81. and what follows? So I gave them up
to the hardness of their hearts, and they walked in their own counsels, verse.
11, 12. All further patience would prove fruitless: so he lays by his rod to
take up his sword; as God has Messengers of wrath for them that despise the
Messengers of his love.

Sect. 8. Now to end with a word of exhortation, to as many of you as have
heard what has hitherto been delivered, (from one that is no party, and so
less subject to be partial) and that are not yet given over.

In the first place, be not any longer offended with your Pastor; for he is
appointed a Watchman over your souls, and does but discharge his office that
God has placed him in, Ezekiel. 3 17. and he should be guilty of high treason
against Christ, and the souls committed to his care, if he should do less. As
the Sentinel or Captain, that does not what he can to maintain the walls, does
what he can to betray the City The word is no other than Christ's, though
delivered by a weak Instrument. Who ever be the Crier, the proclamation is the
King of Heavens. (While it goes for man's, it is no marvel if it lie open to
despite.) So that in hating your Minister, and complaining of his bitterness,
you do as wisely and justly, as if the people should impute the cause of the
war to the Herald, or accuse the Trumpet for all that their rebellion has
brought upon them. Yea, consider who is the Author of the Word, what the cause
and ends of the Ministers delivering it; and that there is nothing can cure
your grief, but the same Word that caused it: and then thou will receive him as
an Angel of God, yea, even as Christ Jesus; as the primitive Christians did the
Apostles, Gal. 4.14. who acknowledged to owe, even themselves, to their
spiritual Pastors, Philem. 19. And would, if it had been possible, have plucked
out their own eyes, and have given the same unto them, Gal. 4.14, 15. and 6.6.

You have heard sufficiently, that this is the true method of preaching, though
it be little used; because discretion (with many) eats up well nigh all true
devotion. Their discretion and moderate stayedness, much abates of their zeal,
honesty and goodness.

Nor can there be a better argument to prove, that a Minister studies more to
profit than to please men with his wholesome counsel; than when he will not let
them sleep and snort in their sins, but cry aloud against their abominations.

I grant Corrasives are not to be used in all cases, Lenatives and Cordials are
of no less use to weak constitutions. Whence the care of every wise and able
Minister, that has skill to divide the word of God aright, must be and is, to
give to each man his due portion; comfort to whom comfort belongs, terror to
whom terror is due: observing the same rule that St. Paul did, who meeting
with an Elymas, one that resisted the truth, and labored to keep others from
it, entreats him not with fair and sweet words, as he did Agrippa, who was
hopefully coming on to embrace the truth. Wherefore the same Apostle says to
the one, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, and
enemy of all righteousness, Acts 13.10. But when he speaks to the other, it is
in a more mild, gentle, and winning tone. Or as our Savior himself used, (that
Lamb of God, who would not break the bruized reed, nor quench the smoking
flax.) As how does he multiply woe upon woe, and threaten double damnation, when
he was to deal with hard-hearted Hypocrites, Opposers of the Gospel, those
Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. And indeed, the best music is made by a
judicial correspondence of sharp and flat. Let all merciful and meal-mouthed
Preachers, such as flatter sin and flout holiness, such whose scope of their
preaching is but to feed the people with hopes, though they give them no
grounds for it: that Heaven shall meet them at their last hour, be their
condition never so wretched; which is the reason that most men walk in the
broad way, and yet every man thinks to enter in at the straight gate. Let
these, I say, take notice of this. As also scorners of their teachers and
Instructors, and more of their godly instruction: then will they love where and
what they now hate, and hate where and what they now love. But you have no
cause to complain of either extreme: for in the Sermons, against which you
except, there is matter of instruction, of reprehension, of consolation, of
exhortation; for the ignorant, for the sinful, for the faithful, for the
despairing soul and drooping spirit: not Gospel without Law, nor Law without
Gospel: but a sweet composition of severity and mercy, wherein Law and Gospel
meet, as Moses and Christ met upon the Mount: the one to direct your obedience,
the other to answer for your disobedience, if you will but repent and turn unto
God, with such Christian moderation, as may argue zeal without malice, and
desire to win souls, no will to gaul them. For as Saul's servants did not only
tell him that he had an evil spirit, but withal told him a remedy, and helped
him to the party that gave him ease, 1 Samuel 16.16, 18. So your Pastor, with a
discovery of your sins, shows you a means of cure and recovery for your souls.
Yea, do but submit, and the very same Word (like the sword of Achilles) will
heal again, whom it has wounded. Whereas if you forthwith fly from your
Admonisher, it is as if one that is launsed should fly from his Chirurgian,
before his wound can be bound up.

Sect. 9. Again, slight not him whom God has placed over you, lest hereafter,
when you lie gasping on your deathbeds, and come to a sight and sense of your
sad condition you wish; Oh that I had now but the opportunity, to converse with
such a Minister; as Saul slighted Samuel while he lived, but would fain have
heard and conversed with him, when he was dead. A case which often falls out,
for when godless persons are in any distress, they still pray the people of God
to pray for them: and commonly those too, whom they have most slighted, hated,
and abused. For the Oppressor is in no man's mercy, but his whom he has
trampled upon; and injuries done us on earth, give us power in Heaven.
Whereupon Jeroboams hand being dried up, for stretching it out against the
Prophet, he sueth to the man of God, saying, I beseech thee pray unto the Lord
thy God, and make intercession for me, that my hand may be restored unto me,
and the man of God besought the Lord, and the Kings hand was restored, 1 Kings
13.4, 6. And thus it fared between the Israelites and Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.19.
between Miriam and Moses, Numb. 12*13. Thus when the Lords wroth was kindled
against Eliphaz and his two friends, nothing would appease the same, but the
prayer of Job whom they had so contemned, Job 42.7, 8. Thus Simon the Sorcerer
prays Peter to pray for him, Acts 8.24. Yea, of whom did Dives, being
tormented in Hell flames, expect and seek for ease, but from Lazarus whom
lately before he had despised, Luke 16.24. For though the wicked scorn and
despise the godly in their prosperity, yet in their distress they only are set
by for advice, and to pray unto God for them, who are more ready to solicit
God for their mortallest enemies and persecutours, than they to desire it, be
it at the time when they wrong them most, witness Stephen when they stoned him,
Act. 7.60. And our Savior Christ when they crucified him, Luke 23.34. Yea,
they account it a sin, to cease praying for their worst enemies, 1 Samuel 12.23.
To all which I might add, how such as have wronged and persecuted the servants
of God, are not seldom forced to confess their own folly, wickedness, and
unthankfulness; the Godlies superlative goodness, etc. As Laban did to Jacob,
Genes. 30.27. and Pharaoh to Moses, Exodus 9.27, 28. and again chap. 10.16, 17.
and Saul to David, saying, I have sinned, I have done foolishly, and have erred
exceedingly: thou art more rightous than I, for thou have rendered me good, and
I have rendered thee evil, etc. 1 Samuel 24.18. and 26.21. Rare acknowledgements
from Heathen and Christian Kings to their own Subjects. Yet God will have it
so, and conscience will compel them to do so; though perhaps afterward, when
the rod is off their backs, they are apt to harden again, and return to their
old bias, as did the same Pharaoh and Saul. For no longer than they smart, no
longer can they see: and unless affliction opens their eyes, there is no
persuading them, but the righteous man is worse than his neighbor: yea, none
so vile, as Haman thought and reported of Mordecai and the Jews, and Ahab of
Elijah, and Saul of David.

And this I can assure you beyond all exceptions, that if ever your eyes be
opened, before you drop into Hell, when the mask of prejudice is taken from
before your eyes, you will be clear of another mind to what you are: you will
love that down right preaching which now you hate, and hate those clawing and
Rhetorical discourses, that now you so much adore and admire.

Sect. 10. Wherefore, receive with meekness the engrossed Word, which is able
to save your souls, Jam. 1.21. Entertain it with an honest and good heart, and
in so doing, you shall entertain both God and Christ with it, as our Savior
himself plainly tells you, Joh. 13.20. See also Chron. 34.27, 28. Yea, hear the
Word indifferently and impartially, and the rather from such as thou have hated
for their bitterness; perhaps God will conver^ and save thee by no other means
or Minister, than such as he has placed thee under. Saul, if you observe it,
when he was possessed with an evil spirit, (as all are that persecute their
faithful Pastors) all his spite was at David, from whom he received more
benefit than from any one man in his Kingdom besides: yet by Gods special
appointment, none could give him ease but David. Despise not the meanest of
Christ's Messengers, that delivers his Word purely, aims at his glory and the
good of souls. As what says Luther, If God speaks to thee as he did unto
Balaam by an Ass, thou must have so much wisdom and humility, as to hear him:
Gods word is the Sword of the Spirit, that kills our corruptions, and that
unresistable Cannon-shot, which beats and battereth down all the strong holds
of sin and Satan. But above all resist it not, kick not against it, mock not at
Gods Word or Messengers. O do not sport away your souls into those pains, which
are easeless, endless, and remediless.

Do you believe there is a God? Are you willing to be saved? If you are, Break
off your sins by repentance, Dan. 4.27. Cease to do evil, learn to do well,
Isa. 1.16, 17. Seriously grieve and bewail for the millions of times that you
have provoked God, and never more commit the like impiety: yea, as you tender
the everlasting happiness and welfare of your almost lost and drowned souls,
set upon the work presently, before the drawbridge be taken up. Provide with
Joseph for the dearth to come, and with Noah in the days of your health, build
the Ark of a good conscience, against the floods of sickness: yea, do it while
the yearning bowels, and compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive
you, abjure and utterly renounce all wilful and affected evil, lest when it is
too late, it vex every vein of your hearts, that you had no more care of your
souls.

Again, if God by his Spirit shall work this upon your consciences, (as you
will have cause to bless his name, that ever you met with such a stop, so)
resemble not the rustic Sailour, who when he is in danger of shipwreck, will
promise to change his life; but when the storm is overpast, he returns to his
former vomit, making no conscience nor account of his vows and protestations.
But remember that perseverance is the crown of graces, and Heaven the crown of
perseverance. If you are convinced, and resolve upon a new course, let you
resolutions be peremptory and constant, and take heed you harden not again as
Pharaoh, the young man in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did: resemble not the
iron, which is no longer soft than it is in the fire, lest your latter end
prove worse than your beginning, Matthew. 12.43, 45. As it fared with Julian the
Apostate, and Judas the Traitor; for millions are now in Hell, who thought
they would repent hereafter.

God will not give his heavenly and spiritual graces at the hour of death, to
those who have contemned them all their life. If in any reasonable time we
pray, he will hear us; if we repent, he will pardon us; if we amend our lives,
he will save us: But for want of this timely consideration, Dives prayed, but
was not heard; Esau wept, but was not pitied; the foolish Virgins knocked, but
were denied. And so it fares with all such fools, they died as they have lived,
and commonly go from despair unto destruction.

If you would prevent the like, lay not hold upon mercy, until you be
thoroughly humbled. The only way to become good, is first to believe that you
are evil. God does not pour the oil of grace, but into a broken and contrite
heart. Would you truly know how evil and miserable you are by nature, and be
very sensible how evil and wicked your hearts are, seriously consider these
three particulars: 1 The corruption of your nature by reason of original sin; 2
Your manifold breaches of Gods righteous Law by actual sin; 3 The guilt and
punishment due to you for both. This being done, you will see and find your
necessity of a Redeemer, who came to save none but the weary and heavy laden
sinners, even the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 15.24. and 11.28.
And indeed the sense of our wretchedness, and the valuation of our spiritual
helps, are the best trial of our Regeneration.

All which, if you would obtain, omit not to pray for the divine assistance of
Gods Spirit. For of our selves we cannot think a good thought, a Cor. 3.5. John
15.4, 5. Swift we are to all evil, but to any good immovable. Wherefore beg of
God, that he will give you a new heart, and when the heart is changed, all the
members will follow after it, as servants after their Lord. Only let me add,
be sure you wholly and only rest on your Savior Jesus Christ for salvation,
abhorring to attribute or ascribe ought to doing. To conclude, if you receive
any power against your corruptions, forget not to be thankful; and when God
has the fruit of his mercies, he will not spare to sow much, where he reaps
much. This do, and my soul for yours, God by his grace, will more than supply
what is wanting; (as may be seen in his entertainment of the prodigal Son) and
thou shall be for ever happy, Luke 15.20. which is the prayer, and hope, and
should be the joy of

Your impartial Monitor, J.F.

FINIS.

