THE Young Man's ALARM: OR, The sad Consequences of those Sins which are most
Rife in Young Men now in these days, as Swearing, Drunkenness, Adultery, and
the like.

^n a Discourse upon the 9th. verse of the 11th. Chapter of Ecclesiastes.

Rejoice O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of
thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart and in the sight of thine eyes;
but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment.
Licensed according to Order.

^^inted for William Thackery at the Angel in Duck lane.

THE Young Man's Alarm.
Eccles. 11. chap. 9. ver. Rejoice O Young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart
cheer thee in the days of thy Youth, etc.


IT is a matter of no less wonder than grief, to see that Man, the most
excellent and noble Creature of the World, made by God to enjoy all the
benefits of this and another Life, should respect his great happiness so
little, as at once to neglect them both; and wilfully run headlong into misery,
and so carefully to provide for himself eternal Torment. How unpleasant the Way
that leads to Sin and Destruction is, others cautions with his own experience
daily tells him? and though Death and Damnation were not the sure Wages of Sin,
yet the very ills that are produced and issue from hateful vice here, should
methinks, engage Mankind to an abomination of it, and make him apply himself
with his utmost diligence and industry to follow and keep those Commands which
God out of his infinite Goodness and Mercy delivered himself to guide Mankind
to his everlasting rest and happiness. And can we believe that God did bestow
all those noble Faculties of our Soul upon us, as Reason, Knowledge and
Understanding, to be Instruments of any thing besides his Glory and the
Salvation of us? what then will be the consequence (we may easily imagine) of
the mis-employment of these great Gifts and Benefits, and converting them to
the ruin of our own Souls and contempt of him and his Glory, a a Use clear
contrary to what he designed them? Ah! huge Ingratitude of Men, thus to abuse
and forget so merciful a God, and too too worthy of eternal Afflictions that
will to the Destruction of themselves, wickedly defy the means and
opportunities that are offered of being happy; which can never be found in the
loathsome embraces of Sin and Wickedness: Hear Young men what is here denounced
against your Riots, Debauches, and your own joyful though perverse Heart; the
Judgment of the all-powerfull God, who will not spare your Blasphemies, your
Drunkenness, nor the Sins of your Lust, but will deliver you to the Tyranny of
Death and eternal Despair. Let these, let these thoughts and considerations,
enjoin you to a Change of your uneven ways, remembering that for each thing you
say, you do, you must render an account to the just and all-knowing God of
Heaven and Earth, who will punish you according to your Crimes.: And though as
in the 8th. verse of this Chapter of Ecclesiastes, You live many days, and
rejoice in them all, yet remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many,
and that comes is vanity. Let us reflect but a little on the miseries that all
who has been Offenders, against Heaven has suffered, and we shall give over the
continuance in our Impieties; and let us take a view of all the Examples in
Holy Writ, and we shall find not one amongst them that left to fear the Lord,
but was involved in Ruin and Misfortunes: Saul paid for his VVickdness with
the dear loss of a Kingdom to Himself and Posterity; and all the wicked and
unrepenting Kings of Israel was scourged by their Enemies, or dye by the
dangerous hands of their own Subjects: think then what God will even do to you
if you continue in your evil doings and desires. Rouse, rouse, and cast from
thee, vile Sinner, these destroying Evils, and with the Prodigal return to
Repentance: and that you may not be discouraged from so pious and beneficial a
Work, God himself does promise that your Ills shall be past over when you pray
to be forgiven, leaving off the power of Satan, turning with all your Hearts to
your Creator. How happy, how fortunate, are you young men that begins with the
fear of the Lord? how assured is your Estate of Bliss, since God himself says
he will accept you, and professes his Joy at the younger Years of Piety and
Religion, leading you still with his Grace till you arrive at the blessed Land,
the Land of Promise to all Believers? Let me then persuade every one of you to
lay hold of all means of being saved, and with your first endeavors seek the
knowledge of your God and Redeemer; for know it is Youth, the most healthy and
the most strong years are the best and most acceptable Offerings to him: and
when the dismal Groans and Sighs of an Old Age, preceeded by a wicked and
debauched Youth shall he but little minded, you will be sure to meet with a
kind reception of your Prayers, and have all the Blessings of a present and
future Life poured upon you. Believe me, for you will find it, that it is the
Knowledge of a well-spent Youth that secures us the greatest comfort, and alone
can afford us Pleasure, when the Aches and pricking Pains of Old Age, lies
heavy upon us; and it is that that makes us with courage and assurance enter
upon Eternity, knowing that we shall receive the grateful Rewards of what we
so well acted here. There is none who is not quite hardened with Sin and
Wickedness, but knows what a Joy a well past day brings, how comfortable a good
action is, and how terrible to Conscience, (which every one feels sooner or
later) the cruel remembrance of a Wickedness is. But more than this, it would
be well to consider how vast Injuries these Bodies too suffer, for whose
pleasure we so often engage our Souls in endless and lamentable Woes, by Vice;
and it is strange to see Men hurry on by so many several ways to Death and
Diseases the only two Bugbears thought of humane Nature: it is true that some
by Drunkenness shorten those Lives every Body seems so much concerned for, and
are oftentimes living Martyrs to that Vice, continuing to their Grave the
wretched Objects of our pity, and their own shame. By Whoring, how greatly
miserable Men make themselves each Hospital tells us, and their cruel Diseases
are as so many marks for us to avoid such deplorable conditions; which if we
neglect after such personal warnings, we are not to be pitied if we split
against those Rocks and loose our Healths, and all the Comforts of our Lives.
By Swearing, how constantly do we call God's Judgments upon us? and how
extremely abhorred are our Conversations, even by Wicked Men, who though they
practice it themselves, yet hate the deformed Sin in another? Of all the Sins
that has so absolutely subdued Men, I could say the same things, but it is
needless, since the most common Experience cannot but be acquainted with their
inconveniences: but to say something in short of them, they not only injure our
Souls, but spoil our greatest benefits here; for there is not so much as an
advantage to be expected, where Vice is taken notice of; Men justly suspecting
they will be false to others who are so to their own Souls, and to their God;
which without doubt is the cause of so many endeavors, though they have
nothing of Piety or Sanctity but the bare pretense to maintain the opinion of
it amongst others, finding it necessary to the increase of their Riches and
esteem in the World. But to return to the Afflictions that follows at the heels
of the neglect of pious exercises and duties; what People shall we ever find
that ever had the smiles of a prosperous Condition, without being true to God
and the just Principles of Religion? did not the contempt of God and abominable
filthiness, cause the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha? was it not the
forsaking of God, the Instructions and Commands received from him, that rendered
not only the People of Israel lamentable, but made them become the Byword of
all Nations, to whom they were a terror whilst they preserved God their Friend
and Protector, by serving him alone and dedicating themselves to the pure
Worship of him? all this but duly considered, it will be owned that Sin is the
impulsive cause of all our own Unhappinesses, both Temporal and Eternal; and
it is because of our Transgressions that we are so often plagued; for Vbi
Peccatum ibi Miseria, Where there is Sin there is Misery: Iniquity calls down
all sorts of Punishments upon our heads; are we molested with Wars? is our
Health crushed with raging Diseases? are we tormented with distracting Maladies
it is all for our Sins? Haggai. 1.9.10. Hear the great God of Heaven declaring
Punishments to those that break his Commandments and keep not his Statutes in
the 28. chap, of Deuteronomy. But it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto
the voice of thy Lord thy God, to observe to do all his Commandments and the
Statutes which I command this day, that all these Curses shall come upon thee.
The Lord shall send upon thee Cursing and Vexation, and Rebuke in all that thou
set thine hand unto, o^ to do, until thou be destroyed and unti^ thou
perish, quickly, because of the Wickedness of thy Doings, whereby thou have
forsaken me. Again, The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee, until
he have consumed thee from off the Land whither thou go to possess it. Art
thou not afraid wretched Man! then to offend this great, this just God, who is
so able to punish, and who will assuredly do it if thou forget thy God, and
his Commandments? think thou, he will be more inclined to spare thee than
that People whom he so loved? he lead them with his own mighty hand through so
many dangers; for whom he made a dry Passage over the Red Sea, to secure them
from their Enemies; Ah! no, feed not thy self up with these Hopes, for he will
send these and many more Curses upon thee, if thou return'st not with
Penitence, begging his most gracious pardon: delay it no longer, since it so
much concerns thy eternal welfare, and endeavor to reconcile thy self, whom
thou have so unworthily and ungratefully offended; least he crush thee ^n the
very midst of thy Sins, and give ^hee over to Hell and the Devil, from whence
there is no Redemption. Think again and again upon this Portion that ^s
allotted the Wicked and Impenitent; pity thy own Soul, and thrust it not into
Hell and its Torments; but call, and God will hear thee, knock and he will open
and deliver thee Heaven, with such Joys as never entered into the Heart of Man
to conceive: But if the denouncing of Judgments no whit stirs thee nor removes
thee from the course of Sin, let his kind and gentle promises allure thee to be
Righteous and Holy: hear him pronouncing his Blessings to the Good and Holy, in
the 28. chap. of Deuteronomy. ver 1. And it shall come to pass, if thou shall hearken
diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God to observe and to do all thy
Commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee
on high, above all Nations of the Earth. v. 4. Blessed shall be the fruit of
thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of, thy cattle, and the
increase of thy Kine, and flocks of thy sheep; so on: See then what a great
gain Godliness is to us here: see how necessary the observation of God's
Command is for the Riches of this World, for the increase of our store: and
mark that it is from Virtue alone that we are to expect the Riches of this Life
and the Glory of another. How justly will all Men condemn him for a Fool, that
in spite of these immense Promises and Blessings, shall continue a Sot to
Pleasures, which tickle only for the present, but leave a fatal Sting behind
them; and whilst they are Honey in the Mouth, are Gall in the Stomach, and are
succeeded by Miseries and Discontents? Let Reason take a place a little, and
hearken to the dictates of Truth; compare impartially the Good and the Bad
together, that thou may find the difference, and not like the Child, choose
only things that are fair, and pleasant to the first eye of Fancy; ^ut those
that carry an intrinsic and ^olid worth: Moreover, weigh with thy self the
small duration and continuance of things of this World, and think thy self that
thou can not be with them long thy self, but must be summoned to make thy
appearance: these often considered, will perhaps abate thy affection to things
here below, and will persuade thee to strive to secure an Interest where is
eternal happiness and where Joys can never fade; which done, thou will be sure
to be quiet within thy self here, and not fear Death, which is so great a
terror to the Lovers of wordly Delights. Having done with this, it becomes me
to tell you young Men the Ways by which ye may most assuredly glorify God and
purchase your selves eternal Happiness. Be sure to avoid Idleness, it being the
Banker and Rust of good Inclinations, and an inlet to a thousand dangerous
Sins: be sure to Honor your Parents, as those that gave you Life and Being,
with many more benefits: be obedient to all Magistrates and all higher Powers,
according to the Direction of S^ Paul, fly the Company of Drunkard debauched
Persons of all degrees, for Evil Conversation corrupts good Manners: Shun the
Embraces of loose and wanton Women, Solomon assuring you they will bring you to
a Morsel of Bread: But chiefly, be sure to perform your Duties of Prayer both
day and night to God, using no frivolous pretenses to excuse you from them; for
so we bless God and he blesses us: On the Lord's day abstain from all Works or
Sports, and fail not to be present at the public hours and places of Prayer,
attending reverently and devoutly. Lastly, do as you would be done by,
practice these, though there be many other Rules, and you will not fail to have
Eternal Life.

FINIS.

