An Infallible Way to Farewell. In our BODIES, NAMES, ESTATES, PRECIOUS SOULS,
POSTERITIES.
Together with, Men's great loss of Happiness: For not paying, The small
quitrent of Thankfulness. Whereunto is Added Remains of The P. A. A Subject
also of great concernment for such as would enjoy the Blessed Promises of this
life, and of that to come.

By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex.

To gratify such as have long, and earnestly desired them, To prevent future
mistakes in the Printing and for other considerable Reasons: I shall Print some
few of these Books; though at five times the rate of my other Pieces, whereof I
Print ten thousand at once; Again, though they will be too great, for me to
give as formerly; or for the poor woman to sell, as she can small ones: Yet
that the Buyer may have enough for his money, I have (like those, that would
distill Roses in the winter:) fairly crowded (as you see) a peck into a pint
Pot. And that my own loss may be the less; my method shall be when I have
Printed off my number of any one sheet, to keep the letters undistributed,
until such are served, as will venture upon each sheet single, and have
patience to stay, until it shall be grown up, to an entire Treatise.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by James Crumpe in
Little-Bartholomues Well-yard, and Henry Cripps in Popes-head-alley, Anno 1660.
1661.

To the well affected READER, that would be HAPPILY RICH.
As the Orator grown old, wrote of old age to an old man; and of friendship,
to his much indeared friend: so is this Discourse of Riches and Happiness,
writ to such, and such only; as would be Happy as well as Rich.

Not to all, nor to all that are Rich: as well knowing, that the way to please
the best, is to displease the most: and that to frame or fashion my matter, to
please either the Rich or all; were to displease him, that is all in all.

Readers may be resembled to the Belgic Armies: that consisted of French,
Dutch, Spanish, Italian, etc for so many hearers, so many humors. And what ^ne
speaks of Learning in general, may be applied to many wholesome truths in
particular: the same discourse, may make the indifferent good, the good better,
and the bad worse.

Again, Some and not a few, are like the Gadarens, (Mark. 5. 17.) who are
Christ entered their City, besought him to depart their Coasts. Nor is it
amiss, to leave such as these to themselves: until time and experience, or
their own Rod has made them wiser.

More especially, was it composed and published for their sakes, who know the
worth and sweetness of these flowers; that prize these Pearls: as having
still found, when I have finished what I intended; their entertainment to be
such as at first I expected. For these Posies may be resembled, to a Plume of
Feathers, or some sovereign Balsome, for which some will give much, others
little or nothing. Whence according to my accustomed manner, I have out of
diverse fleeces, wove one piece of cloth: and brought home to them many famous
Authors, though (like Mummers in a mask) I conceal their Names; as thinking
it sufficient if I deliver profitable matter, after a profitable manner; and
guessing it the greatest point of Learning and Oratoury; to distinguish aptly
that which is confused, and to illustrate plainly, that which is obscure.

Nor do I at all, like those raw fruits of Poetry, Pamphlets, and Playbooks,
(which take so with our youth and Gentry) that weaken the stomach of the soul,
and fill it full of crudities, which will not be digested into any good blood,
either of knowledge or virtue. And happy it were, if all proud and unsanctified
wits, had but the wit to know, how Satan guls them with chaff instead of wheat,
with copper instead of gold, with glass in liew of Pearl. Which is the earnest
desire of him, who would gladly be

A furtherer of their Wealth and Happiness, that have a mind to it, Richard
Young,

How to become Rich and Happy, The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
THe Surgeons of Greece, (like our English Mountebanks) were wont to show
the operations of their Skill upon Scaffolds, in view of all passengers:
thereby to assure men what they could do, as well as to get more practice and
custom, if they were deserving. The Merchant thinks it a good course, first to
try with a little, how vendible his commodity will be, and after he
replenisheth the Market, according to the esteem it finds with the
Inhabitants. Nor is he held wise, that will venture all his estate in one
bottom. Such were my thoughts, in publishing the first part of this Tracte:
intending (like Phidias touching his portrayture) that if it were liked, did
abide the touch, pass the standard of the judicious Readers approbation: I
would publish the residue, otherwise not: res^lving whether allowed of, they
should encourage me; or disliked, they should amend me. And now having found
that acceptance, which in modesty I could not expect, I have sent abroad the
second Part.

In the former Part of this Discourse, I have declared what it is, and what it
is not to be Rich: and withal chalked out the way in six Particulars, how men
that are poor, may become Rich, and rid of poverty. In this which follows, I
shall declare how they may become Happy, and rid of discontent or Melancholy.

Now for the effecting of this, there needs no more be done, than to cure men
of their covetousness: for if that be once done, all is done; otherwise
nothing, or nothing to purpose. For let a covetous man become never so rich, he
is never the happier; his care, misery, and melancholy still remains: but let
his covetousness cease, and then comes peace, and joy, and content, have he
never so little: as I shall show when I come unto it. Yea, let men but leave,
or be willing to leave this one sin, and they shall depart from this
discourse, (like Naaman out of Jordan) as if they had been washed, and all their
sins taken away, like the scales from Paul's eyes, Act. 9. 18. For what has
brought Usury, and Simony, and non-residency, and bribery, and perjury, and
felony, and cruelty, and hypocrisy, and subtilty, and envy, and strife, and
debate into the City, and Nation, and made every house an Inn, and every shopa
Market of oaths, and lies, and equivocations, and fraud, and indeed of what
not? but the superfluous and excessive love of money? What is the cause of all
the murmurings, mutinies, jarres, contentions, grudgings, repinings, fretting,
chafing, weeping, vexing, complaining, and discontent in every Family? but the
great controversy of mine and thine. Name but covetousness, and you have
named the Mother of all sins that can be named, which makes the Apostle call
it, The root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Wherefore my principal endeavor shall
be, to prescribe some remedies against this cursed sin. O that I could with
little David, cull out of the Scriptures, (that spiritual and celestial Brook)
the stone or Pible, that would kill this Goliath: then would I stick it into his
temples, with all my might. For I thirst to pleasure these unworthy men, with
that which is more worth beyond compare, than all their wealth multiplied as
many times, as there are lands on the seashore. For let me tell you, you
worshippers of the golden Calf: that the cure which Erasistratus did upon
A^tiochus, for which he had fourteen thousand three hundred and seventy five
pounds; was nothing to this cure of covetousness, in him that is therewith
infected, or thereto inslaved: as you will confess if you but consider, what
the difficulty of this cure is, of which I have largely spoken in Chapter 19,
to Chapter 23. of the foregoing part.

CHAP. II.
Now there is no way to remove this let, or to rescue them from this Remora:
except I can insure them, that they shall be gainers by the bargain, and
receive by way of exchange, that which shall more than countervail what they
part withal: which I doubt not, by the blessing of God to do, if they will but
vouchsafe or be willing to hear, either reason or Divine Authority. And 1. I
will prescribe or give them some rare Recei^s, acquaint them with some
sovereign Remedies, against this desperate evil: and therein show them, how
they shall or may, of the most miserable men alive, become the most Blessed and
Happy. And who knows whether God has nor put me upon this work, and will
accordingly bless the means that shall be used? though by a most unworthy and
insufficient Instrument? Neither is the strength or weakness of means, either
spur or bridle to Gods choice, who sometimes does greatest acts, by weakest
Agents; and gives the greater success, to the weaker means. However, an
Emperick or Quacksalver, has now and then, had the hap to cure a Patient, whom
a learned Artist could not do. Wherefore be at leisure you lovers of money, to
hearken to what I shall produce from the word, to your ears; and God shall
speak to your hearts by his spirit, touching your temporal, civil, spiritual,
and eternal state.

Now if you would relinquish this sin, and so be everlastingly happy; If you
prefer true content, and the peace of God which passes all understanding;
before your own misery and vexation: And rather desire to go to Heaven with
Lazarus, than with Dives to those sc^rching flames; observe these few things in
order.

In the first place, lay to heart the things formerly delivered; consider that
a competency of earthly things with content, is the best estate in the world.
Yea that a poor and mean condition, (in case God be pleased to give grace, and
his blessing with that little he bestows:) is far better and happier, than to
swimm^ in great wealth and abundance. Consider also, and set before you the
heinousness of this sin, and the manyfold evils and mischiefs, which do
accompany covetousness: and how it is the cause of many heavy and grievous
judgments here, as well as depriving men of everlasting happiness, in Heaven;
and plunging them, into eternal hellish torments hereafter. Yea apply every
word that has been spoken to thy self: and this will be a good means to make
thee moderate thy greedy desire, mor^ifie thy carnal affections, and curb thine
unruly, and insatiable appetite after gain. And without this all is to no
purpose; Little would it have availed the Israelites, that the Manna lay about
their tents, if they had not gone forth and gathered it, beaten it, baked, and
eaten it; so let the means of salvation be never so plentiful; if we bring it
not home, and make it ours by application and faith: we are never a whit the
better for the same. Clothes must be put on, meat eaten, a p^aster applied: or
they will never warm, nourish, or heal.

CHAP. III.
Secondly, (though I inverte the order, in setting the cart before the horse)
dote not so upon the world: for while our minds are so scattered among these
visible things, we forget how the stare stands within us. Besides, I have shown
you that as nothing so aliena^es a man's love, from his virtuous Consort, as his
inordinate affection to a filthy strumpet: so nothing does so far separate; and
diminish a man's love to God, and heavenly things, as our inordinate affection
to the world and earthly things. The damps of the earth, do not more quench
fire, than the love of the earth stif^les grace. Neither trees nor grass grow
above, where the golden Mines are below. If the love of money, be once entered
into the heart: no fruits of goodness, can appear in the life. Yea there is
an absolute contrariety between the love of God, and the love of money. The
Covetous man is like that Pompous Prelate, who said he would not lose his part
in Paris, for his part in Paradise. Or like Ulysses, who so dearly loved his
Country, that he pre^erred his native soil Ithaca, before immortality. Or the
Child, that more esteems of an Apple, than of his Fathers Inheritance. For
thus stands the case with them. Man has a precious Jewel to dispose of, viz.
his soul, God and the world come to buy it, the world steps in first, and
tempts him as once Saul his servants, saying, Hear now ye Benjamites, will the
son of Ishay, will the son of Mary, give every one of you fields, and
vineyards? will he make you all Captains over thousands? and Captains over
hundreds? 1 Samuel 2^. 7. Yea if a man will needs have present possession, Satan
will instantly give him bags of money; as he dealt with Gehazi, Achan, Judas,
Annanias and Saphira, Balaam, and in a thousand the like cases.

God comes and out-bids the world; for he offers grace, and peace, and glory:
but withal he craves day for the greater part of it; and gives nothing in hand
but his promise, his Word, and some small earnest of the bargain. Nay perhaps
instead of bettering our condition, he makes it worse: for the encouragement
that Christ gives is, Whosoever will be my Disciple, let him take up his cross
daily and follow me, Luke 9. 23. Yea more than that, in case a man has got any
part of what he injoyes unjustly; he must restore the same to the right owners,
though it be to the impoverishiing of his estate. As in case thou would
indeed, and to purpose become rich, happy and cheerful; If thou love not
gold, above thy salvation: restore to every man thy evil-gotten goods. For as
humility is the repentance of pride, abstinence of surfeit, alms of
covetousness, love of malice: so only restitution, is the repentance of
injustice. This is the revenge that a Christian must take upon himself, if he
means to be saved, 2 Cor. 7. 11. For as the best charm for the tooth-ake, is
to pull out the tooth: Or as they, who have meat in their stomachs undigested,
or store of ill humors, are eased only by vometing them up: so if ever thou
look to find ease in thy soul, and conscience, or to pacify God; be sure to
vomit up all thy extortions, by restitution. For as it fared with those
Mariners touching Jonas, Jonah 1. 15. they tremble, pray, unlade, strike
sails, fall to oars, but all in vain, the Vessel was sick, and had taken a
surfeit, when she took in the fugitive Prophet; all the loss of their goods,
cannot expiate the cause of this tempest; there is a morsel that lies
undigested in the stomach, throw out Jonas, and all is quiet.

There are a world of men, that bear the Name, and wear the livery, but have
not the souls of Christians. Others must pay them, or they will use all kinds
of extremity: but they (by their good wills) will not pay what is lent them, in
their greatest need. But a debtor that can pay, and will not, makes himself
incapable of pardon. Indeed such men think to set all on Christ's score, and to
say Dimitte mobis debita nostra: forgive us our debts is sufficient, though
they leave out the other part of the petition. But God does not forgive
spiritual debts where men have no care to pay temporal debts. For he that dies
before restitution, dies in his sin: and he that dies in his sin, cannot be
saved. Nor is there a more infallible character of a wicked man, in all the
Book of God: The wicked borrows, but pays again Psalm. 37. 21.

Where is no restitution, of things unjustly gotten, there sin shall never be
forgiven: Non tollitur peccatum, nisi restituatur oblatum: as St Augustine
speaks, and all Orthodox Divines hold; in case the party have wherewithal. For
if a man have it not, God will accept of the will for the deed. Yea in this,
and all other cases: he does the will of God, who does the best he can to do
it. But in ease a man do it not, so ^arre as he is able: well may he gull his
own soul, but God will think it soul scorn to be so mocked. As consider,
Repentance without restitution: is as if a thief should take away thy purse,
ask thee pardon, say he is sorry for it; but keeps it still: In this case,
would thou not say he did but mock thee? The Law of God, under the penalty of
his curse, requires thee to restore, whatsoever by injustice or oppression,
thou have taken from thy neighbor or master; with a fifth part (for amends)
added to the principal, Levit. 6. 5. Numb. 5. 6, 7, 8. And we read that there
is a flying roll, a winged curse for him, that gets riches by robbery and
oppression: that shall not only pursue the thief, but even enter into his
house, and consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, Zach. 5.
3, 4.

Nor had Zacheus his repentance served his turn, (if ever he had this way been
faulty,) or his bounty to the poor been accepted: if he had not withal,
restored to every man his due, Luke 19. 3, 8. Mi^ah 6. 10, 11. Jer. 18. 8.

So that, whatever blinded sensualists may think of it; there is wisdom and
gain in restoring: for when all is done, how to be saved is the best plot: and
better it is, to cast our evil-gotten goods ever-board, than make shipwreck of
our souls.

Merchants when a tempest comes, think it wisdom to cast their goods, yea even
their butlayne over board, to save themselves. And for certain thou art worse
than frenzy, if thou do not the like. For what shall it profit a man? though
he should win the whole world, if he gain Hell with it, and loose both Heaven
and his own soul? Mat. 16, 26. What is it to flourish for a time, and perish
for ever? and well does that man deserve to perish, that so loves the creature,
as that he leaves the Creator. The ^osse of faith is a dangerous shipwreck; if
it be possible save your vessel, save your goods, save your bodies: but though
you loose all else, save your faiths, save your souls.

True, your twenty in the hundred, will not believe this: but an hundred to
twenty, he shall feel it, here or hereafter. As what gained Balaam, or Judas,
or Ahab, or Achan, or Ananias and ^aphira? when by seeking unlawful gain, they
lost both what they got, and themselves too?

A man would think, that Achan paid dear enough for his goodly Babylonish
garment, the two hundred shekels of silver, and his wedge of gold which he
cove^ed, and took away: when He, his Sons, and Daughters, his Oxen, and Asses;
his Sheep, and Tent; and all that he had, were stoned with stones, and burnt
with fire: if that was all he suffered, Josh. 7. 18. to 26. But to be cast into
Hell, to lie for ever in a bed of quenchless flames, is a far greater
punishment. For the soul of all sufferings, are the sufferings of the soul; and
in reason, if Dives be tormented in endless flames, for not giving his own
goods to them that needed, Luke 16. 21, 23. Matthew. 25. 41, to 43. What shall
become of him, that takes away other men's? If that servant in the Gospel, was
bound to an everlasting prison, that only challenged his own debt; for that he
had no pity on his fellow, as his Master had pity on him: whither shall they be
cast, that unjustly vex their Neighbors, quarrel for that which is none of
theirs, and lay title to another man's propriety? If he shall have judgment
without mercy, that shows not mercy, Jam. 2. 13. What shall become of
extortion, and Rapine? Psalm. 109. 11. Oh the madness of men! that cannot be
hired to hold their finger for one minute, in the weak flame of a farthing
Candle; knowing it so intolerable: and yet for trifles, will plunge themselves
body and soul, into those endless and everlasting flames of hell fire.

True, He that makes gain, blesses himself, as the Psal^ist speaks, Psalm. 10.
3. Yea, if he can, (I mean the cunning Machevilian, whom the Devil and
covetousness has blinded) any way advantage himself, by another ruin; and
do it politickly: how will he hug himself, and applaud his own wisdom! Hab. 1.
13. to the end. But by his leave, he mistakes the greatest folly, for the
greatest wisdom. For while he cozens other men of their estates; Sin and Satan
cozens him of his soul. See Job. 20. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 8, 10. And woeful gain it
is, that comes with the souls loss. And how can we think those men to have
reasonable souls, that esteem money above themselves! That prefer a little base
pelf; before God, and their own salvation?

Nor are there any such fools, as these crafty knaves: For as Austin speaks; If
the Holy Ghost term that rich Churl in the Gospel a fool, that only laid up his
own Goods, Luke 12. 18, 20. find out a name for him that takes away other men's.

And this know, that if thou do not (willingly, or at least with an unwilling
willingness) do it thy self, yet it shall be plucked from thee with a
vengeance. As what says the Holy Ghost? Job. 20. Though wickedness be sweet
in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue, yet his meat in his bowels,
is turned; it is the gall of Aspes within him: he shall vomit them up again:
God shall cast them out of his belly. He shall suck the poison of Aspes, and
the Vipers tongue shall flay him: because he has oppressed, and forsaken the
poor, because he has violently taken away an house, which he builded not.
Surely he shall feel no quietness in his belly. When he is about to fill his
belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon
him, while he is eating. He shall flee from the Iron weapon, and the bow of
steel shall strike him through. And the like from verse. 5. to the end of the
Chapter. And so Jeremy 17. He that gets riches, and not by right: shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool, verse. 11.

Wherefore in any case, omit not to restore what thou have unjustly gotten: And
that without disputing the point, or making thy lust of counsel: (as they that
desire with heed, and more surely to see, do shut the one eye.) Do like
Abraham, who when he was bid to offer his Son; rose up betime, and left his
wife at home, never making Sarah privy to it: lest she should stop him, Genesis
22. 6. So do it if it be possible, before thy flesh hears of it: like Abigal,
who if she had consulted with Naball, whether she should have supplied David
with victuals or no: the Miser would never have consented: so she had perished,
with her whole family, 1 Samuel 25. Paul consulted not with flesh and blood, when
he went to preach among the Heathen, Gal. 1. 16. the case was clear enough,
having a strict command from God. So in this case, there needs no deliberation,
but answer the Devil, as that Martyr answered his Persecutors, when they
offered him both torments and rewards: (rewards if he would deny Christ,
torments if he would not,) but withal time of deliberation: whose answer was,
In re tam iusta, nulla consultatio: The case is so clear, that I need not study
about it.

Here I might show you, both from the Word, and a world of Instances, that
restoring and giving rather than sinning, is the way to grow rich; I mean in
pecuniary riches, see Prove. 11. 24. and 28. 27. Mark. 10. 29, 30. Mat. 6. 33. 2
Cor. 9. 6, 9, 10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. and 27. 6. Deuteronomy. 7. 13 to 16. and 28. 1.
to 14 2 King. 6. 25. to Chap. 7. verse. 17. Psalm. 34. 9, 10. and 37, 26, 28, and
112. 3. and 37. 3, 4, 5. Luke 18. 29, 30. Mark. 4. 24. Hag 1. 2 Chapters, Mal.
3. 10, 11, 12. But if this weary not the Muckmonger, it is well.

Now this being the case, namely that what God gives, is chiefly hereafter,
little at present; yea that we may look to be loosers by him at present;
whereas Satan and the world out bid Christ, in respect of outward condition,
and present pay: thus it falls out, or this is the issue. The worldling cries, a
bird in the hand is best, hugges his money that he has: God he thinks is not
so good a customer, or he dares not trust him. Yet will this man, rather accept
a reversion of some great Office or Esta^e, though expectant, on the tedious
transition of seven years, or on the expiration of another life, (which may
prove to be sixty years or more,) than at present a sum of far less value.
But what a strange folly is this? rather to take the idle vani^ies of this
world in hand, than faithfully to wait upon Gods promise, for an eternal
Kingdom of glory in Heaven!

CHAP. IV.
Thirdly, The rarest of all remedies is Regeneration. As what says holy David?
Turn my heart unto thy Law, and not to covetousness, psalm. 119. 36. As if a
man could not be covetous that sets his heart upon heavenly things; nor have
any leisure to think upon good, so long as he is coverous. Let them seek after
the earth says one, that have no right to Heaven: let them desire the present,
who believe not the future.

As Regeneration is the best physic, to purge away melancholy: so likewise of
covetousness. As may be seen in Zacheus, who before he met with Christ, knew
nothing but to scrape; but so soon as Christ had changed his heart, all his
mind was set upon giving and restoring, Luke 19. 8. He was as liberal in alms
and restitution, when he was become a Convert: as possibly he was unjust and
unmercifull, when he was an usurer.

And the like of all other sins. Paul was not a more hot and fiery enemy to
Christ, when he was a Pharisee: than he was a shining, burning, and zealous
Preacher when he was an Apostle. When any man is born anew, (and better never
be born, than not to be born again.) there will be new virtues, arise in the
room of old vices, Heretofore, thy soul has been an Idolatrous Temple: if the
Ark of God, that is his Holy Spirit, once enter into it, Dagon, that is the
works of darkness, will down, and soon moulder away: For both cannot stand
together, 1 Samuel 5. 3. especially covetousness will be chash^ired. Yea God
has set Religion and covetousness, at such variance: that they cannot
possibly reign, in one person. No man can serve God and ^ammon, Luke 16. 13. He
that loves this world, the love of God dwells not in him, I Joh. 2. 15.
Wherefore, as we desire to have peace in the end: let piety be our race. 'Twas
Marcus Aureli^^, his dying counsel to his Son Commodus: that if he would live
quietly, he should live justly: if he would dye peaceably, he should live
uprightly.

Now if covetousness be once cashiered by Regeneration: have a man much or
little, he will not be overmuch troubled at it.

The godly man has sufficient, though he have no wealth: even as man in
innocence was warm, and comely, though without clothing. A small thing unto
the just man, is better than great riches to the wicked and mighty, Psalm. 37.
16. The reason is, the one has his sight to see clearly his happiness, in
having what is best for him, and is content to be poor in outward things,
because his wealth and purchase, is all inward. ^he other by a just judgment of
God, is so blind, that he cannot see when he is well; but thirsts so after
other men's goods, that he takes no pleasure in his own. His heart is glewed to
the world, or rather to his wealth: and an object too near the eye, cannot be
seen: yea be it but the breadth of a penny, it will hide from the sight, the
whole half heaven at once. Covetousness is like the Albugo, or white spot in
the eye: that dimmes their understandings, and makes fools even of Achitophels,
leaving them never an eye to see withal, according to that of Moses, A gift
blinds the eyes, Exodus 23. 8. And this for certain, could the covetous chur^
but see, what peace, and rest, and joy through contentation the godly man has,
at the same time when he can say with Peter, Silver and gold have I none: he
would be also a suter to godliness, that he might have the dowry of
contentation. He would soon see, that it is much better to be poor than evil,
that it is quieter sleeping with a good conscience, than in a whole skin: and
that there is no comparison, between want with piety, and wealth with
dishonesty.

As what can thou say against it? thou have abundance of all things, yet thou
find small peace, joy, or content in the world. Get but godliness, and thou
shall have true content of mind, great peace of conscience, together with joy
in the Holy Ghost, and Gods blessing upon all thou have, or take in hand: be
thy condition in the world never so mean.

Thou have hitherto like Satan, compassed the whole earth; never thought of
compassing Heaven: thou art as poar in grace and parts, as rich in revennes.
Thy desires about this world, have been insatiable; but for heavenly things, a
small scantling has been thought enough. I believe that Christ dyed for me, I
am sorry for my sins, I hope to be saved: this is sufficient, though thou
do all thy devotions more out of custom, than of conscience: as Simonides
reports of Theodoricus. But will thou prove thy self wise? will thou do thy
self good indeed? the only way is to become godly. For godliness in great
gain, if a man be content with that he has, 1 Timothy 6. 5. And this I may be
bold to affirm, that if thou can not say as Paul says, I have learned to be
content, godliness is not as yet come unto thine house. For the companion of
godliness, is contentation: which when she comes will bring you all things.
Therefore as Christ says, If the Son make you free: you shall be free
indeed, John 8. 36. So I say, if godliness make you rich: you shall be rich
indeed. Otherwise, have you never so much, it will no more satisfy your
desire, or quench your lust: than fuel does the flame. Yea as oil kindles the
fire, which it seems to quench: so riches come as though they would make a man
contented, but they make him more covetous.

CHAP. V.
As see how insatiable men's desires are, of these transitory things by some
examples. Give Alexander Kingdom after Kingdom, he will not rest till he have
all. Yea giving credit to that opinion of Democritus, to wit, that there were
worlds infinite, and innumerable: he even wept to think, that he was Emperor
but of one only. And Croesus, the richest Prince that ever the world could
boast of; thought he had not enough. Nemo miser, nisi comparatus. And Licinius
being replenished, with almost infinite sums of gold and silver, was so far
from being satisfied, that he even sighed for, and bewailed his poverty. Marcus
Crassus a private Roman, worth eight hundred fifty and two thousands pounds;
yet never thought himself rich enough; but was still as greedy, and griping as
ever. Ahab has a whole Kingdom, yet because he cannot have poor Nahotb's
vineyard, he goes into his house heavy and in displeasure, lies turning upon
his bed, and cannot so much as eat his meat: all he has will do him no good, 1
Kings 21. 3, 4.

And the like might be shown of all other outward comforts: For suppose a man
should have all he could wish, or desire, (as it is feigned of Apollonius, that
he never asked any things of the gods in all his life, but it was granted him:)
health, wealth, honors, pleasures, and the like: yet when he had enjoyed them
but one whole day, he would not be contented, something he would still want,
one thing or other would displease him; until God comes; and then he says
with holy David, My cup is full, the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant
places, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 6. and 23. 5. As the worldling is
not satisfied with sin, so he is satisfied with nothing. Riches come, and yet
the man is not pleased; Honors come, as an addition to wealth, and yet the man
is not pleased: as it fared with Haman, who having reckoned up all the glory,
promotions, riches, banquets, graces and favors of the King and Queen, respect
of the Nobles, etc. yet he concludes that all is nothing, so long as Mordechai
sits in the Kings gate. He had the homage of all knees but one, and was ready
to burst for lack of that; he is miserably vexed, that all other men, did not
think him so good, and great as he thinks himself.

Again, Pleasures come, and yet the man is not pleased: The lusts of the flesh
are fulfilled by him, and yet he is not pleased: Liberty, outward peace, and
the like, they all come, and yet the man is not pleased: until Christ comes,
as he did to Zacheus: and then he has more than enough, or then he desires,
and therefore imparts, a great part of what he has, unto others that have
less.

CHAP. VI
But to apply this to the present occasion. I would fain know, whether this be
not thy case, that art an unmercifull rich man? Have thou not all outward
comforts, presenting themselves and their service to thee in great abundance?
Yet they are to thee, and in thy account but miserable comforters. For though
thy house be full, and thy shop full, and thy coffers full, and thy purse full,
and thy passures full, yet thy heart is still lanke and empty, through an
excessive desire of more: as if thy heart were without a bottom. Whereas, if
thou would but admit Christ into thy heart, (who now stan is at the door and
knocks, Revel. 3. 20.) thou would then need no more, who now need every
thing: (even what thou have in possession.) For he alone that fills Heaven and
earth, can fill the soul. Nothing but the Trinity of Persons in that one Deity;
can fill the triangular concave of man's heart. Show us the Father (says
Philip) and it suffices, John 14. 8. Nay show us but thy truth, (whereby Satan
and our deceitful hearts may not so deceive us,) and it suffices, Dan. 9. 13.
When godliness comes, content follows it. What says Christ? Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be satisfied. Not
they that hunger and thirst after riches, nor they that hunger and thirst after
honor, nor they that hunger and thirst after pleasure, but they that hunger
and thirst after righteousness: They shall be satisfied, and satisfied to the
full, Mat. 5. 6, etc. Thus it fared with St Paul, who was able to say after his
conversion, that which he nor any else could ever say before conversion, I have
learnt in whatsoever state* I am, therewith to be content. First he learnt
godliness, then godliness taught him contentation; and is there any
satisfaction like content? When Christ brought salvation to Zacheus, his mind
was strangely altered: before he was all for getting, now he is all for giving.
This was not the first day that he seemed rich to others, but this was the
first day he seemed rich to himself. Riches bring contention, Godliness brings
contentation. Gain has often hurt the getters, piety and Godliness is
profitable to all men, and for all things: I Tim. 4. 8. Godliness is the most
profitable thing in the world, because it makes all things else profitable;
And it is for want of Piety and Godliness, that the covetous man's riches no
whit profit him. Godliness sets such a glass before the eyes of them, that
possess the same: that it will make a shilling seem as great as a pound, a
Cottage thought as sumptuons as a Palace, a Plow seem as goodly as a Scepter;
so that he which has but twenty pounds, shall be as merry as he who has an
hundred, and he who has an hundred, shall be as ^ocond, as he who has a
thousand, and he who has a thousand, shall be as well contented, and think
himself as rich, as he who has a million. Even as Daniel did thrive with water
and ^ulse, as well as the rest did with their wine and junkers. Godliness is
called by the Apostle great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. And well it may, for it gains
God, and with him his blessing upon all things else. He says also, That bodily
exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy
4. 8. But shall I show you in some Particulars, how gainful and profitable it
is? and how it brings the blessing of God upon all, or rather all Gods
blessings upon him that is godly?

CHAP. VII.
The particular Benefits and Privileges of Grace and Godliness, above all
worldly commodities, are innumerable; I Will name only Nine, that you may the
better remember them. There is nothing wherein men usually rejoice, but the
godly more than find it in Christ.

First, Does any man desire or glory in Knowledge? In him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. I desire to know nothing among
you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. This is eternal life, to
know thee the only God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, John 17. 3.

Secondly, Does any man desire, or glory in Honor and Nobility? Believers are
more Noble than any other men, Act. 17. 11. The righteous is more worthy than
his neigbour, Prove. 12. 26. and 28. 6. The best Nobility, is the Nobility of
Faith, and the best genealogy, the genealogy of good works. The only true
greatness, is to be great in the sight of the Lord, as John Baptist was, Luke
1. 15. Whence it is, that David thought it not so happy for him, to be a King
in his own house, as a doorkeeper in Gods house. That Solomon preferred the
title of Ecclesiastes, before the title of the King of Jerusalem. That
Theodosius the Emperor, preferred the title of Membrum Ecclesiae: before that
of Caput Imperii: professing that he had rather be a Saint and no King, than a
King and no Saint. And that godly Constantine rejoiced more, in being the
Servant of Christ: than in being Emperor of the whole world.

And indeed, Gods servants, are the only worthies of the world: for Christ has
made them spiritual Kings, Rev. 1. 6. So happy are they, as to have this high
honor and dignity given them. Yea so soon as regenerate, we are made Sons to a
King, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Brothers to a King, Heb. 2. 11. Heirs to a King, Romans 8
17. Even to the King of glory, Joh. 17. 22. Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Nor are
we his Sons only, but he accounts us his precious Jewels, Mala. 3. 17. And
repures us his intimate Friends, Joh. 15. 14, 15. Our Friend Lazarus, says
Christ, Joh. 11. 11. O what an high and happy condition is this, for mortal men
to aspire unto; that the God of Heaven should not be ashamed to own them for
friends, that before were his cursed, and mortal enemies!

By nature we are like Nebuchadnezer, no better than beasts grazing in the
forest: but when grace once comes, we are like him restored to his reason, and
high dignities, Dan. 4. 29. to the end. Or like Manasses, brought out of a
loathsome Prison, to be King of Jerusalem, 2 Chro^. 33. 11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, Does any man glory in riches? Christ is an unexhaustable treasure,
never failing, and of his fullness have all we received, Joh. 1. 16. Nor are
these transitory riches, (though these we have also, when God sees them good
for us: For riches and treasures shall be in the house of the righteous, Psalm.
112. 3.) but we have heavenly, and spiritual riches, that true Treasure, that
is infinitely better than silver or gold, and more precious than Rubies,
Pearls, or any the most precious stones. Yea it surpasses all pleasure and
prosperity, strength, honor or felicity. It is more sweet than the Honey and
the Honeycomb; yea all the things thou can else desire, are not to be
compared to it. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left riches
and honor: Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
She is a tree of life, to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one,
that retains her, as Job, David, and Solomon will insure you. Job. 28. 13. to
20. Psalm. 19. 10 and 119. 103. Prove. 3. 14 to 19. and 8. 10, 11. Eccles. 9. 16.
Yea lastly, Heaven it self, is made sure to every gracious soul for her
Patrimony, Mat. 5. 3. to 12. Now consider before we go any further, how poor a
clod of earth a Manor is, how poor an inch a Shire, how poor a span a
Kingdom, how poor a pace, or Acre the whole earth; And yet how many have sold
their bodies, and souls, and consciences, and Heaven, and eternity, for a few
grains of this dust.

Only with Believers, it is otherwise, they consider that commodities, are but
as they are commonly valued: And because transitory things in the next life,
bare no value at all; and because there is nothing firm under the firmament:
They hold it very good covering, what they may have, and cannot leave behind
them. And though others most loye, what they must leave, and think that money
will buy any thing, like foolish Magus, Act 8. 18. Or the Devil, who presumed
that this bait, would even catoh the Son of God: Yet the wise and religious,
can see no reason, why it should be so doted upon as it is. But

Fourthly; Does any one desire or glory in Liberty? Christ has delivered us
out of the hands of all our adversaries and enemies, Luke 1. 71, 74. As namely,
from the Law, Gal. 5. 18. Romans 6. 44. From sin; 1 John 2. 1, 2. From death,
Joh. 8. 51. and 5. 24. And from the Devil, with all the powers of darkness,
Heb. 2. 14. Romans 8. 35. to the end. Or

Fifthly, Is it safety from fear and danger, that a man wishes for or desires?
Let him become one of those little ones that believe in Christ; then may he
trust to a guard of Angels, Mat. 18. 10. and be assured of Gods protection;
without which a worm, or fly, may kill a man, with it no Potentate on earth can
do it. As for Instance, When Valens the persecuting Emperor, should have
subscribed an order for St Bazils banishment: such a sudden trembling took his
right hand, that he could write never a good letter, whereupon he tore the
order for anger, and there was an end of the business. Laremouth Chaplain to
the Lady Anne of Cleave, a Scotchman, being in Prison in Queen-Maries days, it
was said, as he thought, once, twice, thrice, Arise and go thy ways:
whereupon, he arising from prayer, a piece of the prison wall fell down, and he
escaped beyond the Seas.

CHAP. VIII.
Sixthly, Would thou have God to prosper all that thou have, or do: then
get grace to serve him, so shall thou be blessed, in all places, and delivered
from all temporal evils, as it is Deuteronomy. 28. Nor can it be other in reason. For,
if when the Ark of the Covenant, (which was a sign of Gods presence) was in the
house of Obed Edom, then the Lord blessed him, and all his house: how much more
shall that man be blessed? in whose heart even God himself, by his Spirit
dwells; and by his grace, which is a more sure, and infallible sign of his
presence then was the Ark. So that if thou be wise, thou will more esteem of
grace, and God blessing accompanying it; than thou would of Jasons Golden
Fleece: or the great Chams Tree-full of Pearls, hanging by clusters.

Seventhly, Would thou with all these, have all peace and joy? than get
Grace and Holiness. For as the Unicorns horn dipped in the fountain, makes
the waters which before were corrupt and noisome, clear and wholesome upon the
sudden: so whatsoever estate grace and godliness comes unto, it says like
the Apostles, Peace be to this house, peace and happiness be to this heart, to
this man, etc. That Regeneration is the only best Physic for melancholy, I can
sufficiently evidence, out of fifty years experience. I most gladly
acknowledge, that when I was in my natural condition, without the pardon of
sin, and some assurance of Gods favor: I seldom wakened in a morning, but my
heart was as heavy as lead; as fearing an hell, after that purgatory: which
since my heart was changed, I have not, I bless God, been acquainted with. An
old Disciple of Christ, being asked the cause why he was ever such a merry man,
answered: when I was a young man, I studied how to live well; and when I became
an old man, I studied how to dye well; and so desiring to seek God in this his
Kingdom of grace, and hoping to see him in his Kingdom of glory, one day to me
was better, than a thousand unto those, who weary themselves in the ways of
wickedness, and destruction.

Now if grace and Gods favor, brings such peace and joy: what fools are
sinners? to deprive themselves of it. What mad men are Misers? As how do their
hearts droop with their mammon? How do they weary and turmoyl themselves, vex
their spirits, torment their consciences, making themselves a very map of
misery, and a sink of calamity? Whereas it is nothing so with the servants of
Christ.

Perhaps at their first conversion, they are much troubled in mind, (though it
fares not so with all) and conscience; for their long and grievous offending,
so good a God; but that sorrow is soon turned into joy, and abundantly
recompensed. When the Angel had troubled the waters, in the Pool of Bethesda:
then stepped in those that were diseased, and infirm; and were healed. It is
Christ's manner, to trouble our souls first, and then to come with healing in
his wings. Yea the very tears of repentance are sweet: whereas the covetous
man's heart, even in laughing is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth us
heaviness, Prove. 14. 13.

An evil life, says Seneca, causes an unquiet mind: for as the least moat in
the eye, hinders the ease and sight of it; or as the least gravel in the
shoe, hinders the traveller in his comfortable going; on as the least bone in
the throat, hinders our eating, and threatens to choke us: So the least sin
in the soul unrepented of, hinders the peace, and joy, and hope thereof. But
least (which is not likely) I should glut you with joy, observe with me

In the eighth place, That there is nothing can be wanting to a man, but grace
and Gods savor will more than supply it. When reverend Calvin was upbraided by
the Papists, with the want of Child^^^ in marriage, he could answer; That is
nothing, for God has ins^^ad of such children, given me many thousand
children, of far more excellent kind, and of nobler breed through the whole
world. And surely a man shall see, the Noblest works and Foundations, have
proceeded from childlesse men: which have sought to express the Images of
their minds, where those of their bodies have failed.

CHAP. IX.
Ninthly, Godliness has the Promises not only of this life, but also of that
which is to come. The quintessence whereof consists in these two things;
freedom from all pain, fruition of all pleasure, which is the purchase of
Christ for his followers. For when he sits upon his Throne, he shall say unto
them, and only to them: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from before the foundation of the world: where are such
joys, as eye has not seen, nor eat heard, etc. And are there any pleasures,
like those at the right hand of God for evermore? Whereas to those, that have
not had the grace, nor the wit to serve him: he shall say, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And is
there any pain, like the separation from Christ, into everlasting and
ever-flaming fire? Mat. 25. 41. Think of this, you that prefer the service of
sin and Satan, before that of our Saviors. Heaven you will confess to be
best of all; yet for Heaven you will use labor least of all. For I may boldly
affirm it, your covetous man, takes more pains to go to hell; than do the
godly to get to Heaven: he rises early, and rests late, and eats the course
bread of sorrow; and after a great deal of tedious and odious misery, goes to
the Devil for his labor. But look to it, this will one day cost men dear: For
it will be the very hell of hell, when they shall call to mind, that they have
loved their sins, more than their Savior, or their own souls. When they
shall remember, what love and mercy, has been almost enforced upon them; and
yet they would by all means, and that of free choice perish.

Now I might go on to other Particulars, yea I might alomost be infinite in
these things: but having said enough, to be thought too much: I will mention no
more, only let me a little apply it. We see that the shadow, does not more
inseparably follow the body: than all blessings follow grace. Bodily exercise
profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. as
having the Promises of the life present, and of that which is to come. Men talk
much of the Philosophers stone, that it turns copper into gold: of
Cornucopia, that it had all things necessary for food in it: of the Herb
Pana^e, that it is instead of all purges, and cures all diseases: of the Herb
Nepenthes, that it procures all delights: of Vulcans Armor, that it was of
proof against all thrusts and blows. Yea, Pliny speaks of no less, than three
hundred and sixty benefits; that may be made of the Palm tree, if we will
believe him. But whether these things be so or not, it much matters not: this I
am sure of, that what they did vainly attribute to these rarities, for bodily
and transitory good; we may with full measure; and without any hyperbole,
justly ascribe to grace and Gods favor, for spiritual. So that Religion,
Piety, and Holiness, are Mistresses worthy your service. Yea, all other Arts
in the world, are but drudges to these. Fools may contemn them, who cannot
judge of true intellectual beauty: but if they had our eyes, they culd not but
be ravished with admiration of the same. And men truly wise, have learned to
contemn their contempt, and to pity their injurious ignorance.

All which being so apparent, and undeniable: men's wisest and surest way were,
as one would think, to become the Servants of God, and be as industrious after
grace, as they have been after gold. For in common reason, who would eat husks
with the Prodigal, when if he will but return home, he shall be honorably
entertained, by his heavenly Father? have so good cheer and banqueting, hear so
great melody, joy and triumph? Generally, men are very eager and industrious to
get worldly wealth; yea, no pains is thought too much for it: but where shall
we find men thus eager after spiritual wealth, which alone can make them happy?

CHAP. X.
Objection: But will some say, How shall we obtain this happy condition? It is
not so easy a matter to become gracious, and to gain the favor of God, as you
seem to make it.

I Answer Yes, this may easily be helped, if thou have a mind to it. For as
when a man would have those things to be on his right hand, which are now on
his left: it is but turning himself, and the work is done: so do but turn you
affections from earthly things, to things celestial and heavenly; the case will
be so altered, that you will think your self, as a blind man restored to sight*
a mad man to his senses, a prisoner set at liberty, a beggar advanced to a vast
estate, and as one vexed with an evil spirit, or troubled with a tormenting
conscience, to such a blessed peace, as the world can neither give nor take
away, John 14. 27. As thus:

Would you quiet your clamorous conscience, that will not be friends with you,
unless you be friends with God? The air is not so clear, when the cloud is
dissolved by rain, as the mind is, when the clouds of our iniquities are
dissolved by the rain, or tears of true repentance* These waters; are the red
sea; wherein the whole Arm of our sins is drowned. As O the calm spirit of a
godly man! his very dreams are divine.

When Ptolomy King of Egypt, had posed the Seaventy Interpreters in order, and
asked the nineteenth man, what would make one sleep quietly in the night: he
told him the best way was, to have divine and celestial Meditations, and to use
honest actions and recreations in the day time. The godly man enjoyes Heaven
upon earth, peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1. 6. Nor
is joy less, when it is least expressed, (as it fares with grief) but as the
windows of the Temple were narrow without, but broad within; so is the joy of
our hearts, greater than it does outwardly appear to the world.

Again, It is as falfe a slander as common, that when once a man imbraceth
Religion, farewell all joy and delight. For virtue has neither so crabbed a
face, nor so stern a look, as men make her. Pleasure is not gone, when sin is
gone. It is not Isaac that is sacrificed, that is our laughter and mirth; but
the Ram, that is the bruitishnesse of it. The soul of joy, lies in the souls
joy. What says holy David? Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord; and
be joyful all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32. 11. It was not the
Eunuchs riches, nor honors, but his faith, which set him on his way rejoicing,
Act. 8. 39. In this rejoice no^, (says our Savior,) that the spirits are
subdued unto you: but rather rejoice, that your names are written in Heaven,
Luke 10. 20. Yea, there is even joy in grief, where the sorrow is for sin.

Besides, how can men partake of that fountain of joy, and rejoice not? He is
no good Christian, that is not taken with the glory he shall have, and rejoice
that his name is written in the Book of life. The worldly man has joy in
prosperity, the Child of God in adversity. The believing Hebrews suffered with
joy, the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in Heaven, a better and
more enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. Yea, let the worst that can come, they
are still merry and joyful: as has been observed in sundry of the Martyrs,
who clapped their hands for joy, even in the midst of the flames. And reason
good, when all things shall work to their good, that are good: and when the
very draught, and abridgment of Heaven, is in every sanctified heart upon earth.

Then live religiously, and thou shall both live and die comfortably: For live
in grace, and die in peace, is a rule that never fails. Only this hinders our
joy, our love to spiritual things is too defective; of worldly things too
excessive. Earthly goods are earnestly and eagerly sought after; Heavenly not
once thought upon. Much travel taken for the body, little or no care used for
the soul. It would be otherwise, if with Paul at his conversion, they had those
scales taken away from their eyes, by some godly Ananias, some faithful
Minister of the Gospel: which during their natural condition, covers their eyes
from seeing things spiritual. It is a sad thing to see, what fools men are,
that walk according to the flesh; and how they are gulled by the God of this
world, and their own deceitful hearts. The covetous man is like a mad man,
that loves and is unmeasurably delighted, with the sight and gingling of those
chains, wherewith he is fettered and tormented. He hugs them* (I mean his
money) and adores them; and even makes them his god, that occasion him all his
grief. But had he once tasted how good, and bountiful the Lord is, to those
that set their delight on him, 1 Pet. 2. 3. If he did grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. If the Lord,
would once incline his heart unto his testimonies, and not to covetousness,
Psalm. 119. 36. he should soon know and find, that things themselves are in the
invisible world; in the world visible, but their shaddows only. That wicked men
enjoy whatsoever they have, viz. wealth, honor, wisdom, pleasure, etc. but as
it were in a dream. They dream they are rich, wise, happy, and the like; as a
beggar may dream he is a King: Or one that is ready to starve, that he is
richly furnished with all manner of meats and drinks: but when once he is
awake, he finds himself grossly mistaken. All worldly happiness, has its
being only by opinion: whence St Luke calls all Agrippa's pomp, but a fancy,
Act. 25. 23. a mere conceit or supposition. The sweetness of sin, is but as
the sweetness of poison: sweet only in the mouth, in the belly bitter and
deadly. Stolen bread is sweet; sweet in the obtaining, bitter in the account
and reckoning. Yea* this last dish, will spoil all the feast; and make it but
like a drop of pleasure, before a river of sorrow and displeasure: Whereas
whatsoever the godly feel, is but as a drop of misery, before a river of mercy
and glory.

CHAP. XI.
The way of Wisdom and Holinnsse, is the way of Pleasure, Prove. 3. 17. As O
that all covetous, miserly muckworms did but know, what pleasure is in the
peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, and the joy of the Holy
Ghost; what a sollace it is, to be the son of God, an Inhabitant of Heaven;
to live by faith, etc. Then would they think it more worth, than all the worlds
wealth, honor and pleasure, multiplied as many times as there be stars in the
firmament: that any thing, that every thing, were too small a price for it.
Their would they change these broken, wormeaten, and poysonfull pleasures of
sin, for the pleasures of Gods House, of Gods Spirit, and those other
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

God made the world of naught, because men should set it at naught: as did the
Apostle, (the better to prevail with others) who after he had been wrapped up
into the third. Heaven, reckoned of all earthly things, riches, honors,
pleasures; but as dross and dung, in comparison of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. And what says holy David; a man of a most brave and
divine spirit? I have had as great delight; in the way of thy testimonies, as
in all riches. They are more to be desired than gold, yea, than fine gold;
sweeter also than the honey and the honeycomb* Psalm. 19. 10. And again, How
sweet are thy words unto my mouth? Psalm. 119. 103. This likewise was Jobs
judgment, who affirms, That wisdom cannot be valued with the gold of Ophire,
the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire. That the gold, and the crystal, cannot
equal it; and that the exchange thereof, shall not be for jewels of fine gold.
That no mention shall be made of corral, and pearls: for the price of wisdom
is above Rubies, that the Topaas of Aethiopia, shall not equal it, neither
shall it be valued with pure gold, Job 28. 12. to 20.

Neither was this the case only of Paul, and David, and Job, and such like
Champions in grace, but every Believer finds the same in some measure. They
can truly say unto God with the Prophet Jeremy, Thy Word was unto me the joy
and rejoicing of my heart, Jer. 15. 16. They meet with Christ himself in his
Word and Ordinances, where is also the water of Regeneration, the wine both of
consolation and compunction; the bread of life, the oil of gladness, the
honeycomb of grace, the milk of the Gospel, etc.

But how unlike to these, are natural men? Natural fools indeed: who esteem not
at all of Heavenly treasures, spiritual enjoyments, or riches of the mind.
There is a mighty differenee between David's or Paul's spirit, and the spirit of
these salvage Swine, whose only delight is, to root in the earth: Who are only
pleased and taken with the music of their money; in that they are altogether
unacquainted, with soul-comforts, and heavenly enjoyments. As acorns were
thought very good, until wheat was found out: and bread, before Manna came.
But had they tried both esta^es, as Believers have done, they would find that
content (the poor man's riches,) were far sweeter than desire, (the rich man's
poverty:) and that the ones wisdom, and spiritual treasure, will bring them to
those joys, that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither has ever
entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. 9. while the wisdom and
wealth of these stupefied worldlings, if they take not heed, will bring them to
those endless miseries, that cannot be expressed, nor conceived by any heart,
were it as deep as the Sea. And yet these forsooth, repute themselves, and are
reputed, the wisest of men. But pitifully do they err in every thing, that
are not instructed by the Word and Spirit. The natural man, receives not the
things of the Spirit of G^d: for they are foollishnesse unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned But he that is spiritual,
discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. which is a text or lesson worthy to be
learned, of all that are in their natural estate. O that they would but
seriously ponder the words! For then they would see, that simple or shallow
honesty, will prove more profitable in the end, than the profound quicksands
of craft and policy: Then their neglect would not be most in that, wherein
their care should be the greatest. But the world has always had a mean and
base esteem of Christ himself, and therefore no marvel, if they esteem so
little of his grace and Spirit. The Gadarens preferred their Swine before him;
the Jews, Barrabas; Judas, thirty pieces of silver: whereas St Paul wanted
words to express how he valued him, and therefore breaks off with O the depth!
Romans 11. 33. Neither can Christ, or indeed the meanest saving grace that he
bestows upon his, be valued with ten thousand worlds.

But hear another reason why miserable muckworms are so transported with
earthly trash, which the godly so little regard. A main cause is this; Men of
the world, as they know not what the riches of the mind means, so they have no
hope of a better life after this. This is all their Heaven, and here they have
all their portion, they are like to have, Psalm. 73. 12. Deliver my soul from
the wicked, (says David) from men of the world, who have their portion in this
life: whose bellyes thou fillest with thy hid treasure; their children have
enough, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes, Psalm. 17. 14. But
my teeth shall not water after their dainties. Woe be to you that are rich,
(says our Savior) for ye have received your consolation, Luke 6. 24. All
here, none hereafter: and hereupon they covet riches, and honors, and
pleasures so excessively, and insatiably. Nor can it be otherwise in reason;
for nothing but the assurance of heavenly things, makes us willing to part with
earthly things. Neither can he contemn this life, that knows not the other. But
this is the privilege of Piety; The rich man, has not so much advantage of
the poor in enjoying, as the religious poor has of the rich in leaving.
Neither is the poor man, so many pounds behind the rich for this world, as he
may be talents before him for the world to come. So that there is no learning
this art, without being religious: For you will be covetous, until you be
gracious. And during the time of your greediness, you shall never be
satisfied; because happiness is tied to goodness, by the chain of Providence.

CHAP. XII.
Now if thou would become godly in good earnest; if thou would have this
change wrought in thee, and have thy affections so altered, as to find more
sweetness in spiritual things, than ever thou have done in thy worldly
enjoyments, be sure to begin at the spring head, I mean thy heart. This is Gods
own counsel to the men of Jerusalem, Jer. 4. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved. How long shall thy wicked thoughts
remain with thee? verse. 14. It is idle and to no purpose, to purge the
channel, when the fountain is corrupt. Had Elisha cast the salt into the
brooks and ditches, the remedy must have striven against the stream, to reach
up to the springs: Now it was but one labor in curing the fountain. Our heart
is a well of bitter venomous water, our actions are the streams: in vain shall
we cleanse our hands, while our hearts are evil. Whence the Apostle orderly
bids us, first be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and then let him that
stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24, 8. But alas, how many are there that
set the cart before the horse, and begin to change their lives, before their
hearts? but if we shall be advised so to do, it is not advisedly. It is most
ridiculous, to apply remedies to the outer-parts, when the distemper lies in
the stomach. He were an unskilful Physician, that when the headache is caused
by the distemperature of the stomach, would apply outward remedies to the head,
before he had purged the stomach, where lies the matter that feeds the disease.
To what purpose is it, to crop the top of the weeds, or lop off the boughs of
the tree, when the root and stalk remain in the earth? Cut off the sprig of a
tree, it grows still, a bough, an arm, still it grows; lop off the top, yea saw
it in the midst, yet it will grow again; stock it up by the root, then (and not
till then) it will grow no more.

Great Cities once expunged, the Dorpes and Villages will soon come in of
themselves. Wherefore, as the King of Syria said unto his Captains, Fight
neither against great nor small, but against the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22.
31. So especially we must set our selves, against our mother and Master sin:
the King being caught, the rest will never stand out. The heart is originally
evil, that is the treasure and storehouse of wickedness.

As in generation, so in regeneration: Cor primum vivit: life begins at the
heart. Yea, the heart is the first in our Creation, which is formed; the first
by reason of our fall by sin, which is deformed; and the first in our
regeneration that is reformed. And whenever God does savingly shine upon the
understanding, he gives a soft and pliable heart. For without a work upon the
heart by the Spirit of God, it will follow its own inclination to that which it
affects, whatsoever the judgment shall say to the contrary. That must first
be reformed, which was first deformed.

Out of the abundance of the heart (says our Savior) the mouth speaks, Mat.
12. 34. Yea out of the abundance of the heart, the head devises, the eye
sees, the ear hears, the hand works, the foot walks. A man may apply his
ears, and his eyes, (as many blockheads do) to his Book and yet never prove
Scholar: but from that day, which a man begins to apply his heart unto wisdom,
he learneth more in a month after, than he did in a year before; nay, than
ever he did in all his life. As you see the wicked, because they apply their
hearts to wickedness, how fast they proceed? how easily, and how quickly they
become perfect Swearers, perfect Drunkards, cunning Deceivers, etc.?

The heart is like the fire, which kindles the sacrifice, 1 Kings 18. 38. And
indeed, if the tongue, or the hand, or the ear, think to serve God without the
heart, it is the irksomest occupation in the world. But as the Sun rises
first, and then the beasts arise from their dens, the fowls from their nests,
and men from their beds: so when the heart sets forward to serve God, all the
members will follow after it; the tongue will praise him, the foot will follow
him, the ear will attend him, the eye will watch him, the hand will serve him,
nothing will stay after the heart, but every one goes like Handmaids after
their Mistress. Such as the heart is, such are the actions of the body which
proceed from the heart. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good things: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his
heart, brings forth evil things, Matthew. 12. 25. Therefore as Christ says,
Make clean within, and all will be clean, Matthew, 35. 25, 26. So see your hearts
be sincere and single, and then all your actions will be holy to the Lord. If
we would be rid of noisome fowls, the only way is to destroy their nests in
every place. A vain and lost labor it is, to stop the current of a stream, if
you go not to the fountain. Whence it is that God faith, Give me thine heart,
Prove. 23. 26. As though he would teach us the pleasantest, and easiest way to
serve him, without any grudging, or toil, or wearisomenesse. As let but the
heart be changed, and we shall attend the Ordinances, and perform all duties
with deligh^, cheerfulness and alacrity. Whereas to a carnal heart, holy
duties, as fasting, praying, hearing, is so tedious and irksome, that it thinks
one Sabbath, or Fast Day, more tedious and burdensome, than ten holy days, as
their consciences will hear me witness. Whereas the gracious soul, is more
delighted therewith, than his body with a well relished meal. Touch but the
first link of a chain, and all the rest will follow: so set but the heart a
going, and it is like the poyse of a clock, which turns all the wheels one way:
such an oil is upon the heart, that it makes all nimble and current about it:
but without the heart, all is mute and dumb. As the tongue will not praise,
because the heart does not love; the ear does not hear, because the heart does
not mind; the hand does not give, because the heart does not pity; the foot
will not go, because the heart has no affection. All stay upon the heart, like
the Captain that should give the onset. Nor is any service we can do accepted,
without the heart and affections flowing thence. Therefore David's prayer is,
Create in me a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. The
Scribes and Pharisees, did fast, and watch, and pray, and hear, and read, and
give, and do all that we can do: and yet Christ rewarded all their works with a
woe, because they wanted a good heart, and true affections flowing thence. They
honored God with their lips, but their hearts were far away from him. Whence
he also calls them hypocrites, Mark. 7. 6. The Disciple that betrayed Christ,
heard as much as the Disciples that loved him.

CHAP. XIII.
But here (least I should be mistaken) let me join to what has been said, and
what shall be further said by way of caution: Expect not that this should be
done by any power of thine own: for except God give thee repentance, and
removes all impediments that may hinder, thou can no more turn thy self, than
thou could at first make thy self. We are not sufficient of our selves to
think much less to speak, least of all to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
We are swift to all evil, but to any good immovable. We can lend no more
active power to our conversion, than Adam did to his creation, than the Child
does to his conception, than the dead man to his raising from the grave. It was
the Lord, that did open the heart of Lydia to conceive well, Act. 16. 14. the
ears of the Prophet to hear well, Isa. 50. 4. the eyes of Elishaes servant to
see well, 2 Kings 6. 17. and the lips of David to speak well. Bid a man by his
own strength, do the least good, or bear the least trouble: you may with as
good success, stand in the street, and bid a chained prisoner come out of his
dungeon. St. Paul before his conversion, could do as much, as the best
accomplished moralist of them all; his words are, If any man thinks, that he
has whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more I, Phil. 3. 4. Yet when he
speaks of his doing, or suffering, he shows that it was because the love of
God, was shed abroad in his heart, by the holy Ghost, which was given him, Romans
5. 5. Of himself he could do nothing, though he were able to do all things,
through Christ, and by the Spirits assistance, who strengthened him, Phil. 4.
13. Man is like an Organ-pipe, that speaks no longer then wind is blown into
it. Wherefore as when David came to fight with Goliath, he cast away Saul's
armor: so let us in this case, cast away all trust and confidence in our
selves, and only set forward in the Name of the Lord God of Israel. If we trust
to our own resistance, we cannot stand: we cannot miscarry, if we trust to his.

Yet this is to be considered, that God does not work upon us as upon blocks,
and stones, in all and every respect passive: but converts our wills, to will
our own conversion. He that made thee without thy self, will not justify, nor
save thee without thy self: Without thy merit indeed, not without thine
endeavor. When those deadly waters were healed by the Prophet, the outward act
must be his, the power Gods: he cast the salt into the spring, and said, Thus
says the Lord, I have healed these waters, there shall not be from thence, any
more death or barrenness. Elisha was the Instrument, but far was he from
challenging ought to himself.

Wherefore be sure to use that power, which Christ shall give thee, and then my
soul for thine, he will not be wanting on his part. And amongst other thine
endeavor, exercise Prayer: Omit not to beg of God, for the grace thou want,
and praise him for what thou obtainest. Abhor to attribute, or ascribe ought to
thy doing: trust only to Christ's obedience; in whom, only what we do is
accepted, and for whom, only it is rewarded.

Now you are to know, that as no Sacrifice was without Incense: so must no
service, be performed without Prayer. And Prayer is like the Merchants Ship, to
fetch in heavenly commodities. It is the Key of Heaven, as St Austin terms it;
and the Hand of a Christian, which is able to reach from earth to Heaven; and
to take forth every manner of good gift out of the Lords Treasury. Whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father in my Name, (says Christ) believing, he will give it
you, John 16. 23. Matthew. 21. 22, Unto fervent Prayer, God will deny nothing. It
is like Saul's S^ord, and Jonathans bow, that never returned empty. Like
Ahimaaz, that always brought good tidings. It is worth the obse^ving, how
Cornelius his serious exercies of this duty of Prayer, brought unto him first
an Angel, then an Apostle, and then the Holy Ghost himself. Have thou then a
desire after that happiness before spoken of, seek first, to have the
asistance of Gods Spirit, and his love shed abroad in thine heart by the Holy
Ghost? Would thou have the love of God, and the asistance of his Spirit, ask
it of him by Prayer? who says, If any of you lack in this kind, let him ask of
God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him, James 1. 5. Would thou pray that thou may be heard? Ask in
faith, and waver ^ot; for he that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, test of
the wind, and carried away, Verse. 6. Would thou have says? be diligent to
hear the Word preached; which is the sword of the Spirit, that kills our
corruptions, and that unresistable Cannon-shot, that battereth and beats down
all the strong holds of sin and Satan, Romans 10 17. Unto him therefore, that
is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or think, I
commend thee.

CHAP. XIV.
Lastly, For conclusion of this point, Would thou be a contented and Happy
man? then strive to be a Thankful man: and when God has the fruit of his
mercies, he will not spare to sow much, where he reapes much. Would thou
become thankful? then bethink thy self what cause thou have, by calling to
mind and considering, what God and Christ has done for thee. As first, That he
is the Author of thy natural life: For in him we live, and move, and have our
being, Act. 17. 28. Secondly, Of thy spiritual life: Thus I live, says Paul,
yet not I now, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. Thirdly, Of thy eternal
life, 1 John 1. He is the way, the truth, and the life, John 14. 6. The
resurrection, and the life, John 11. 25.

Or more particularly thus: In the first place, He gave us our selves, and all
the creatures to be our servants; yea, he created us after his own Image, in
righteousness and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the truth, with a
power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed and happy condition;
and this deserves all possible thankfulness. But this was nothing in
comparison. For when we were in a sad condition; when we had forfeited all
this, and our selves: when by sin we had turned that Image of God, into the
Image of Satan, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments; when we were become his enemies, mortally hating him, and to our
utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only enemies, (Sin and
Satan) not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement, but a perverse
and obstinate will to resist all means tending thereunto; He did redeem us, not
only without asking, but even against our wills: so making of us (his cursed
enemies) servants, of servants sons, of sons heirs, and coheirs with Christ,
Gal 4. 7. Here was a fathomlesse depth, a wonder beyond all wonders!

2. But that we may the better consider what an alms or boon God gave us, when
he gave us his Son: Observe, that when neither Heaven, Earth, nor Hell, could
have yielded any satisfactory thing, besides Christ that could have satisfied
Gods justice, and merited Heaven for us, then, O then! God, in his infinite
wisdom and goodness, did not only find out a way to satisfy his Justice and
the Law, but gave us his Son, his only begotten Son, his only beloved Son out
of his bosom: And his Son gave himself to die, even the most shameful,
painful, and cursed death of the Cross to redeem us; that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. The very
thought of which death, before he come to it, together with the weight and
burden of our sins, put him into such an Agony in the Garden, that it made
him to sweat, even drops of blood. A mercy bestowed, and a way found out, that
may astonish all the sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven! Wherefore, O
wonder at this, you that wonder at nothing! That the Lord should come with such
a price to redeem our worse than lost souls, and to bring salvation to us, even
against our wills. The Lord Jesus Christ being rich, for our sakes became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Even the eternal
God would die, that we might not die eternally; O the deepnesse of Gods love! O
the unmeasurable measure of his bounty! O Son of God! who can sufficiently
express thy love? Or, commend thy pity? Or, extol thy praise? It was a wonder,
that thou made us for thy self, more that thou made thy self man for us;
but most of all, that thou should unmake thy self, that thou should die
to save us.

3. And which is further considerable, It cost God more to redeem the world,
than to make it. In the Creation he gave thee thy self; but in the Redemption
he gave thee himself. The Creation of all things cost him but six days to
finish it; the Redemption of man cost him three and thirty years. In the
Creation of the world he did but only speak the word; in the Redemption of man,
he both spoke and wept, and sweat, and bled, and died, and did many wonderful
things to do it: Yea, the saving of one soul single, is more and greater than
the making of the whole world. In every new creature are a number of Miracles;
a blind man is restored to sight, a deaf man to hearing, a man possessed with
many Devils dis-possest; yea, a dead man raised from the dead, and in every one
a stone turned into flesh, in all which God meers with nothing but opposition,
which in the Creation he met not with.

What shall I say? God of his goodness has bestowed so many and so great
mercies upon us, that it is not possible to express his bounty therein; for if
we look inward, we find our Creators mercies; if we look upward, his mercy
reaches unto the Heavens; if downwards, the earth is full of his goodness,
and so is the broad Sea; if we look about us, what is it that he has not given
us? Air to breathe in, fire to warm us, water to cool and cleanse us, clothes
to cover us, food to nourish us, fruits to refresh us; yea, Delicates to please
us, Beasts to serve us, Angels to attend us, Heaven to receive us; And which is
above all, Himself and his own Son to be enjoyed of us. So that whethersoever
we turn our eyes, we cannot look besides his bounty; yea, we can scarce think
of any thing more to pray for, but that he would continue those blessings,
which he has bestowed on us already. Yet we covet still, as though we had
nothing, and live as if we knew nothing of all this his beneficence.

God might have said before we were formed, Let them be Toads, Monsters,
Infidels, Beggars, Cripples, Bondslaves, Idiots, or Mad men, so long as they
live, and after that Castawayes for ever, and ever: But he has made us to the
best likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed us in the best
Land, and appointed us to the best, and only Inheritance, even to remain in
bliss with him for ever; yea, thousands would think themselves happy, if they
had but a piece of our happiness. For whereas some bleed, we sleep in safety;
others beg, we abound; others starve, we are full fed; others grope in the
dark, our Sun still shines; we have eyes, ears, tongue, feet, hands, health,
liberty, reason, others are blind, deaf, dumb, are sick, mained, imprisoned,
distracted, and the like; yea, God has removed so many evils from us, and
conferred so many good things upon us, that they are beyond thought or
imagination. For all those millions of mercies that we have received from,
before, and since we were born, either for soul or body, even to the least bit
of bread we eat, or shall to eternity, (of which we could not well want any
one) Christ has purchased of his Father for us, and yet God the Father also,
has of his free grace, and mercy given us, in giving us his Son; for which
read Psalm. 68. 19. and 145 15, 16. and 75, 6, 7, Yea, God is many times working
our good, when we least think upon him: as he was creating Adam an help meet
for him, when he was fast asleep. And as much do we owe unto God, for the
dangers from which he delivers us: as for the great wealth and dignities
whereunto he has always raised us.

CHAP. XV.
But the better to illustrate, and set out this Love; it will be good to branch
it out into some more Particulars. As

First, Call to mind all these external, inferior, earthly and temporal
benefits; as that your being, breathing, life, motion, reason, is from God.
That he has given you a more noble nature, than the rest of the creatures;
excellent faculties of mind, perfection of senses, soundness of body,
competency of estate, seemlyness of condition, fitness of calling,
preservation from dangers, rescue out of miseries, kindness of friends,
carfulness of education, honesty of reputation, liberty of recreations,
quietness of life, opportunity of well-doing, protection of Angels.

Then rise higher to his Spiritual favors, though here on earth; and strive to
raise your affections with your thoughts. Bless God, that you were born in the
light of the Gospel, for your profession of the truth, for the honor of your
vocation, for your incorporating into the Church, for the privilege of the
Sacraments, the free use of the Scriptures, the Communion of Saints, the
benifit of their prayers, the aid of their counsels, the pleasure of their
conversation, for the beginnings of Regeneration, (...) footsteps of Faith,
Hope, Love, Zeal, Patience, Peace, Joy, conscionablenesse, for any desire of
more.

Then let your soul mount highest of all, into her Heaven, and acknowledge
those Celestial Graces; of her Election to Glory, Redemption from Shame, Death,
and Hell, of the Intercession of her Savior, of the Preparation of her Place;
And there let her stay a while, upon the meditation of her future Joys.

This or the like do, and it will teach you where to beg blessings when you
want them, and whom to thank when you have them. For as the Sea is that great
Cistern, to recieve the confluence of all waters: as first from that large and
vast pond, water is derived into all parts of the earth, by veins and springs,
those springs (...) into rivers, and those rivers empty themselves again into
the Sea: so all blessings come from God, and all praises must be returned to
him.

If we have any thing that is good, God is the giver of it. If we do any thing
well, he is the Author of it. God is Alpha, the fountain from which all grace
springs; and Omega, the sea to which all glory runs. All blessings come from
him, like so many lines from the center to the circumference: therefore we must
return all praises to him, like so many lines from the circumference to the
center, Romans 11. 36. 1 Cor. 10. 31. His wisdom he communicates, and his justice
he distributes; and his holiness he imparts, and his mercy he bestows, etc. 1
Cor 1. 30, 31. but his glory he will not give to another, Isai. 42. 8.

But this is not all; yea, what can we think of, that can be thought
sufficient, to render unto the Lord our God, so good and gracious, in way of
thankfulness for all these his mercies? For in reason has he contrived so
many ways to save us; and should not we take all occasions to glorify him?
Has he done so much for us, and shall we deny him any thing that he requires
of us, though it were our lives, yea our souls; much more our lusts? We have
exceeding hard hearts, if the blood of the Lamb cannot soften them: stony
bowels, if so many mercies cannot melt them. Was Christ crucified for our sins?
and should we by our sins crucify him again?

Now the meditation of what God and Christ has done for thee, will wonderfully
inflame thee with the love of God, and thy Redeemer; and withal make thee
abhor thy self, for thy former unthankfulness. It will make thee break out
into some such expression as this, Praised be the Lord, even the God of our
salvation, who loadeth us daily with benefits, Selah, Psalm. 68. 19. The eyes of
all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat, in due season; thou
openest thine hand, and fillest all things living of thy good pleasure, Psalm.
145. 15, 16. To come to promotion, is neither from the east, nor from the west,
nor from the south: but God is the Judge, he makes low, and he makes high,
Psalm. 75. 6, 7. And so of all other mercies and deliverances.

He that confers a Benefit, upon a grateful nature, robs him of his liberty,
and self also: and in one and the same act makes him a vassal, and himself his
Master. Wherefore if we have any ingenuity in us, it will make us to direct all
our thoughts, speeches, and actions to his glory, as he has directed our
eternal salvation thereunto.

But to help and further you herein, if you be willing so to do, take these few
Directions.

First, Let these things be never out of the minds, memories, and mouths of
those whom Christ has done thus for. O let us (I say) remember, as we should
never forget! Si totum me debeo pro me^ facto, quid jam reddam pro me refecto,
says holy Bernard. If I owed my whole self unto thee, for giving me my self in
my creation: what have I left to pay for giving thy self for me to so cruel a
death, to procure my Redemption, which was not so cheap as my Creation? Great
was the benifit that thou would create me of nothing; but what tongue can
sufficiently express the greatness of this grace, that thou did redeem me
with so dear a price, when I was worse than nothing? We are full of thy
goodness: O let our hearts run over with thankfulness! Yea, let so many of
us, as have either heart or brain, in the next place say, O Lord, What is man
that thou art so mindful of him? Psalm. 8. 4. And O man, what is God that thou
art so unmindfull of him? And then conclude with, What shall I render unto
thee, O Lord, for all these thy benefits? but love thee my Creator, and
Redeemer, and become a new creature. I will serve thee, O Lord, by the
assistance of thy grace, because thou have given me my self: but much more
honor thee, because thou have given me thy Son Christ.

Nor can any man in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not study
and strive for an answerably thankful demeanure. If a friend had given us but
a thousand part of what God has, we should heartily love him all our lives,
and think no thanks sufficient, but to him that has given me all things, I
have scarce given so much as thanks. Yea, I have striven to multiply offenses
against him, and to make them as infinite in number as his blessings.

Thirdly, The continual meditation of What God has done for thee, will make
thee do, what thou art able for him again. For did God and Christ, do all this
for us? and shall we do nothing for him again? Like favors, require like
gratitude.

This then, should at least make us part with our nearest, dearest, and
sweetest darling sins, to serve him in righteousness and holiness every day,
every hour, all the days of our lives. Even every sin; for what sin should be
so dear to us, as Gods only Son was to him? Do we then for Gods sake not spare
our dearest sin; when God for our sakes, did not spare his dearest Son.

Yea, what a brutish and barbarous unthankfulness, and shame were it, that
God should part with his Son, and his Son with his own precious blood for us,
and we not part with our sinful lusts, and delights for him?

Fourthly, Has Christ done all this for us, his servants, so much, and so many
ways obliged unto him? let us do what we are able for him again. 1. Let us be
zealous for his glory, and take his part when we see or hear him dishonouted.
Nor can there be any love, where there is no zeal, says Augustine. Well-born
Children are touched to the quick, with the injuries of their Parents. And it
is a base, vile, and unjust ingratitude in those men, that can endure the
disgrace of them, under whose shelter they live. 2. Let us seek to draw others
after us, from Satan to Him. 3. Do we all we can, to promote his worship and
service. 4. Take we all good occasions to publish to others, how good God is;
and what he has done for us. 5. Let us wholly ascribe all the good we have, or
do to free grace; and give him the glory of his gifts, employing them to our
Masters best advantage, 6. Let us (that we may ^^presse our thankfulness to
him) show kindness to his Children and poor members, who are bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5 30. 7. Abhor we our selves for our former
unthankfulness, and our wonderful provoking of him. 8. Hearken we unto
Christ's voice, in all that he says unto us; and express our thankfulness by
our obedience. Yea, all this let us do, if we do it but for our own sakes: For
what should we have, if we did thus serve Christ, who has done all these
things for his enemies neglecting and dishonouring him?

CHAP. XVI.
But thou will say, What can we do for God; or for Christ?

I Answer, We cannot properly benefit God, nor add to his fullness. They can
add no good to him, that have all their good from him. The Ocean is never the
fuller, though all the rivers of the world, flow into the same: So, What is God
the better, for our praises or performances, to whom (in that he is infinite)
nothing can be added? If we be righteous, our righteousness may profit the
sons of men; but what can we give unto him? or what receives he at our
hands? Can the Sun receive light from a candle? What profit does the Sun
receive, by our looking upon it? We are the better for its light, not it for
our sight; or at all prejudiced by our neglect. A shower of rain that waters
the earth, gets nothing to it self: the earth fares the better for it. Lord
(says David) our well-doing does not at all extend unto thee; but to the
Saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent ones in whom is all my
delight, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Yea, if we could give him our bodies and souls, they
should be saved by it, but he were never the better for them. It is for our
good, that he would be served, and magnified of us.

True, as the Ocean daynes to take tribute of the small brooks, and accepts
that in token of thankfulness, which was its own before, it being the
maintainer of the rivers streams: Or as Joseph accepted of his Brethrens small
gifts, albeit he had no need of them, Gen 43 15. So does God accept of our
free will offerings, and bountifully rewards them, Phil: 4. 18. Yea, if in
employing our Talents, we aim at his glory, and the Churches good, he doubles
them, Matthew. 25. 21, 22, 23.

Nor does God look for such glory, or service from us, as he is worthy to
receive, but as we are able to give. Our praises and performances, are not
sins; yet they are not without some touch of sin. Duties and infirmities,
come from us together: but Christ parts them, forgiving the infirmities, and
receiving the praises and performances. They are full of weaknesses, yet does
not he except against them for their imperfections. He takes them well in
worth, though there be no worth in them: and vouehsafes them a reward, which
had been sufficiently honored with a pardon.

Neither can we hurt, or take away any thing from him: For if we be wicked, our
wickedness may hurt a man like our selves; but what is it to him, Job 35. 7,
8. Yet nevertheless, we may do many things, which he accounts and rewards, as
done to himself; of which I will give you one in special, and I pray mind it.

Though we can do nothing for Christ himself, he being now in Heaven: yet we
may do much for his poor members, those excellent ones whom David speaks of
Psalm 16. 2, 3. which Christ accounts all one, as if it were done to himself,
as appears by many express testimonies. When I was an hungered, ye fed me; when
I was naked, ye clothed me; when sick and in prison, ye visited me, etc. For
in as much as ye did it unto one of these little ones, that believe in me, ye
did it unto me, Matthew. 25. 34. to 41. He that gives unto the poor, tends
unto the Lord, Prove. 19. 17. And many the like which I have formerly cited.

CHAP. XVII.
Now, do we love Christ? or would we indeed express our thankfulness to him,
for what we have received from him? Or do we desire to do something again for
Christ, who has done and suffered so much for us? here is a way chalked out
unto us, which he prefers before all burnt-offerings and sacrifices, Mark. 12.
33. When David could do the Father Barzillay no good, by reason of his old age:
he loved, and honored Chimham his son, 2 Samuel 19. 38. And to requite the love
of Jonathan, he showed kindness to Mephibosheth. So if thou bear any good
will to God, or Christ, whom it is not in thy power to pleasure; thou will show
thy thankfulness to him, in his Children and poor members: who are bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30. Is our Jonathan gone? yet we have
many Mephibosheths: and he that loves God for his own sake, will love his
Brother for Gods sake. Especially when he has loved us (as it were) on this
condition, that we should love one another, John 15. This is my Commandment,
(says Christ) that ye love one another, as I have loved you, Verse. 12. And
greater love than his was, cannot be, Verse. 13. And until we consider, how
infinitely good God has been unto us: we can never show any goodness toward
our Brethren. We must know, he has given us all we have: before we will part
with any thing for his sake.

God in the beginning, had no sooner created the Heavens and the Earth, but he
said, Let the Earth bring forth grass, the Herb yielding seed, and the
fruitful tree yielding fruit, etc Genesis 1. 11, 12. So when he has by his Word
and Spirit, created us anew, he commands us to be fruitful in the works of
Piety, and Charity, Col. 1. 10. And the river of Charity, does always spring,
from the fountain of Piety. Faith is as the leads, and pipes, to bring in: and
Love, is as the cock of the cunduit, to let out. And what avails the one
without the other? What avileth it, my Brethren, (says St James) though (...)
man says he has faith, when he has no works, (that is, works of Charity) can
the faith save him? For if a Brother, or a Sister be naked, and destitute of
daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, warm your selves,
and sill your bellies; notwithstanding ye give them not those things, which are
needful for the body: what helps it? Even so the faith, if it have no works,
is dead in it self, James 2. 14. to 18. A just man lives by his faith, Hab. 2.
4. Heb 10. 33. and others live by his charity. Pure Religion, and undefiled
before God, even the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in
their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world, James 1. 27. Love
is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. and Faith is the fulfilling of the
Gospel, Act. 13. 39. and 16. 31. 1 These. 4. 14. 1 John 3. 23. A Christian in
respect of his faith, is Lord over all, 1 John 5. 4. and 2. 14. in respect of
his love, he is servant unto all, Gal. 5. 13. Faith is the mother grace: by it
we are justified, Luke 7. 47, 50. Gal. 3. 8. our hearts are purified, Act. 15.
9. our persons are accepted, and our souls saved, Ephe. 2. 8, 9. Luke 18. 42.
Yet in many respects, love is preferred before it: as 1 Cor. 13. 13. Now
abides Faith, Hope, and Love, even these three; but the chiefest of these is
Love. So that what the diamond is among stones, the Sun among Planets, and gold
among metals, such is Love among the graces. Love will make us to have
public spirits, resembling the Moon, which borrows her light from the Sun,
that she may convey it to all the inferior creatures; takes from the Sea, that
she may give to the lesser rivers. It will enforce us to practice, what the
Apostle exhorts unto, Phil. 2. Look not every man on his own things, but every
man also of the things of other men: let the same mind be in you, that was even
in Christ Jesus, etc. Verse. 4, 5, 6. It will make us remember them that are
bound, as if we were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if we
were also afflicted in the body, Heb. 13 3. Which is but reason. As may not
thou thy self be in affliction or want? and would not thou in thy need, be
relieved? Why then should not thou know it reason, to do to others, as thou
would have them do to thee? We ought to love our neighbor as our selves,
Levit. 19. 18. but how do we so, if we take not care for them, as we do for our
selves? There is nothing that any one does, or indureth, but any other may: We
are all liable to the same common misery, if unsustained. Therefore insult not
over him that is cast down; but let it make thee humble, thankful and
compassionate: because it is a goodness not our own, that makes the
difference, though pride will scarce believe it. The proudest he cannot say,
this or that shall never befall me. Who can say (says Menander) I shall never
do, nor suffer this or that? For that we go not the round of others sins, or
punishments, it is neither our goodness, desert, policy, or power preventing,
but from those lines of gracious Providence, from Gods preventing, and
preserving mercy. Doubtless he had been counted a prating fool, that should
have told Haman, he should have held Mordecai's stirrup: much less have
changed preferment with him. That Mordecai should be lifted up into Hamans
favor at Court, and Haman should be exalted to that fifty cubits eminency
above ground, in Mordecais room. But go we on.

Love will cause us to open our hands unto such as are in want; and lend or
give them sufficient for their need, as God commands, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. It will make
us of Jobs spirit, who would not eat his morsells alone, but invited the
fatherless to eat with him, Job 31. 17. It will make a man love his enemies,
and do good for them, that do hurt to him, Luke 6. 35. Yea, if need so require,
as in a femine, or common persecution; it will make us sell our possessions and
goods, and distribute them to all, as every one has need, as did the
Christians in the Primitive Church, Acts 2. 44, 45. And lastly, which is above
all; It will make a man to lay down his life for the brethren, 1 John 3. 16.
Whereas he that has not this Christian grace, feels, and is sensible of common
calamities, just so much as appertains to his own private estate and interest,
and no more. It is the want of compassion, that takes no compassion of others
wants. Yea, this is an argument, that the love of God is not in us, 1 John 3.
17. Whatsoever we think, or say, it is not at all in us, John 3. 14, 15. 17.

CHAP. XVIII.
Again, It Is impossible that he who has love should be ungrateful? Mary
Magdalen had received much, and this made her love much: and loving much, she
thought nothing too much to bestow, even upon the most remote members of
Christ, to express her thankfulness, Luke 7. 38. And the like of Naaman, when
Elisha had done that great cure upon him; whose hands were no less full of
thanks, then his mouth. Dry and barren profession of our obligation, where is
power to requite are unfit for noble and ingenuous spirits. And so of Jacob; if
(says he) I come again unto my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be
my God, and this stone which I have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house;
and of all that he shall give me, I will give the tenth unto him again, Genesis
28. 21, 22. And Hannah, who vowed a vow, and said, O Lord of Hosts, if thou will look on the trouble of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget
thine handmaid, but give unto thine handmaid a Man-child; than I will give
him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon
his head: and she did it accordingly, 1 Samuel 1. 11. 27, 28.

An ingenuous disposition cannot receive favors without thoughts of return.
Behold thou have been careful for us (says Elisha to the Shun^mite,) with all
this care: what is to be done for thee? would thou be spoken for to the
King, or to the Captain of the Host? what is there to be done for thee? And
when he understood that a son was the only thing she wanted and desired, her
husband being old, he obtained of the Lord to fulfill her desire, 2 Kings 4.
13. to 17. Both Christ, and the Angels, the Prophets and Apostles were wont to
be very beneficial guests to their hosts, and hostesses, and ever paid
ablessing for their entertainment. Elias requited his hostess with a
supernatural provision: He gave also her own, and her sons life to her for
his board. Yea, in that woeful famine, 1 King. 17. He gave her, and her son,
their board for his house-room. Yea, it is storied of Pyrrbus an Heathen, that
he did exceedingly grieve, for that a friend of his happened to dye, before he
had requi^ed his many favors.

Those hearts that are truly thankful, delight no less in the repayment of a
good turn, then in the receipt: and do as much study, how to show their servent
affections for what they have received, as how to compass favors when they
want them. Their debt is their burden, which when they have discharged, they
are at ease, and not before. Resembling Homer, who never forgot to requite a
benefit received, nor could be at rest, until he had done it.

CHAP. XIX.
Nor can there be a better sign of true love, and sound amendment, then that
we can be content to be loosers by our repentance. Many formal penitents have
yielded to part with so much of their sin, as may abate nothing of their
profit. It is an easy matter to say, (yea and think what they say to be true)
that they love God and Christ. There is no Dives among us, but he thinks scorn
to be charged with the want of love. What, not love God? But ask his
conscience the next question; What good have thou done for his sake? No he can
remember none of that, no goodness, no works of mercy or charity has come
from him all his life long. But know this thou wretched rich miserly muckworme,
that thou art bound to perform these works of mercy to the poor, both out of
duty, and thankfulness to him, who has given thee thy self, and all that
thou have. Yea, if thou be not a mere beast, or block: When thou beholdest
them (the poor I mean) behold how thou art beholding to Him, that suffered
thee not to be like them. Has God given thee all things, and do thou then
think it a great matter to give him back something? especially seeing thou
give him but of his own, as David gladly acknowledged, 1 Chr. ^ 9, 14. For
shame consider of it, and let thy conscience make answer to what I shall ask
thee, what can be more equal and just then to give a little unto him, who has
given all unto us? especially seeing he has granted unto us the use only of
what we possess, reserving still the chief propriety unto himself, and to
spare something unto the poor, out of our abundance at his request, who has
not spared to give unto us his only begotten, and dearly beloved son; that
by a shameful death he might free us from everlasting death and condemnation,
and purchase for us eternal happiness. Yea in truth, what madness is it to
deny, being requested, to give at his appointment some small portion of our
goods? who by his own sight and authority may take all. And what senseless
folly were it to turn away our face from him, when he asks in the behalf of
the poor, some earthly and momentany trifles, from whom we expect as his free
gift, Heavens felicity, and everlasting glory.

CHAP. XX.
But to drive home this duty to men's consciences, see further what cause we
have to extend our liberality to the relief of Christ's poor members; For here
I shall take occasion to slide into a discourse, which in the Title page I
durst not once mention, as well knowing how averse most men are, and how
desperately most rich men's hearts are hardened against the poor; whereof i will
only give you an instance.

Some six years since, having taken no small pains in composing the Poores
Advocate in eight parts, I printed the first two of them with these words in
the front; That it is an incomparable favor to the rich, that there are poor
to accept of their Charity, had they the Wit to know it. This they no sooner
read but their bloods would rise, saying; We must be beholding to the poor to
accept of our charity, we will see them hanged first. An expression more fit for
a Caniball, then a Christian: And certainly such men had need to look to it in
time: for of all men in the world, they shall have judgment without mercy,
that are so miserably unmercifull. And I would wish them, to take heed of
turning the deaf ear to Christ, when in his members he cries to them for mercy:
lest Christ turns the deaf ear to them, when they (being in far greater need)
shall cry to him for mercy.

Again, (which is worth the observing) when the said two parts took so with the
good, that provision was made, and a way thought upon that to every rich man in
the Nation, there should be one of them, freely given for the poores good, by
the Clerks of every Parish, they (I mean some of them) so abused their trust,
that the donor was forced to withdraw his hand: whereby both Rich and Poor,
might sustain no little loss, the one in their souls, the other in their
purses. For it is well known that a person of quality upon the reading of it,
sent in many hundred pounds to the out parishes, to he be bestowed by the
Churchwardens upon their poor. If any shall think I wrong Parish Clerks, let
them but ask the Clark of Lawrence Church, whether the then Reverend Pastor,
did not deliver him five and fifty of those Books, with the names of five and
fifty rich men in that parish, together with a great charge to deliver them
into every of their hands. And whether he did not most perfidiously and
sacrilegiously barter them away to the Book Women for other Books, instead of
giving them to the parties. And this (for i will mention no more) I acquaint the
world with, as tendering the good of his soul, more then that of his honor, for
I have done in private what lies in me, to make him sensible of the crime, but
he is the more obstinate.

Now that I have taken occasion to shroud the Remains of the poores Advocate,
under the notion of how to become happy here and hereafter, these are my
reasons.

First, Bounty to the poor, is the most proper means, tending to happiness.
And secondly, it is very probable, that many will read or hear thus far, under
this notion (whether out of curiosity or self ends) and having heard hitherto,
will be willing also to hear me a few words in behalf of the poor, (which is
of no less concernment) when otherwise they would have heard neither of both.
Now such as have read the two first parts of The Poores Advocate, may remember,
that I have dispatched these six heads. 1. The necessity of the duty. 2. The
persons of whom it is required. 3. They to whom it must be performed. 4. What.
5. How. 6. How much we are to give.

In the other six parts, I intended to have treated, 1. Of the time when we are
to give. 2. Of the means inabling to it. 3. Of the ends to be propounded in
it. 4. Of the impediments that hinder it. 5. Of the remedies or encouragements.
And 6. Of the Uses. But finding that it would have been as welcome to the
parties concerned therein, as water into a ship, I will only give you a few
gleanings out of them: In which also I will more respect the weight and benefit
of the matter, then the order of handling: that so I may couch all, within a
little compass.

CHAP. XXI.
Touching the grounds, reasons, and inducements, which may move men to be
bountiful and beneficent to the poor, with which I will begin: they are so
many, that only to name them all, would by worldlings be thought too much.
Wherefore I will only nominate such, as every wise man (even out of self love)
will allow for weighty. And therein be as brief as possibly I can in running
them over.

1. If in some good measure we perform this duty, if we deal our bread to the
hungry, bring the poor that are cast out into our houses; and that seeing them
naked, we cover them, as it is I say 58. 7. God has promised and given it
under his hand, that it shall go well with us in our estates, and that we shall
be no loosers by it, but he will surely pay it us again, Ecc. 11. 1. Luke 6.
38. Matthew. 6. 4. And lest any should be discouraged, from performing these
duties, because he is able to give but a little: he assures us, that whosoever
gives a cup of cold water unto a Disciple in the name of a Disciple he shall
in no wise lose his reward, Matt. 10. 42. And that because this reward is not
grounded upon the excellency and merit of the work, but upon Gods rightousness
and truth, in fulfilling his promises, according to that Heb. 6. 10. For God is
not unrighteous, that he should forget your work, and labor of love, which ye
have showed toward his name, in that ye have minstred to the Saints, and do
minister; Whereby he implies that it is no more possible, that those who in
love and obedience, have exercised themselves in these works of mercy, should
lose their reward, then that God himself should lose his righteousness. And the
wise man tells us, that he who has pity on the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and that which he has given, he will repay again, Prove. 19. 17. Neither
in reason can it be otherwise, for if mercy and bounty be in God, as an
inexhanstible and everspringing fountain, and in us as a little stream that
flows from it, how is it possible that our small and shallow rivulets of
mercy should flow to our Neighbors, and that the everlasting spring of Gods
mercy and goodness should be dry unto us? or how should the stream flow and the
fountain and well head be dried up? Yea let us assure our selves, that we
cannot suffer (in a wise and dis^reet manner) empty our selves of these waters
of Gods blessings, for the satisfying and quenching of the poor man's thirst,
and relieving of his wants: but we shall again be replenished from the fountain
of all goodness; and if like kind Nurses, we let these dear Children of God
suck the breasts of our bounty, for their comfort and nourishment: that which
is thus spent will again be restored: whereas if we churlishly refuse to
impart, and communicate this milk of Gods blessings, it is the readiest way to
have it quite dried up.

Neither are we to imagine that if we be careful in feeding Christ, that he
will be careless in feeding us. That he will deny us meat who has given us
his precious blood. That he will suffer us to want earthly trifles, who has
provided for us heavenly ricbes. Let such more then heathenish diffidence, be
far from us, who profess our selves to be of the household of Faith. Is it
not he (as Hannah speaks) that makes poor, and makes rich; that brings
low, and lifts up. Do we enjoy all things through Gods blessing? And can we
think to keep our riches, by disobeying his commandment? Indeed the contrary
we may well expect, according to that, Prove. 11. There is that scatters, and
is more increased; but he that spares more then is right, shall surely come to
poverty, verse. 24. And it is but just, if God deny thee thy daily bread, if
thou denyest him the crumbs.

And thus it appears, that by giving to the poor, we shall be no loosers. But
this is not all; For

CHAP. XXII.
Secondly, we shall not only receive our own again, but it shall be with great
increase. Yea, if the Word of God be true, there is not a more compendious way
to thrive and grow rich, then by being bountiful to the poor: But that bounty
is the best and surest way to plenty, and that it is so far from weakening a
man's estate, or bringing him to want and poverty, that it is the only means
to keep us from it, and to bring plenty and abundance. I have largely and
plentifully proved (if you remember) in Chapter the 30. of The best and surest
way to become rich: And I heartily wish, that the Reader would peruse the same:
For it is the most piercing and patheticall Chapter of all the parts, and
should methinks exceedingly whereon those that are greedy of gain, to put the
same into practice, and make them bountiful in doing these works of mercy,
and not think themselves loosers thereby; but rather to conclude as a merciful
man once did; The more I give, the more I have. As what Husbandman does not
reckon more of his seed in the ground, then of that in his Barn or Garner? And
shall we be such Atheists, as to trust the ground, and not God?

Yea, let us be so far from grudging these Alms to the poor, when we have fit
occasion, that we do them with joy and thankfulness unto God, that he has
given us so fit an opportunity of sowing our seed, that so we may reap a
fruitful harvest. For what husbandman would not readily and cheerfully hearken
to one, who should offer him fertile and fruitful land, ready prepared, and
ma^ured, to sow his seed in, with a faithful promise, that he should reap the
whole crop for his own use, and benefit? But thus God deals with us, when he
gives us opportunity of relieving the poor: Yea, in truth much better and more
ability, for he gives us even the seed also we sow with; and whereas, if a man
should freely receive of another, Land to sow his seed in, yet he were not sure
of a fruitful harvest: For many accidents usually happen, which cut off the
hopes of the most skillful Husbandman, as Frosts, and Mildewes, worms and
locusts, tares and weeds, too much wet, or too much drought may destroy the
corn, though the seed were never so good: or when it is ready for the sickle,
the enemy may come and reap it; but if we sow these seeds of our beneficence,
believing Gods promises, and hoping for a happy harvest: we shall never sail of
our expectation, because God who is infinite in power and truth, having
promised a fruitful crop, no outward accident is able to hinder it.

But lest what has been said should not be sufficient to prevail with men to
be merciful to the poor, let them hearken to, and mind well the many other
reasons and inducements that propound themselves, and then I doubt not, but
they will if wise, do good to others, if it be but to do a greater good to
themselves. For of all other graces, the grace of charity and bounty, has the
most and primest promises of reward, to us and ours, both here and hereafter,
of which I will mention some.

CHAP. XXIII.
Thirdly, God has further promised to confirm, strengthen, and continue, as
well as increase his prosperous and flourishing estate, and that in sundry
places of scripture already cited and elsewhere. He is gracious and full of
compassion, he shows favor and lends, he has given to the poor, etc. And
what shall be his reward? Wealth and Riches shall be in his house, he shall not
be moved for ever: his righteousness (aye and his riches too, as is implied in
the close) shall endure for ever, he shall be in everlasting remembrance, he
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord,
his horn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm. 112. 1. to 10. All grace shall
abound toward him, that he always having al sufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work, and hold out to the end, 2 Cor. 9. He devises
liber^ll things, and by his liberallity he shall stand, Isa. 32. 8. He draws
out his soul to the hungry, and comfort the afflicted: therefore his light
shall rise in obscurity, and his darkness shall be as the noon day; and the
Lord shall guide him continually, and satisfy his soul in draught, and make
fat his bones, he shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water
whose waters fail not: and they that shall be of him, shall build the old waste
places, he shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and he shall be
called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in, Isa. 58.
6 to 13. And the like Pro. 28. 27. He that gives unto the poor, shall not
lack: And so Psalm 37. 25. I have been young, and now am old, y ^ have I not
seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread: and why so? He is ever
merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed, as it follows in the next
verse, and in the next to that; He that does good shall dwell for ever more,
Verse 27. He shall not be forsaken, but the Lord will preserve him for ever,
Verse 28. He shall inherit the Land, and dwell therein for ever, Verse. 29. and
a great deal more to the same effect, Verse 31, 33, 34, 37, 39, 40. See more
Jer 17. 25. Psalm. 1. 3. and 32. 10. Job 1. 10. which are all pregnant places,
and full to the point in hand. But I may not stand upon it; Only read these
Scriptures and remember them.

Fourthly, he shall be blessed in his person, and that many ways: yea the
benefits and blessings, temporal, spiritual, and corporal, for soul and
body, which God has promised to bestow upon the merciful, for a reward of
their bounty, are infinite, of which observe with me these few.

First, touching corporal benefits and blessings. Blessed is the says the
Psalmist, that considers the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble, he will keep and preserve him alive, he shall be blessed upon the
earth, and not delivered unto the will of his enemies, Psalm 41. 1, 2, 3. Great
privileges! but to these are added, Isa. 58. If thou draw out thy soul to the
hungry, then shall thy health spring forth speedily, etc. verse 7. 8. But admit
the merciful man be long sick, God will preserve him alive, strengthen him
upon the bed of languishing; yea make all his bed in his sickness, the Lord
will stir up the feathers under him, his soul shall be at ease, and his body
sweetly refreshed, mercy shall be his cordial or pillow of repose, until he
be raised up again, Psalm 41. 1. to 11.

CHAP. XXIV.
But see how God has rewarded many particular persons for this most excellent
virtue. Abraham in his old age was blessed with an Isaac, a godly son and heir,
a glorious type of the worlds Redeemer, and entertained Angels by his
hospitality: yea the Son of God, the Lord of Angels, as Sinesius observes. The
Shunam^te that entertained the Prophet Elisha, received above a Prophets
reward; namely the promise and gift of a son when she was old, and the raising
of him to life when he was dead, and the restoring of her house and land, lost
in her long absence for the samine, 2 Kings 4 and 8. Chapters. Rebeccah got so
good and great an Husband by her hospitality, as Chrysostom observes. Lot was
honored with the entertainment of Angels, and preserved alive with his whole
family from the destruction of Sodom by his hospitality. The Widow of Sarepta
was blessed with a miraculous increase of her meal and oil, with the
preservation of her family in the time of famine; and with the resurrection of
her son, by her relieving the Prophet in his banishment, 1 Kings 17. Revell or
Jethro (for it is the same man under two diverse names) as Calvin proves upon
Exodus 2. for this, was rewarded with such a son in law as Moses, and by him
better instructed in the true worship of God. Publius the chief man of the
Island Melita, by entertaining St Paul and his companions gat his father healed
of a fever, and of a bloody flux, Acts 28. 8. It is likewise storied of
Stephen King of Hungary, and of Oswald King of England, that their right hands
did never putresie because so much exerc^sed in relieving the necessities of
such as were afflicted.

Again Fifthly, It brings the blessings of God upon all we (...), or do: And
we know that the blessing of God in effect is all, and does all, Thou shall
surely give to thy poor Brother, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou
give unto him: because for this thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in
all thy work, and in all that thou put thine hand to, Deuteronomy. 15. 10. And the
like Prove. 22. 9. Luke 14. 14. It were endless to name the particulars, wherein
God has promised to bless the merciful, see only Isa. 58. Psalm. 112. Prove.
10. and 22. Chapters, 2 Chronicles. 31. 10. Deuteronomy. 14 28, 29. Ezekiel. 44. 30. Or turn
to Luke 11. and there you shall see, that as fasting sanctifies the body, and
prayer the soul; so Alms does sanctify the substance. Give alms of those
things which ye have ( says our Savior) and behold all things shall be clean
unto you, ver. 41. Its not spoken without a behold. But,

CHAP. XXV.
Sixthly, the merciful man shall be no less blessed in his name and credit, he
shall be had in honor and reputation: according to that Prove. 14. He that
oppresses the poor, reproacheth him that made him; but he honors him that
has mercy upon the poor, ver. 31. And to this accords that of the Psalmist,
he has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for
ever his horn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm 112. 9. And so Proverbs 10.
His memorial shall be blessed, Verse 7.

And of this I might give you sundry examples, and preg^^^t. As Rachab, Gaius,
Job, The Centurian, Boas, Cornelius, and Merry: as how did our Savior value and
honor Mary's bounty? (though so slighted by him that was a thief, and carried
the bag, into which he would have had it come) when he commanded it should be
spoken of to her honor, wherefoever the Gospel should be preached throughout
all the world, Matthew. 26. 13, But experience sufficiently proves, that a
liberal and bountiful man, shall have all love and respect with men, all good
repute and report, both living and dead: Nor is this so light a blessing as
many deem it, for what says the wise man? The memorial of the just shall be
blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. 7. Tea a good name, is
better then a sweet ointment: and to be chosen before great riches, Prove. 22.
1. yea, then life it self.

Briefly, for conclusion of this point, let this be the use: when the poor at
your gates ask their daily bread, they highly honor you, yea after a sort they
make you Gods: therefore by your bounty and liberality, show your selves at
least to be Christians, to be men. Secondly, such as have by this divine virtue
obtained a good report: let it provoke them as much to excel others in doing
good, as they do excel them in hearing thereof. For I hold this a sure rule,
He is of a bad nature to whom good report and commendations are no spur to
virtue, but he is of a worse disposition, to whom evil report and blame, is no
bridle and retentive from vice, which made Tully so wonder at the strange
perverseness of Antony: whom neither praise could allure to do well, nor yet
fear of infamy and reproach deter from committing evil. But,

CHAP. XXVI.
Seaventhly, the spiritual blessings and benefits which accompany these works
of mercy, and thereby accrue to the soul even in this life's as they are
inestimable, so they are innumerable, lie nominate so many as may satisfy, and
not cloy.

First, it is the only means to have the soul prosper, kept safe and
preserved, Psalm. 36. Preserve my soul ( says David) for I am merciful, Verse.
2. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall also be
watered himself, Prove. 11. 25. The merciful man does good to his own soul,
Verse 17.

Secondly, it is rewarded with illumination and conversion, The two Disciples
that went to Emaus, were rewarded with illumination, for entertaining our
Savior as a stranger, Luke 24. 45. Whence St. Austin observes, that by the
duty of Hospitality, we come to the knowledge of Christ. Lo says St. Gregory,
the Lord was not known while he spoke, and he vouchsafes to be known while he
is fed. And then St. Albo^e the first Martyr, that ever in England suffered
death for the name of Christ, was converted from Paganism to Christienity by a
certain Clark, whom he had received into his house, fleeing from the
persecutors hands.

Thirdly, works of mercy are infallible signs of a lively faith; whereby we
may prove it to our selves, and approve it unto men. Jam. 2. 18. which fruits,
if our faith bear not, it is dead, and not a living body, but a carcass that
breaths not, verse 26. They are signs of a lively faith, for no man easily
parts wirh his worldly goods to these uses, unless by faith he be assured
that he shall have in lieu of them heavenliy and everlasting treasures. The
merciful man is ever a faithful man.

Fourthly, it testifies our unfeigned repentance, whereof it is that Daniel
says to Me^usba^nezer; Wherefore O King, break off thy sins by repentance, and
thine iniquities, by showing mercy unto the poor, Dan. 4: 27. The which
Zache^s practiced, Luke 19. For no sooner was he converted unto God, but to
testify his unfeigned repentance, he gives half his goods unto the poor,
Verse 8.

Fifthly giving much, is an infallible sign that many sins are forgiven us: as
our Savior speaks of the woman, Luke 7. 47.

Sixthly, by it we may know our selves to be the children of God 1 John 3. 14.
Yea and others may also know it, John 13. 34, 35. And hereby we know the
unmercifull to be none of Gods children: for the Father of Mercies has no
children but the merciful.

Seventhly, it is said that Obadia feared God greatly: for when Iesabel
destroyed the Prophets of the Lord, he took an hundred Prophets and bid them by
fifty in a cave, and he fed them with bread and water, 1 Kings 28. 3. 4.
Therefore it is a sure sign of the fear of God.

Eighthly, they are undoubted fignes of our love toward God. When as we so love
the poor for his sake, as that we be content to spare somewhat, even from our
own backs and bellies, that we may the more liberally communicate unto their
necessities. But this a wicked man will never do the only loves the Lord (...)
Laban did J^c^b, only to (...) riches by him; Or as Soul loved Samuel, to gain
honor by him. True they will say they love God, and perhaps think so too: but
let them say what they will, if unmercifull, I will never believe against
Scripture, that they love God whom they have not seen: that love not their
brother whom they have seen; if we love him, we will love one another, 1 John
4, 20, 11. If any man (says the Apostle) have these worlds goods, and sees
his Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3. 17. And us they are manifest signs
of our love to God, so also of our love toward our Neighbors: when as we
carry our selves in all Christian bounty toward them, as unto Children of the
same Father, and members of the same body: suffering with them in their wants;
through compassion and sellow-feeling, and rejoicing with them in their fullness
and prosperity. Hereby we know that we love the brethren: because our hearts
and hands are open to them, for love is bountiful. For otherwise it is but an
unprofitable, counterfeit, and hypocritical love, to make show of kindness and
compassion in word, and to perform nothing in deed; as Saint James plainly
affirms, James 2: 15. But that this alone is the best touchstone, to show the
sincerity and truth of our love; many places demonstrate, as 2 Cor. 8. 8, 24. 1
John 3. 18.

CHAP. XXVII.
And as our Almesdeeds are a sign of our love to God and our Neighbor: so the
quantity of our alms, (respect being had to the proportion of our estate) is a
sign of the quantity of our love, for he loves but little, that having much,
gives but a little; and contrariwise, his heart is inflamed with fervent love,
who has it inflamed with bounty toward his poor brethren: the extension of
our love toward them, being the true touchstone of the intention of our love
toward God. And as a great tree with many and large branches, is an undoubted
sign of a root proportionable in greatness: and a small shrub above the ground,
plainly shows that the root also is small which is under it: so is it with our
Almesdeeds which spring from it. For if we be bountiful in Alms, we are
plentiful in love; If we be slack in giving, we are cold in loving: but if we
be utterly defective, in bringing forth these excellent fruits, then it is a
manifest sign that this grace of love is not rooted, in us, 1 John 3. 17.

Ninthly, It is an evident demonstration that we have saving knowledge and
spiritual wisdom: for the wisdom that is from above, is full of mercy and good
fruits, James 3. 17. Otherwise we are not wise, our wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish, Verse. 15.

Tenthly, By these works of mercy, we make our calling and election sure, for
if we do these things we shall never fall as St. Peter speak^, a Pet. 1. 7, 8,
10. And St. Paul infers, Col. 3. Put on as the elect of God, holy and beloved,
the bowels of mercy and kindness, Verse 12. Which makes him in another place
call charity a never sailing grace. 1 Cor. 1. 8. And a little after, he uses
these words; Now abides, Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is Cherity, Verse 13.

Eleventhly, This is a duty which undoubtedly must justify the truth of our
religion, or else condemn us as hollow hearted, and swayed by hyp^crisie, James
1. This is pure religion, and undesiled before God, to visat the father less
and widow in their affliction, Verse 27. O that this lesson would enter home
into every one of our hearts, before we go out of our houses. For men may cry
up this side, and cry down that, but of all the three, the Priest, the Levite,
and the Samaritan; none but the Samaritan ( that showed mercy to him that was
fallen into the hands of th^eves, was wounded, and stripped of his raiment,) was
justified and approved of by our Savior, Luke 10, 36, 37.

And indeed God so highly prizeth, and esteems mercy and the works where in
it is exercised toward the poor: that he preferteth them before the outward
acts of relig^ous duties. Hosea 6. 6. I desired mercy and not sacrifice: that
is rather then sacrifice; This is the oblation which he chiefly requires, yea,
if we but look Micha 6. we shall find that God esteems it more, or above all
sacrifiees and burnt offerings, were it thousands of rams, and ten thousand
rivers of oil, Verse 6. 7. He has showed thee O m^n, what is good, and what
the Lord requires of thee: to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God, Verse ^ Finally these works of mercy, are not only anodor of a
sweet smell, and a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God: (as the
Apostle speaks, Phil. 4. 18.) But also such an oblation, as if we offer unto
God with a lively faith, the use of all the creatures shall be clean unto us:
according to that of our Savior, Luke 11. 41. See more Heb, 13. 16. Isa. 58.
6, 7, 8. James 1. 27. And this is a Twelfth benefit.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Thirteenthly, another no small benefit that we have thereby is, by our bounty
toward the poor, we have the benefit of their prayers unto God, the which are
very available, for the obtaining of all good things for us, the which argument
the Apostle uses to incite the Corinthians to a liberal contribution, 2 Cor.
9, 11. to 15. insomuch that when we hold our peace, or are sleeping in our
beds, the loins of the poor shall bless us, as it is Job 31. 20. and 29. 12,
13. Whereas on the contrary, he that gives not to the poor, shall lie open to
their curse, according to that Prove. 28, 27. and Deuteronomy. 15. 9, and 24, 15. the
which curses of the poor, he will hear and ratify, according to that, Job 31.
16. to 29.

Fourteenthly, By the same means also, we give them and others occasion of
praising, and glorifying God: whilst by the experiment of this ministration,
they see our professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 9. 13. Wherefore let us strive to abound in this duty, that
whiles they enjoy our hounty, we may enjoy their prayers; 2 Timothy 1. 18. and God
may have their praises, 2 Cor 9. 15. And so much the rather, for that of all
men, seldom is any great sin, shame or punishment fastened on the charitable^
for how should he speed ill that has the prayers of so many?

Fifteenthly, it is no small pleasure, and joy which a Christian takes in
performing these works of mercy; for first these virtuous actions in
themselves, do even for the present fill their hearts with joy, who rightly
perform them. But much more do they fill our hearts with joy, as they are
evident signs to assure us, that we are endued with Gods saving graces, and as
they do, being fruits of a lively faith, ascertaine us of our future reward,
and the fruition of Gods presence, where there is fullness of joy for ever
more. Yea the godly man, gives with more joy and thankfulness of heart, then
the other receives the same, as enough can hear me witness; Yea Seneca an
Heathen can testify the same: for he defines a benefit, to be an action
proceeding from love, yiedling joy both to him that receives it, and much more
to him that yeildeth it.

Sixteenthly, The inward habit of goodness and mercy in our hearts, exercised
in the outward actions of liberality and bounty by our hands, makes us to
resemble God himself; and that in such an attribute, as he delightetls above
all others to style himself withal. For howsoever he is infinite in glory,
power, and all perfections: yet most usually in the Scriptures, he is called a
God of mercy and compossion, and hereby principally, he makes himself known
unto Moses, desiring to see him, Exodus 34. 6. Nor can we in any thing resemble
God more, then in this grace: and therefore it is our Saviors exhortation,
that we be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6. 36. Now God
gives to all richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Yea, blessed be God, says the
Church, that daily ladeth us with benefits, that crowns us with loving
kindness, and compasses us about with new songs of deliverance, Psalm 103. and
36

Therefore seeing mercy and goodness do make us above all other graces to
resemble God, and then the creature (...) to greatest perfection and
blessedness, when he is the likest, and comes nearest unto to the excellency
of the Creator. And seeing we profess our selves to be children of our
gracious and glorious God: and we can no way grace our selves so much, as by
resembling our heavenly Father, in those attributes wherein he most shines and
excels: and nothing makes us more like him, then mercy and compassion: let
us hearken unto our Saviors injunction, and imitate our Father in being
beutifull as he is. These are some of the spiritual blessings and benefits
which God has promised for reward to the merciful in this life: it would take
up too much time to mention the many more that might be added; therefore I will
leave them, and so procced to those that are eternal, and concern the life to
come, which I would have you especially mind: yea if it be possible, pluck up
all your senses into your ^ars, that you may the more mind, and better
remember; for it is enough to ravish any Christian soul, and to make him to
stretch his estate upon the tenters, that he may be the more liberal, in
relieving Christ's poor members; for the greater the liberality, the greater
the recompense of reward, Phil. 4. 17. 18.

CHAP. XXIX.
That the merciful man, who distributeth liberally to the poor on Earth, (in
conscience and obedience to Gods Word) whall be rewarded with the unvaluable
gain, and matchless profit of everlasting salvation, is assured us here, and
shall be enjoyed of us hereafter. First, at the Hour of Death. Secondly, at the
day of Judgment, is fully declared Luke 14. 13, 14, 16, 9. Prove. 11. 17. 1 Timothy 6, 18, 19. Math. 5. 7. and 6. (...) and 19. 29. But take these two places
for all: Sell that ye have and give alms, (at no hand let the poor want, what
shift soever ye make, rather sell then want to give) provide your selves baggs
which wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens which fails not: where no thief
approaches, neither (...) corrupts, Luke 12. 33, 34. this is the first, the
second is more full then that. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all the holy Angels with him: then shall he fit upon the throne of his glory,
and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats, and he shall set
the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left; Then shall the King say
unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye
took me in, naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye vifited me, I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. And in as much an ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me Ma^th. 25. 31. to 41.

See here the incomparableness, and infinite difference between the work and
the wages! ye admire the love and bounty of God, and bless his name: who for
the performance of so small a work, has proposed so great a reward; and for
the obtaining of such an happy estate, has imposed such an easy task. Here is
a Kingdom, even the Kingdom of Heaven, Which cannot he valued with many
millions of worlds, in recompense of a little mear, drink, and apparel, who
then (that is in his right sense.) would not turn all his scraping into giving?
yea what can we think too much, what not too little to give to attain eternity?
for this incorruptible Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. and for this Kingdom where
are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into
the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. 9. A place where shall no evil be
present, nor good absent, Matthew. 6. 20. In comparison whereof, all the Thrones
and Kingdoms upon Earth, are less then the drop of a bucket, Isay 40, 15. and
66. 1. Yea how little, how nothing, are the poor and Temporary Enjoyments of
this life, to those we shall enjoy in the next? 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Do thou desire Beauty, Riches, Honor, Pleasure, Long Life, or what ever
else can be named: no place so glorious by creation, to beautiful with
delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation, nor so
durable for lasting, Romans 8. 18. Heb. 12. 22. 1. Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 4, 17 There,
O There, one day is better then a thousand, there is rest from our labors,
peace from our Enemies, freedom from our sins, there is no Death nor Dearth. no
pining nor repining, no fraud, sorrow, nor sadness, neither tears nor fears,
defect nor loathing, Revel. 7. 16. 17. and 14. 13. and 21. 4. Job 3. 17. But of
this I have spoken at large, in The whole duty of a Christion. Now all this is
propo^^ded as a recompense for such as give what they have, have they but a
very cup of cold water, Matthew. 10. 42. Yea we cannot give so little to a
disciple in the name of a disciple, but it assures us of our right and title
unto this eternal inheritance. Heb. 6. 10. Prove. 14. 21. Col. 3. 12. 14. 2
Pet. 1. 7, 8, 10. 11. Phil: 4. 18. Matthew. 5. 7. Christ has promised to make
thee a great one in Heaven, if thou but relieve one of his little ones on earth.

Alms is a seed which we cast into the earth as it were, but we gather them
crop in Heaven. Whence the Apostle would have Timothy to charge them that are
rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the Lord: who gives us richly all things to enjoy. And that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves (mark his reason) a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. And hereupon it is, that he tells the Philippians, he was
glod that they had sent him a supply: not so much for his own benefit, as for
their gain, which should be great in the day of account, Phil. 4. 14. 17, 18.
And this makes Solomon say, that he who is merciful does good to his own soul,
Prove. 11. 17.

So that to distribute to the poor on earth, is before hand to provide a rich
treasure in Heaven. And who then that believes this, would not think himself
happy in such an exchange? Is not this the best Chimistry to turn Earth into
Heaven? is not this a good bargain to part with vain and uncertain things, to
partake of real and durable riches? Believe it, this is the best improvement,
and the most that can be made of these things: Whereupon St. Austin thus
exhorts, Si vis esse mercator optimus, faenerator egregius, da quod non potes
^etinere, ut recepias quod non poteris amittere; da modicum, ut recipas
cent^plum, da tempotalem possessionem, ut consequaris here ditalem aternan:
Would thou be a good Merchant? a great Usurer? give that thou can not
keep, that thou may receive that which cannot be lost: Give though but a
little, that thou may receive a thousand sold, give thy earthly goods, that
thou may obtain eternal life, though indeed this giving is rather a
receiving then a giving, a receiving of treasure for trash, and for things that
cannot be kept, a treasure that cannot be lost, as another has it: Nor do the
poor so much gain by what we give them, as we do, The deeds of the charitable,
do far more profit the giver then the receiver, and he who gives an alms does
himself a greater alms. Neither is it so much given as laid up, for we may
truly say, what I gave that I have, what I kept that I lost, as one caused it
to be set upon his gravestone. What the charitable man gives here, is but sent,
for he shall receive it again by Bill of Exchange in Heaven, and that with
unspeakable increase. Yea it shall be a notable advantage to us at the hour of
death: for when all other riches shall fail, what we have bestowed this way,
shall let us in to heave: God freely cronwing his own grace in us. Make your
selves friends of the Ma^mon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. The poor, says Gregory
Nicen, are appointed Potters, to let their rich Benefactors into Heaven. So
that to give much, is to keep much; and that what would otherwise be lost by
keeping, the charitable man keeps by loosing, And so proves richer under
ground, then ever he was above it, which makes one say;

He is not wise, who knowing he must hence;
In worldly building, makes great expense:
But he that builds for the world to come,
Is wise, expend he never so great a sum.
And another, he shall depart a beggar out of this world, who sends not a
portion of his estate before him, unto eternal bliss. Nay it manifestly
proves, that heaven is none of our Country, if we will send none of our wealth
thither before us. Or rather, that we think Heaven nothing worth, when we will
not give a little base pelse to compass it.

CHAP. XXX.
But if giving might not properly be called gaining, why is it compated to
sowing? Experieence proves, that if we keep our seed by us, it will corrupt:
but cast it into the earth we shall have it again with manifold increase. A
man treasures up no more of his riches, thou what he contributes in alms: The
fool in the Gospel filled his barnes, in filling the bellies of the poor, he
had done more wisely. I confess this is a point of Doctrine, which the world
will not receive, let God say what he will: (...) godly Chrysostom both
affirms and proves, that the rich are more beholding to the poor, then the
poor to the rich. The poor receive only a single alms, the rich have
returned them an hundredfold here, and everlasting happiness hereafter, Mat.
5. 7. and 25. 35. Luke 16. 9. wherein the prayers of their poor suppliants
carry no small stroke* For which see Cor. 9. 11. to 16. The poor are but the
ground, into which these seeds are cast: But we are the Husbandmen, who
disperse and scatter them. Now as the seed is chiefly for his benefit who
sows it, and not for the benefit of the ground into which it is cast: so the
poor have but the present use and possession of this seed of almes-deed; but
the benefit of the crop or harvest, belongs to those good Husbandmen, who sow
in these grounds the seeds of their beneficence.

Again, the poor receive only things transitory, and but of small (...) but
they that give, things spiritual and eternal, most inestimable and heavenly
riches! Why say we then we give to the poor? when as it may more truly be said,
that we give unto our selves, rather then unto them, Dan. 4. 27. Prove. 11. 24.
Why then should we think the poor so mightily bound and beholding unto us for
our scrape and superfluius relics; or that we do such a meritorious
business, whenwe largely relieve them? And not rather think our selves
beholding unto them and to God for them, seeing they are the occasions of such
inestimable gain, for such trifling disbursements; as Austine speaks.

And to speak rightly, giving is not more an act of Charity then of Christian
policy: since we shall not only receive our own again, but have a far greater
return then can be expected, upon an adventure to the East Indies: Since we are
more happy that there are poor upon whom we may exercise our charity, then
they are, that there are rich who do relieve their wants though with never so
great supply; for as Austine speaks, if there were not some to receive thine
alms, thou could not give Earth and receive Heaven: Wherefore give thanks
unto him who has given thee means by such a small prise, to procure a thing so
precious.

Besides, we may boldly aver, with Chrysostom; that without poverty riches
would be unprofitable: As consider that if with Adam and Eve, we had a whole
world, but no body to make ready provision and to attend upon us, nor do any
thing for us; what joy could great men take of their riches, if there were not
poor men to do mean offices for them, what low employments should the highest
be forced to descend unto, if there were no inferious to perform them* How then
should not a considerate man love and be liberal to them, and exceedingly
bless God for them, and not do as do the most, scorn them, and not think them
worthy a familiar-word^r^ courteous look.

CHAP. XXXI.
And certainly, he wants both grace and wit, who does not admire the bounty and
goodness of God, in that he has offered us the opportunity of such sowing,
such reaping, yea, O Lord what are we? that thou should give us plenty of all
things here also, which unto them thou: have denied: so that every way it is
(as our Savior tells us) a more blessed thing to give then to receive, (which
the Apostle would have us to remember, Acts 20, 34, 35.) Yet no reason can we
allege on our behalf, but O the depth! Romans 11. 33. Wherefore do thou O my
God and Redeemer enlarge my heart with thankfulness, and implant this grace in
my heart. O make me liberal of my money, as thou wast of thy blood. O let me
have an heart to give Food and Raiment to those, for whom thou gave thy self
a ransom. Yea, of all other graces, enlarge my heart with Christian Charity
and compassion: since it is a grace so universally profitable, and withal so
amiable. As O the loveliness and profitableness of this Christian grace! For to
do good to the poor, is more then a treble good: it pleasures them, most of
all pleasures the doer: for it brings blessings upon their Souls, Bodies,
Estates, Names, Posterity, it increases their reward, causes the poor to pray
for, and praise God for us, and also others to glorify him; it is an odor
that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God; who will
fulfill all our necessities, through his riches with glory in Jesus Christ, as
the Apostle delivers it, Phil. 4. 16. to 20. Whence that great praise of it, 1
Cor. 13. 13. Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the chiefest of these is
Charity. Whence Sozomen calls it, ^a sure toaken of a most virtuous mind; and
Lallantius a principal virtue; and Calvin the chiefest office of humanity
amongst us; and Aretius, the most elegant ornament of a Christian life, and the
holy Ghost, a never failing grace, 1 Cor. 13 8. whence also it is so highly
commended in the Saints in all ages. As how is Abraham commended for his
hospitality, and almsdeeds? And Lot and Corunelius? (of whose alms there was
in the presence of God, a memorandum made, Acts 10. 31.) and Darcas? (whose
good works and almsdeeds were to be seen, and shown, when she has self was
not; and the poor could not tell how with patience to take her death, she had
done so much good for them all the time of her life, Acts 9. 36. 39.) And those
Christians, Acts 11. 29, 30. for the care they had of the poor, in the Apostles
time, Acts 2. 45. Thus the Macedonians are highly commended, and much honored
for their freeness and forwardness, in relieving of the poor brethren at
Jerusalem, as is seen upon record, Romans 15. 26. And again, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, etc.
And the like of the Philippians, and many more whom I must pass over in
silence.

CHAP. XXXII.
And as bounty is the most beneficial grace, and giving the greatest gain in
every respect: For alms to the poor, is like pouring a paile of water into a
dry Pump, that fetches up much more then was put in: So coutrariwise, to be
unmercifull to the poor, and hard-hearted, or to wrong them whereby to enrich
our selves is alike heynons sin, and the ready way to want here, and to find no
mercy hereafter, as might most plentifully be shew^, Prove. 22. 16. James 2. 13.

It is said, Prove. 11. He that withholds more then is meet shall surely come
to poverty, ver. 24. And so Ver. 25, 26. He that with-draweth his corn, the
people shall curse him; but blessings shall be upon the head of him that
sells corn. And Prove. 58. He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack; but
he that hides his eyes, shall have many a curse, verse. 27. And Prove. 22. 16.
He that oppresses the poor, to increase his riches; and he that gives to the
rich shall surely come to poverty. Give then, that you may never want: hide not
your eyes, that you may not inherit many a curse. But of this by the way
only; for I would have you specially to take notice, that if we show no mercy
here, if we will not hear the suits of the poor when they crave of us for
relief, neither will God give us audience, when we shall sue unto him
hereafter. According to that Prove 21. 13. Who so stops his ears at the cry
of the poor, he also shall cry himself, and not be heard. Yea, he shall have
judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy, James 2. 13. For whereas to
those that have sed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick, etc.
Christ shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Contrariwise to those that
have not done these duties he shall say, depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was an hungered,
and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me as drink, I was a
stranger, and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not ^ For inasmuch as ye did it not to my poor
members, ye did it not to more So these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the other into life eternal, Matthew. 25. 31. to 47. Where are
two things considerable: They to save their purses, would not be at a little
cost for the poor while they lived: and what have they got by it Now they are
dead, b^t first, an everlasting separation from Gods blisfull presence, and
th^se unutterable joys before mentioned, and to be for ever co^fined in a bed
of quenchlesse^flames. For this departure is not for a day, no^ for years of
days, nor for millions of years, but for eternity, into such pains as can
neither be expressed, nor conceived: There shall be no end ^f plagues to the
wicked and unmercifull, Math. 25. 41. Mark 9. 44. Their worm shall not dye,
neither shall their fire be quenched, Isa. 66. 24.

Neither is the extremity of pain inferior to the perpetuity of it, Rev. 19,
20. and ^0. 14. and 18. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Heb. 10. 2^. Jude 6. The plagues of the
first death are pleasant, compared with those of the second: For mountains of
sand were lighter, and millions of years shorter then a tithe of these
torments, Rev. 20. 10. Jude 7. The pain of the body is but the body of pain;
the anguish of the soul, is the soul of anguish. For should we first burn off
one hand, then another, after that each arm, and so all the parts of the body,
it would be deemed intolerable, and no man would endure it, for all the
pleasures and profits this world can afford, and yet it is nothing to that
burning of body and soul in Hell. Should we endure ten thousand years
torments in Hell, it were grievous, but nothing to eternity; should we suffer
one pain, it were miserable enough: but if ever we come there, ou^ payns shall
be for number and kinds infinitely various, as our pleasures have been here:
Every sense and member, each power and faculty, both of soul and body, shall
have their several objects of wretchedness, and that without intermission, or
end, or ease, or patience to endure it, Luke 12. 5. and 16. 24. Matthew. 3. 12.
Yea, the pains and sufferings of the damned, are ten thousand times more than
can be imagined by any heart under heaven. It is a death, never to be painted
to the life: no pen, nor pensill, nor art, nor heart can comprehend it, Mat.
18. 8, 9. and 25 30. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Isa. 5. 14. and 30. 33.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Now what heart would not bleed to see men, yea multitudes run headlong into
these tortures, that are thus intolerable? da^ce hoodwinked i^to this
perdition. O the folly and madness of those tha^ prefer earth, yea, hell to
heaven! time to eternity, the body before the soul; yea the outward estate
before either soul or body. These are the worlds fools, mere children, that
prefer an apple before their inheritance: Besotted sensualists, that consider
not how this life of ours, if it were not short, yet it is miserable: and if it
were not miserable yet it is sho^t* that suffer themselves to be so bewitched
with the love of their money, and their hearts to be r^veted to the earth, to
be so inf^aved to coverousnesse, as to make gold their God? C^rtainly were they
allowed to have but a ^ight of this Hell, they would not do th^^* if they did
but either see or foresee, what they shall one day (without serious and
unfeigned repentance) feel, they would not be hired with all the worlds wealth,
to hazard in the least the loss of those everlasting joys before spoken of,
or to purchase and plunge themselves into those ease less and everlasting
flames of fire and brimstone in hell, there to ^ry body and soul, where shall
be an innumerable company of Devi^s and damned spirits to affright and torment
them, but not one to comfort or pity them. But O that thou who art the Sacred
Monarch of this mighty frame! would give them hearts to believe, at least,
that the soul of all sufferings, are the sufferings of the soul; that as
painted fire is to material, such is material to hell fire* That things
themselves are in the invisible world: in the world visible but their shadows
only: And that whatsoever wicked men enjoy here, it is but as in a dream,
their plenty is but like a drop of pleasure, before a river of sorrow and
displeasure; and whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery before a
river of mercy and glory. Then would they think it better to want all things,
then that one needful thing; whereas now they desire all other things, and
neglect that one thing which is so needful: They would be glad to spare
something from their superfluities, yea if need requ^re even from their
necessaries, that they might relieve and cherish the poor distressed members of
Jesus Christ. And let so much serve to have been spoken of the reasons that
concern our selves in particular, and how God has promised to bless the
merciful man in his soul, body, name, and estate. I should now go on to
declare, that what the liberal man gives, his seed shall inherit: But I
consider, that if for the increasing of their estates, for the obtaining of
heaven, and the avoiding of everlasting destruction of body and soul in Hell,
will not prevail with rich men to do some good with their goods while they
live; wharsoever else can be spoken, will be lost labor, and to no purpose. I
grant there are some of them such despera^e doting fools, that they can find in
their hearts to damn their own souls, and go to hell, to leave their sons
rich: and therefore it will not be amiss to set down (or point them to) a few
of those promises which God has made to the merciful or liberal man's seed,
and posterity after him. I Will allege but three places only.

CHAP. XXXIV.
That if we bountifully relieve the poor, the reward of o^r charity shall not
only extend to us, but also to our Offspring and Progeny; the Prophet Esaias*
witnesses, Chap. 58. where he tells us, that if we will draw out our soul to
the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, the Lord will not only satisfy
our souls in drought, and make fat our bones, but th^^ those also that come of
us shall prosper unto many generations, ver. 10, 11, 12. And also the Psalmist,
Psalm. 37. I have been young, and now a^^ old says he, yes have I not seen
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging ^^ead, verse. 25. then give^ the
reason; He is ever merciful and ends, and his seed enjoyes the blessing,
verse. 26. And so Psalm. 112. His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation
of the righteous shall be blessed, Verse. 2. to 6. Now what better inheritance
can we leave to our Children, then the blessing of God? which like an
ever-springing fountain, will nourish and comfort them in the time of drought,
when as our own provision which we have left unto them may fail; and when the
heat of affliction arises, will like standing waters be dried up.

Nor is this only probable, but God has set down that it shall be so: For he
speaks far otherwise of the unmercifull, as Psalm. 109. Let his children be
fatherless, and his wife a widow: Let his children be continually vagabonds,
and beg their bread. (I pray mind it) let them seek their bread also out of
desolate places. Let the extortioner catch all that he has, and let the
strangers spoil all his labor. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him,
neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children. Let his posterity
be cut off, and in the generation following, let their names be blotted out,
and the memory of them cut off from the earth; Because (mark the reason) he
remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy, Verse. 6. to 17.
all which he speaks by the spirit of prophecy, Though indeed we want not
examples of this in every age. Was not this fulfilled in H^man? and is it not
fulfilled daily in our experience? For hence it is, that riches ill got, or ill
kept, shift masters so often.

But take some other instances out of the Scriptures of both kinds; Jon^^than
is paid for his kindness to David, in Mephibosheth, Jethro for his love to
Moses, in the Kenites. 1 Samuel 15. 6. some hundreds of years after he their
Ancestor was dead. The Egyptians might not be unkindly dealt withal for their
harboring the Patriarchs, though they afflicted their posterity: But the
Moabites and Ammonites were either to dye, or not to enter into the
congregation of the Lord, to their tenth generation, because they met not Gods
Israel with bread and water in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 23. 3* 4.

God caused Saul to spare all the Kenites, for that they had showed mercy to
Israel, who otherwise had all of them been destroyed, 1 Samuel 15 6. Another
example you have in Job, 21. 18, 19, 20. all which shows, that God usually
blesses and rewards the children for their fathers goodness, The loving
kindness of the Lord (says the Psalmist) endures for ever and ever upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens children, Psalm. 103. 17.
And so on the other side, Eternal payments God uses to require of their
persons only, temporary often times of succession, as we sue the Heirs and
Executors of our debtors.

Now if this be so; that what the liberal man gives, his seed shall inherit:
then the good provision that we should make for our Children, consist* not so
much in laying up, as in l^ying out, and more in making provision for their
souls, then for their bodies. I confess it is the case of ni^e parts of the
Parents throughout the L^^d, to provide for their childrens bodies, not for
their souls, (to show that they begat not their souls, but their bodies) to
leave fair estates for the worser part, nothing for the estate of the better
part. They desire to leave their children great, rather then good; and are more
ambitious to have their sons Lords on earth, than Kings in heaven But as he
that provides not for their temporal estate, is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy
5. 8. So he that provides not for their eternal estate, is little better then
a Devil.

The use which I would have you make of the premises is this; Let none refuse
to give, because they have many children, but give the rather out of love to,
and for their children sakes, that God (who as you see has engaged himself)
may be their Guardian, and provide and take care for them.

Or if not for their souls, yet for thine own: For why should thou love
thy children better then thine own person? and in providing for them, neglect
thy self? Yea* why should thou prefer their wealth before thine own soul?
and their flourishing estate in the world, which is but momentany and mutable,
before the fruition of those joys which are infinite and everlasting? Will it
nor grieve and gall thy conscience another day to think, that for getting, or
saving some trifles for thy posterity on earth, thou have lost Heaven? or to
remember, that thy children ruffle it out in worldly wealth* and superfluous
abundance? when thou shall be stripped of all, and want a drop of cold water to
cool thy scorching soul in hell.

CHAP. XXXV.
Thus I might go on, and enlarge my self upon this, and add thereunto many
other reasons.

First, in regard of God. Secondly, in regard of Christ. Thirdly, in regard of
the poor. Fourthly, in regard of others. I should also according to the order
first proposed, show what are the ends to he propounded in our giving alms,
and lastly the several impediments that hinder men from giving* but I find
(which when I fell upon it, I did not soresee) matter representing it self,
like those waters in Ezekiel, Chap. 47. which at the first were but anckle
deep, and then knee deep, and then up to the loins; which afterward did so
rise and flow, that they were as a River which could not be passed over. Or
like that little cloud which Elias his servant saw, 1 Kings 18. Much has been
said of this subject, but much more might be said; for I could carry you a
great way further, and yet leave more of it before then behind. But I am loath
to tire my Reader, or cause any to make an end, before they begin, as not
seldom does Addition in this case bring forth substraction, and more writ,
cause less to be read. Wherefore I will only give you the sum of some few
particulars briefly, and leave the rest.

That little which I intend to deliver is: First, the near communion that is
between the poor and us with our head Christ. For besides the civil communion
that is between all men, as being of one flesh, the offspring and generation
of God, Acts 17, 28, 29. The sons of the same Father Adam, and Noah, and so
brethren one with another, and proceeding as so many flowers from one root,
many Rivers from one fountain; many arteries from one heart, many veins from
one liver, and many ^ine^s from one brain. And likewise of the same Country
and Commonwealth, yea of the same City and Corporation, yea perhaps near
Neighbors and parishi^ners, (every of which the Holy Ghost makes a sufficient
argument to move us to do these works of mercy in relieving the poor, Isa. 58.
6, 7.) There are many spiritual respects, and divine relations which make a
more near communion between Christians one with another: for we are elected to
the same eternal life and happiness, we are not only Gods workmanship.
created in Adam according to his own glorious image, but re^created and
restored unto the divine Image (lost by Adam) in Christ the second Adam: we are
redeemed in our souls and bodies, with the same precious blood of Jesus
Christ, we are partakers of the same calling, whereby we are chosen out of the
world, and gathered into the Church and communion of Saints, that we may
inherit eternal glory together, and that out of darkness into mavelous
light, and out of a desperate condition, to be partakers of the same precious
promises. And by virtue of this Calling, we serve one and the same God, are of
one Church and family, and have one Religion, one faith, one baptism, are
invited guests to the same Table and Supper of our Lord, are all Heirs and
Co-heires of the same heavenly kingdom, and therein annexed also with Christ
our elder brother.

Finally, we are brethren of the same Father, the only Spouse of the same
heavenly Bridegroom, and members of the same mystical body, whereof Jesus
Christ is the head; so that the nearest, and strongest communion that can be
imagined, is between Christians one with another, and all of them with their
head Jesus Christ: And should not all this move us to relieve them? Yea, more
then all this, If we do good to our fellow members, the benefit will redound
unto our selves, who are of the same body; even as the hand giving nourishment
to the mouth, and the mouth preparing it for the stomach, do in nourishing it
provide nourishment for themselves also. Yea more then all this, there is such
a near and strong union and communion with the poor, together with us, and
with our head Christ our Savior: That he esteem^th th^^ as done to himself
which is done unto them; even as the head acknowledges the benefit done unto
it, which the meanest member of the body receives. Yea, in truth, that is much
more acceptable which we do for his poor members, then if we should do it to
his own person, as being a sign of greater love: For it is but an ordinary
kindness to confer benefits upon our dearest friends, but to extend our bounty
to the poorest and meanest that belong unto them, is a sign of much greater
love. For if for their sakes only, we do good unto these, how much more would
we be ready to do it unto themselves, if they had occasion to crave our help*
And as in this regard, he much esteems this Christian bounty, so he will
richly reward it also at the day of ^udgeme^t. For then these merciful men,
who have relieved the poor for Christ's sake, shall with ravishing joy hear
that sentence; Come ye blessed of my Father because the works of mercy which
they have done to the poor, Christ will acknowledge as done unto himself. And
this will more rejoice thy soale hereafter, then it does now refresh the others
body, when Christ shall say unto thee, Come thou blessed, and inherit the
Kingdom. Nor will it then repent thee, that thou have parted with a small part
of what God has given thee to the poor.

CHAP. XXXVI.
And indeed what can be a more forcible reason to make our hearts relent,
though they be never so stony? and our bowels to yearn with pity and compassion
toward the poor; though they were of brass, and iron, Then to consider, that
our dear Lord and Savior in them does crave relief: for who is so more then
bru^ishly ungrateful, that can turn him away empty handed? Who being
infinitely rich in all glory and happiness, was contented for our sakes to
become poor, that by his povertly he might communicate unto us his heavenly
riches. Who would not give Christ lodging? Yea even (if need should require)
the use of his own bed, if he remember, that Christ was content so far to
abase himself for our sakes, as to make a stable his chamber, and a manger his
lodging, that we might be admitted into his heavenly, and everlasting mansious.
Who would deny to cloth him being naked? who has clothed our nakedness, and
covered our filthiness with the precious robe of his righteousness, in which
we stand accepted before God, and receive the blessing of eternal happiness.
Who would not spare food out of his own belly to relieve poor Christ, who
has given unto us his blessed body to be our meat, and his precious blood to
be our drink, whereby our souls and bodies are nourished unto everlasting
life? Who would not leave all pleasure and profit to go and visit him in his
sickness and imprisonment, that left heaven, and his Fathers bosom, that he
might come to visit and redeem us with the inestimable price of himself? Yea,
if wise, we will count it an honor, whereof we are very unworthy. As most
unworthy we are of such an honor as to relieve hungry, thirsty, and naked
Christ in his poor members. whence the Macedonians counted, and called it a
favor that they might have their hand in so good a work, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3,
4. And that David thanks God, that of his own he would take an offering, 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. And this is another reason to convince men, that it is most just
and equal they should be liberal to the poor members of Jesus Christ.

And so much touching the reasons and motives to this Christian duty. Then
which, there cannot he either more, or clearer, or stronger, or weightier
inducements, to persuade to any one thing in the world, then there is to this,
if men have either hearts or brains.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The next to be considered is, The time when we are to give, and that is
twofold.

First, when an opportunity of doing good offers it self, do it speedily
without delay, readily entertain the first ^ot on, withold not good from thy
Neighbor, when it is in thy power to do it. Say not to him that is in present
need, go and come again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by
thee, Prove. 3. 27, 28. When Lazarus is i^ need of refreshment, let him not
wait, or lie long at thy door, Luke 16. 20. 21, 22. For nothing is more
tedious, then to hang long in suspense: and we endure with more patience, to
have our hopes beheaded, and quickly dispatched, then to be racked and tortured
with long delays, according to that Prove. 13. 12. Hope deferred, makes the
heart sick; but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life. For as (...)
says, Beneficentia est virtus que (...) non patitur: Beneficence is a virtue
which disliketh all delays. And as Seneca tells us, (...) ^it as properat;
All goodness is quick of hand, and swift of foot, and hates as well the
paralyticall ^^^king, and staggering of those who doubt whether to give or no;
as the gouty lamenesse of such, as after they are resolved to give, make but
slow have. The greater speed, the greater love, for love can abide no lingering.
Then does a benefit loose his grace, when it sticks in his fingers who is about
to bestow it, as though it were not given, but pluck from him: and so the
receiver praises not his Benefactors bounty, but his own importunity, because
he does not seem to have given, but to have held one weakly against his
violence. These delays show unwillingnesse; Et qui moratur neganti proximus
est: He that delays a benefit, is the next door to him that denies it: Even
as on the other side, a quick hand is an evident sign of a free heart. For
proximum est libenter facientis cit^ facere; It is the property of him that
gives willingly, to give speedily. Being of Boa^ his spirit, of whom N^^^y
could say out of a common fame, That he would not be in rest, until he had
finished the good which was propounded to him, Ruth 3. 18.

And as speed in bestowing graceth the gift, yea doubles it in respect of the
giver, so it doubleth the benefit to him that receives it. Nam bis dat qui
cito dat, he gives twice, that gives quickly; and the swifter that a benefit
comes, the sweeter it tastes. Present relief to present want, makes a bounty
weightier. And he cannot but esteem the benefit, that unexpectedly receives
help in his deepest distress: Whereas a benefit deferred, loses the thanks,
and many times proves unprofitable to him that expects it. Joshuah marches all
night, and fights all day for the Gibeonites, else he had as good have saved
his labor. And possibly through these delays, thy alms may come too late,
like a good gale of wind after shipwreck. When his health is lost for want of
relief, or state ru^ed for want of seasonable help; and so thy late and
untimely alms will do him little good: For it fares with men in their
strength and state, as with a leake in ship, or a breach of waters, which may
be easily stopped and stayed at the first appearing: but if let alone, will
within a while grow remediless. There must then be no stay in these actions of
beneficence, but only that which is caused through the receivers
shamefastness, But specially we must avoid delays in giving, after we have
granted; for there is nothing more bitter, then to be forced to make a new
(...) for that which has already heen obtained, and to find more difficulty
in the delivery, then in the grant.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Another thing required in doing good works, is constancy and assiduity, the
which is also employed in the Metaphor of sowing seed, for the Husbandman
contenteth not himself, to have sowed his seed in former years, but he
continues to sow it still to the end of his life: and though the Crop be
sometimes so small, that the feed it self is scarce returned, yet he will not
be discouraged, but will again cast it into the ground, in hope of better
success. And this must we do in sowing the seeds of our beneficience, casting
them daily into the ground, which we find fitted and prepared, and not think
it enough to a^^orne our selves with them as with our best apparel, which we
only put on in high and Festival days. We must make it our daily exercise,
benefacta benefactis partegentes (as one says) making one good deed an
introduction unto another, and never leaving to do good, so long as there is
any power in our hands to do it.

And unto this the Apostle exhorreth, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. Brethren, be not weary of
well doing. And 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. Ever follow that which is good, both among your
selves, and to all men. And in this we shall imitate our heavenly Father, and
approve our selves to (...) his children, who renews his mercies unto us
every morning, and ^^^^iplyeth his blessings upon us every day with a now
supply, and so we shall be sure to receive a rich reward: For it we be steadfast
and (...), always abounding in these good works of the Lord, we may be
assured, that our labor shall not be in vain, in the Lord, as it is promised,
1 Cor. 15. 58. Many other places there are, that require us to give constantly
to seven, and also to eight, as Solomon phraseth it, even so often as the
necessities of the Saints require: For th^^s the Apostle says, (...) is the
necessities of the Saints: He does not say distribute, but distributing, using
the participle, which notes a continued act of (...) says St. Paul of the
Philippians, (...) sentence and again to my necessity. A Wellhead, or a Spring,
ru^^ with a constant stream, and will not be dry: so should merciful deeds
flow from us. The liberal Man ill devise of liberal things, and continue his
liberality, Isa. 32. 8. And such in one was Boaz, of whom Naomi could say out
of (...) common (...), Blessed be he of he Lord, for he cease not to do good
to the living and to the dead, Roth. 2. 20.

Again, we most increase in doing good, our care Must be as to grow in grace,
so to bring forth new (...) of good works, imitating herein the Church of
Thyatir^, whose last works, excelled the first, Rev. 2. 19. Seeing we cannot
otherwise be sure to be constant in them. For they who go not forward, but
stand at a stay, will not long stay in their standing. And in this the
beneficence of a godly man differs from that which is in worldlings, who do
some good works of mercy by fits, but are not constant in well doing: and also
in that which is in Hypocrites, who do some good deeds for praise or profit,
but yet desist when their turn is served: The flame of their charity lasting
no longer than the fuel does wherewith it is nourished? but these have only a
green blade of an outward profession, and never come to the bearing of ripe
(...). They run well for a time, but get not the garland, because they do not
hold out to the end of the race. They are not true Christians, but only dead
images of Christianity, like that which (...) saw in a Dream, which had an
head of gold, the middle parts of fil^er, his thighs of brass, his legs of
iron, and his feet part of iron, and part of clay: for so the head and first
beginnings of their works, are golden and glorious, but the last, and latter
ends base, and of no worth.

Thus we ought not only to perform this duty presently, and constantly; but
we should increase in the doing of it.

CHAP. XXXIX.
But alas the rich worldling takes a quite contrary course: for either he
never does any good at all, or if he do, it is at his death. The miserly
Muckworms manner is, never to be liberal till he dies never to forsake, or
leave his goods, until his goods leave and forsake him. Being like the
Muckhill, that never does good till carried out: or the fat hog, that is good
for nothing till he comes to the k^^^^: or the poor man's box, that yields no
money till broken up. Like a tree that lets fall none of his fruit, till he be
forced by death, or violently shaken by sickness: And then perhaps he may
think upon the poor, and part with something to relieve them. As sometimes,
after he has in stead of feeding the bellies of the poor, ground their faces
by usury, extorting, wracking, enclosing, and half ^^doing whole Villages, he
liberally relieves some sew at his death, and befriends them with the plasters
of his bounty, which is no other them to steal a Goose; and stick down a
feather; rob a thousand to relieve ten. Or rather as the Jews bought a burying
place for strangers with the blood of Christ: so he build an Almes-house, or
Hospital for the Children, with their Fathers bones.

Nor is that out of conscience, or love to the poor, but rather he thinks by
this, and a piece of Marble, to raise his name, and revive his credit, which he
had long since lost, though it no whit avails him with men of judgment.

Again, he thinks that a little alms will make amends for a great deal of
injustice. But this pleases God, like the offering of Cain, or as that of
Nadab and Abihi^, when they offered str^^ge five unto the Lord, Levit. 10. For
certainly, as the Lord would not in the l^^ receive (...) an offering the price
of a dog, or the hire of a whore, so it is no going about to corrupt God with
presents, and call him to take part of the spoil, which he has gotten by
fraudulent means, and extortion. No, he that offers to the Lord of the goods
of the poor, is as he that sacrifices the son in the sight of the Father,
Eccl. 3. 4.

Yea even Plato an Heathen could say, Neither the gods nor honest men will
accept the offerings of a wicked man. Nay, a generous Roman would scorn to
have his life given him by such a sordid (...) g^t. As when Sy^^a the Dictator
had condemned to death all the Iahab (...) of Peronza, pardoning none but his
Host, he would needs dye also, flying, he scorned to hold his life of the
murderer of his Country, as Appian relates. And for my part, I had rather
endure some extremity, then to be beholding to the alms of Avarice. He that
overvalues what he gives, never thinks he has thanks enough; and I had better
shift hardly, then owe to an insatiable creditor.

Now herein is the difference between grace, and corrupt nature: the Christian
exercises himself in the works of mercy, in the whole course of his life, and
gives his goods to the poor, while he might enjoy them himself: but the
wordling is only liberal at the approach of death, and then alone he is content
to employ them this way, when as he sees he can keep them no longer. And that
not out of love toward God, or the poor, but out of fear of approaching
judgment, and that dreadful account which he must presently make before a
just and terrible Judge: Or out of self-love, either that he may gain the
vainglory of the world, or that he may satisfy for his sins, and to escape
eternal condemnation. In which respect he gives to the poor, and casts his
bread upon the face of the waters, as the Merchant casts his goods into the sea
in time of a storm, to preserve the ship from sinking, and himself from
drowning. For were he not in danger to make shipwreck of his soul, and of
sincking into the gulf of hell, and condemnation, he would be no more liberal
at his death, then he has always been in the whole course of his life.

But what do I speak of his being liberal or the approach of Death? for not
one of a thousand of these ever entertain such a thought. Ye^, they love all
the world so little, that if it were possible, they would with Hermocrates,
make themselves their own Executors, and bequeath their goods to none else. As
he that gives not till he dies, shows that he would not give if he could help
it; and so it appears by their not parting with it, till they be plucked from
it: For to give when they dye, and when they can keep it no longer, is not
worth thanks, it is not in some sense their own to bestow, but rather to be
liberal of that which is indeed none of their own, but other men's. Neither
will God thou accept of it, or hereafter reward it; which proves the covetous
man no less foolish, then wicked; for as one light carried before us, does us
more good then many that are brought after: so does a little given in a man's
lifetime, more benefit him, then thousands at the hour of death. Because what
the charitable man gives while he is alive and in health he shall carry with
him being dead; whereas the uncharitable man shall leave his gold behind him,
but carry the guilt with him into everlasting fire. So that Misers may fitly be
likened to the Mules of Princes, that go all day laden with treasure, and
covered with gay clothes; and at night, after a tedious and wearisome journey,
their treasure is taken from them, and they shaken off into a sorry stable,
much galled and bruised with the carriage of those treasures, their galled
backs only left unto themselves: For after all these men's toil and slavery,
what they have shall be taken from them, and they turned off with their wounded
consciences* to that loathsome and irksome stable of hell and damnation.
Wherefore, he that has either grace or wit, will make his own hands his
Executors, and his eyes his Overseers. Nor are we sheep of Christ's fold (but
goats and swine) if we do not benefit others more in our lives, then by our
deaths.

CHAP. XL.
It is no small wonder to me, that any wise man should so door, and set his
affections upon that which is so uncertain, and that will do him so little good
in time of greatest need. As oh the uncertainty of riches! whom either casualty
by fire, or mundation of waters, or robbery of Thieves, or negligence of
servants, or suretyship of friends, or oversight of reckonings, or trusting of
Customers, or unfaithfulness of Factors, or unexpected falls of Markets, or
piracy by Sea, or unskilfulnesse of Pilots, or vislence of Tempests may bring
to an hasty and speedy poverty. It is in the power of one gale of wind, or a
farthing candle to make many rich men beggars. And then as the greatest floods
have often the lowest ebbs, so are they most poor and miserable, that were
formerly most rich, and in the minds esteem most happy.

2. Or in case our riches thus leave not (...); yet we know not how soon we may
leave our riches: For, for ought we know, this very night may, be our last
night. That rich man in the Gospel, reckoned up a large bill of particulars,
great barnes, much goods, many years; but the sum was short, one night. He
that reckons without God, shall be sure to reckon twice. And so it may fare
with thee; There is but one way to come into the world, there is a thousand
ways to go out of it.

In Plintes time, Physicians had found out above three hundred diseases between
the crown of the head, and the solt of the foot, all which do lie (...); and
furking for our lives. Nor is that all, Anocreon that drunke^ Poet, was choked
with the hurke of a grape. ^uripides returning Rome from King Archelous his
supper, was torn in pieces of Dogs. Archemorus, son to Lycurgus, King of
Thrace, was slain by an, Adder. Lucia sister to M. Azrelius, was killed with a
needle which stuch on her breast, being thrust in by her Child as she held it
in her arms. Heliogabalus was slain upon a Privy. Antiochus the Tyrant,
rotted alive. Herennus the Sicilian, being taken prisoner, fell down dead with
very fear of what he should suffer, being a co-partner in the conspiracy of
Caius Gracchus. And Plautinus the Numidian, at the very sight of his dead Wife,
took it so to heart, that he fell upon her, and rose no more. I have read of a
Captain, that having murdered many on hors-back, was killed with his own
sword faliing out of his sc^bbard as he did alight.

Bibulus riding through Rome in triumph, a tyle stone fell from the roof of a
house and killed him. And the like of King Pyrrhus. Tu lius Hostilius was slain
with a Thunder bolt. How easily may some sudden sickness, an impostum: or the
like out in two the thread of life, when we think the least of death. There be
as man's little Sculs as great ones in Golgotha, says the Hebrew Proverb; for
one Apple that falls from the tree, ten are pulled before they he ripe: And
the parents mourn for the death of their children, as often as the children for
the death of their parents: Which were it well considered, would make men more
wise then so to value the things of this life, and under-value those of the
next. For that which the stern is to the ship, the eye to the body, the
Compass to the Pilot, the same is the consideration of his end to a wise
Christian. Or

3. If he still enjoyes his wealth, together with his life for many years, yet
what will it profit him when sickness comes? All the wealth in the world will
not remove pain, neither will honor or greatness, if they be added to
wealth. It is not the imbroydered stipper that will drive away the painful
govt. Nor the golden Diadem, the cruel head ache; nor the Diamond ring, the
angry Whitflow; nor the long Velvet Roab, the burning Fever. Yea, the asking
of a tooth, the prick of a thorn; or some passion of the mind, is able to
deprive us of the pleasures of the whole worlds Monarchy. Whence all earthly
enjoyments are so often called vanities, because they are vain things to trust
to, or dote upon, they cannot profit, or deliver in time of sickness or death,
1 Samuel 12. 21.

4. And lastly, he cannot carry the least part of his riches away with him: For
as with Job, he came naked into the world, so he shall return naked out of it:
only his evil deeds, and his accusing conscience (if he repents not) shall
bear him company. Bona sequuntur mala persequuntur. Be not thou afraid (says
the Psalmist) when one is made rich, and when the glory of his house is
increased: For he shall take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his
pomp descend after him, Psalm. 49. 16, 17. And also Solomon; As he came forth
of his mothers belly, he shall return naked, to go as he came, and shall bear
away nothing of his labor, which he has caused to pass by his hand, Eccles
5. 15. And likewise the Apostle; We brought nothing into the world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out of it, 1 Timothy 6. 7.

Oh my brethren think of it! it is but a poor comfort, to have wealth, and want
grace: It is far better while our health lasts, to sow the seed of godly
actions in the field of this world, that at the Autumn or end of our age, we
may reap the fruit of everlasting comfort. For to every man that does good
shall be glory and honor, immortality and eternal life, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile, Romans 2. 10. And so on the contrary: For unto them that do
not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil, of the Jew first, and
also of the Gentile, verse. 5. to 10. God has said it, and they shall find it:
And what is it to flourish for a time, and perish for ever?

Whence let us learn this lesson; That Justice has li^cked as with an iron
chain, goodness and blesseanesse, sin and punishment together, insoperably,
as the cause and the effect, as the body and the shadow, as the work and the
wages, as the Parent and the Child, (...) bege^ting another. He that sowes the
seed of godly actions in the field of a repentant heart, shall at the Autumn,
or end of his life, reap the fruits of everlasting comfort, and so on the
contrary.

And so much of the time when we are to give. I should now come to the means
enabling thereunto, which are principally two, Labor and Industry, in lawful
getting, and frugality or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully gotten:
that so having greater plenty, we may be the richer in good works, according to
the French proverb; A seasonable gathering, and a reasonable spending, make a
good housekeeping. But of these I have spoken in the means to attain riches,
Chap. 32, 33. beginning at page 50. Only I will add a few lines.

CHAP. XLI.
First, touching Labor or Industry in lawful getting and eneteasing by all
lawful means in our Callings, that it enables a man to perform this duty, the
Apostle shows in preseribing it to the Ephesians, as a means of bounty and
beneficence; Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his own hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give
to him that needs. And Solomon deseribing the virtuous woman, says in the
first place, that she seeks wool and flax, and works willingly with her
hands; that she lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distasse: and then that she stretches out her hands to the poor, yea she
reaches forth her hands to the needy. And St. Luke having testified of Derom,
that she was full of good works and alme deeds which she did: He soon after
shows the means, and fountain of her beneficence, to wit her labor and
industry, in making costs and garments. So Peter Martyrs Wife is commended for
having been a prudent and painful housewife, and bountiful to the poor and
needy, the former good quality enabling her to the latter. Be we therefore
painful and industrious in our several callings, that GOD may prosper and
replenish us with good things, that so we may the better communicate them to
others.

Secondly, Frugality or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully gotten: For
thrift, (which is a due saving from sinful and needless expenses) must be as
the purveyor for liberality. Be spuring in unnecessary expenses, that thou
may be liberal in good uses, and this will mightily manifest thy heart to
be right. The fuel of charity is frugality, and the flame piety, as we may see
in B^az, whom we find to be thristy, religious, charitable: For (...) by
lopping off the (...) branches, a good tree is made more fruitful: So by
cutting off all needless expenses, a liberal man abounds more in good words.
Whence observe that rule of our Saviors, so to dispose of that plenty which
Gods goodness has bestowed on us, as that nothing be lost, John 6. 12. Now a
thing may be lost and spoiled two ways by our own fault; either when we
suffer our meat and drink to wa^e corrupt and dead; and our garments not
beaten, or our gold and silver cankered and rusty, rather than bestow is upon
the poor members of Jesus Christ. Which makes St. James utter these dreadful
words, Chap. 5. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that
shall come upon you; Tour riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten:
Tour gold and silver is canckered, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: and more of the like,
Verse. 1. to 7.

But lest I should step too far out of the way, return we to the matter in
hand, which is thrist or frugality, and not covetousness or cruelty. As

Oh! how liberal might we be in charitable uses, and in showing mercy, if we
would use Thrift as a Razor, to cut or shave off all superstuous expenses,
about unlawful and unnecessary things: if we would lay it as a rule, to
moderate and diminish all expenses about things even lawful. A good layer up,
is a good layer out, as is plainly verified in that virtuous Ruth, who was no
less pious and charitable in spending, then soberly frugall in sparing and
saving; for she brought forth, and gave to her poor Mother in Law, that she
had reserved at dinner, after she was satisfied. Frugality, says Justine, is
the mother of virtues. I am sure it is the basis, and foundation, the pillar
and supporter of liberality and benificence. For instance, though Peter Martyr
had forsaken all for the Gospel sake, and left his great riches and
preserments he did enjoy in Italy, having nothing to live on but a small
stipend for his Professorship at Strosbourg: Yet being very frugall and
sparing, he had enough to maintain himself, and to help his friends too:
whereas on the contrary, an expensive man by his wasting and over-lavishing of
his estate, disables him from doing good to himself or others.

CHAP. XLII.
But you will ask me, from what must we save?

I answer, from Riot, Luxury, Drunkenness, Garning, and such like sinful
expenses, by which men waste and lavish that which might suffice many others
besides themselves. Yea, that sordid sin of drunkenness, besides robbing the
poor, has brought a multitude of rich men to poverty, and poor men to beggary.

Secondly, from Banqueting and feasting, wherein at the least, one of these
three spots of unthristinesse is commonly seen: Excess of frequency, excess
of plenty, or excess of delicacy. With some feasters it is always Holiday,
never considering that the Rich man in the Gospel is not so much branded for
feasting sumptuously, as for feasting sumptuously every day. Others, though
they feast their friends but seldom, yea when they do, they resemble Isaacius
Angelus, whose usual feasts did so exceed in abundance and quantity of
provision, that they were said to be nothing else but a mountain of loaves, is
forest of wild beasts, (...) sea of fishes, and an Ocean of wine.

Thirdly, others are so for delicacy, that like Philenenus that Belly-god, they
think that sweetest, that is dearest. It is a horrible wide that is practiced
by many now adays, even mean ones, they scorae forsooth that any Butchers
meat, should be admitted their Table when they feast it. The cru^ rule of
Feasts and Banquets seem to be dead with our Forefathers, whose dishes for
sort, number, price, and serving out, was inferior to our sauce, insomuch that
less then tho reversion might suffice the whole company, though they suffer
the poor to starve, who might be well sed with the superfluity thereof. Tantum
luxuries potuit suadere malorum.

Fourthly, much might he saved, out of what men spend lavishly in Apparel and
Raiment: For many spend so much in the number, matter, and making of their
Garments, that they have little left to be liberal withal. The French
proverb, that Silk quenches the fir^^ the Kitchen, is not more tarte then
true. How many ruffle it in silk, (...) that are scarce able to pay for wool?
Yea, some can carry whole Manors upon their backs, heads, feet, and fingers,
what hospitality then can be expected from such?

Fifthly, much might be spared of what is lavishly spent in keeping of Coaches.
As Oh! the fearful Pride, Atheism, contempt of Gods Word, and want of
compassion to Christ's poor members; that is manifested in, and the sad account
that men have to give even for this abominable excess. I dare say, many within
these few years, have and do keep Coaches, who can remember the time, that
they or their Fathers would have been glad to be kept in an Almes-house. And
who spend more in one year upon this Lordly vanity, then they do in twenty
years upon these works of mercy.

I know it is lawful enough for many to keep them: but if they can afford to
spend forty pounds a year in keeping of a Coach, merely for pomp and
pleasure, and cannot afford half so much to keep thousands from starving in
these hard times, wherein not one in two all the land over, can get sufficient
meat for their bellies, or clothes to their backs, or fire in their houses if
they have any; certainly they can never look to be set at Christ's right hand,
and to hear that joyful sentence, Come ye blessed, Marth. 25.

CHAP. XLIII.
Sixthly, how much might be spared of what men vainly spend in keeping of
Horses, Hawks, and Dogs? when not a few, change their Ancestors liberality
upon Christ's members, into prodigality upon Beasts. When they will kill an
Horse of price, in the pursuit of a Hare worth nothing. Or to be at twenty
pounds a year charge in Hawks, to catch a few Partridges not worth so
many-shillings: when the poor are not so many groats the better for their
worships.

Seventhly, how much of that which might be given to the poor, is wasted in
that witch Tobacco, when many spend as much in that wanton weed, as their
honest Forefathers spent in substantial hospitality: When an hundred pounds a
year upon this precious stink will scarce serve their turns, were it now as
dear as it has been, Yea I have known a Knight and his company, in one day
drink out five pounds sterling, in five ounces of Tobacco; which I am sure had
been better bestowed upon these charitable uses. The Knights name was Huit. The
Apothecaries Name that sold it, was Bakon; at the Myter in Fleetstreet it was
taken.

Again, hundreds there are, that will buy all the News Books, Declarations and
Proclamations that come forth, (which since the beginning of our troubles, have
amounted to no small sum) and yet are so far from being bountiful to the poor,
that by their good wills, they will neither pay debts nor duties. Others as
bountiful and as good Christians as they, that can afford to give three pounds
for a falling Band, five pounds for a Tulip, ten, twenty pounds for a yard of
Lace: But will Christ take this well, and count them good Stewards? when he
shall sit upon his Throne, and judge every man according to his deeds, Matthew.
25. 31. to the end.

To these might be added the vast sums of money that are lavisht out without
measure, in needless and unnecessary Buildings, and trimming of houses, as if
the owners were to dwell for ever in this world; So many Walks and Galleries,
Turrets and Pyramides, such setting up, pulling down, transposing,
transplacing, to make gay habitations, for the memory and honor of men's Names:
So much yearly bestowed in costly furniture; with which their houses were well
stufe and filled before; whereas multitudes of people, by reason of the late
civil wars, are driven to wander about, as having no certain dewlling place,
yea no other house then the wide world; no other bed then the hard ground, and
no other Canopy then the wide Heaven. And so I might go on to many hundreds
spent in Lawsuits, for the satisfying of a self-will; so much spent in sports
and needless Journeys, in Gaming and Revelling, in kindnesses to Friends and
Neighbors, and many the like; Whereas they should be sparing in other things,
that they might be the more bountiful in this duty; They spend where they
should spare, and spare where God bids them spend: Yea, whereas the godly
man spares not only from his superfluities, but even from very necessaries,
that he may have the more to spend in bounty and beneficence: These only spare
in the works of mercy, that they may have the more to spend upon their sinful
Vanities. But as the niggard that sows not, shall not reap; so the prodigal
Worldling, that sows only to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption;
as it is Gal. 6: 8.

Now for conclusion of this point, if Frugallity and saving, be so great an
help to bounty and liberality; let it be our care to practice it; avoiding both
the extremes, Prodigality on the one side, and Avarice on the other; for this
(as all other virtues) is placed between two extremes, as the Planet Jupiter,
between cold Saturn, and fiery Mars; Let it be used as a razor of all wicked
and superfluous, and as a rule of all good and necessary expenses; For that
stock is like to last, that is neither hoarded up miserably, nor dealt out
indiscreetly: We fow not the furrow by the sack full, but by the handful; and
the wise man knows, it is better looking through a poor Lettice-window, then
through an Iron Grate. Let it quite shave off, all expenses about Surfeiting
and Drunkenness, Harlotry and Wantonness, with other debauched courses, which
many amongst the Heathens have been ashamed of; and therefore should not be
once named among Christians, Ephesians. 5. 3.

Nomina sunt ipso, pene timenda sono.

And let is also moderate and diminish those excessive charges which too
commonly men are at, about things lawful and commendable; because if men would
so do, the poor would be richly provided for: As how much might be saved, how
many millions of money every year; and how abundant might we be in works of
mercy, and yet be never the poorer at the years end? Yea how would they praise
God, and pray for their bountiful Benefactors? And how would God bless us in
our souls, bodies, names, estates and posterities? As he has abundantly
promised in his Word.

CHAP. XLIV.
AND so much of the means enabling to this duty: Now of the ends we are to
propound to our selves in the doing of it, wherein I will be brief.

Fourthly, As our Alms or Works of mercy, should flow from faith, obedience,
charity, mercy, unfeigned love; etc. which are proper only to true believers,
and such as in Christ are first accepted; (because as a woman that abides
without an Husband, all her fruit is but as an unlegitimate birth; So until we
be married to Christ, all our best works are as bastards; and no better then
shining sins, or beautiful abominations, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11. 6.
Romans 14, 23.) So our aim and end must be, the glory of God, the good of our
brethren, who are refreshed with our Alms, the adorning of our Profession with
these fruits of Piety, the edification of others by our good example, the
stopping of the mouths of our Adversaries, our own present good, both in
respect of temporal and spiritual benefits, and the furthering and assuring of
our eternal salvation; all which shows that howsoever any man may give gifts
out of natural pity; yet only the Christian and godly man, can rightly perform
this duty of Alms-deeds; for it is a good work; and there are none do good, but
those that are good; neither is it possible that there should be good fruit,
unless it sprung from a good Tree: Charity and Pride do both feed the poor; the
one to the praise and glory of God, the other to get praise and glory amongst
men; in which Case God will not accept, but reject a man's bounty. As when one
sent a Present to Alcibiades, he sent it back again, saying, He sends these
Gifts ambitiously, and it is our ambition to refuse them. The Hypocrite aims
chiefly at his own glory and good, either the obtaining of some worldly
benefit, or the avoiding of some temporal or everlasting punishment; or
finally, that he may satisfy God's justice for his sins, make him, beholding
unto him, and merit at his hands everlasting happiness.

But the Christian does these works of mercy with great humility, remembering
that whatsoever he gives to the poor for Gods sake, he has first received it
from God, with all other blessings which he enjoys: In which respect when he
does the most, he acknowledges that he does far less then his duty, and that
with much infirmity and weakness; and therefore in this regard he humbly
confesses that his Alms are sufficiently rewarded, if they be graciously
pardoned; the which, as it makes him to carry himself humbly before God, so
also meekly and gently toward the poor.

And indeed our axes, saws, hammers and chisels, may as well and as justly rise
up and boast, they have built our houses, and our pens receive the honor of our
writings, as we attribute to our selves, the praise of any of our good actions.
And it were as ridiculous so to do, as to give the Soldiers honor to his
sword; For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to whom be
glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11. 36.

If we have any thing that is good, God is the giver of it; if we do any thing
well, he is the Author of it, Joh. 3. 2. Romans 11. 36. 1 Cor. 4. 7. and 11. 23.
We have not only received our talents, but the improvement also is his mere
bounty. Thou have wrought all our works in us, says the Prophet Isaiah, Chap.
26. ver. 12. We do good Works, but so much as is good in them, is not ours, but
God's: We for these things, magis Deo debtor est, quam Deus homini; are rather
debtors to God, then God to us. We cannot so much as give him gratias, thanks;
unless he first give us gratiam, the grace of thankfulness. God gives not only
grace asked, but grace to ask: We cannot be patient under his hand, except his
hand give us patience. God must infuse, before we can effuse. The springs of
our hearts must be filled from that ocean, before we can derive drink to the
thirsty. For as the virtue attractive to draw Iron, is not in the Iron, but in
the Adamant; so all our ability is of God, and nothing as our own can we
challenge, save our defects and infirmities.

Whence that of Austin, Lord look not upon my Works, but upon thy Works which
thou have done in me, or by me; which indeed he does even to the amazement and
astonishment of all that are wise and truly thankful: For (mark it well) first
he gives us power to do well, and then he recompenceth and crowns that work
which we do well by his grace and bounty.

Bernard reports of Pope Eugenius, that meeting a poor, but honest Bishop, he
secretly gave him certain jewels wherewith he might present him, as the custom
was for such to do: So if God did not first furnish us with his graces and
blessings, we should have nothing wherewith to honor him, or do good to
others. Of thine own I give thee, said Justinian the Emperor, borrowing it from
the Psalmist, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. The use whereof before we leave it, would be
this: First hope we for, but challenge not a reward for our well-doing: yet not
for it self, but for what Christ has done for, and by us.

Let this be the temper of our spirits, when we do any duty; Do we the work,
give God the praise. To us the use of his gifts; to him the thanks and glory
for ever. Yea having received all we have from him, and done all that we do by
him; what madness and folly is it, not to refer the glory and praise of all to
him, as the Apostle argues, Romans 11. 36. to which he adds, as an injunction;
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. 31.

O God, if we do any thing that is good, it is thine act, and not ours: Crown
thine own work in us, and take thou the glory of thine own mercies.

God bestows upon us many indowments, to the end only, that we should employ
them to his honor, and best advantage that gave them us: For that he may be
honored by our wisdom, riches, graces, is the only end for which he gives us
to be wise, rich, gracious, Matthew. 25. 27, 30 1 Cor. 12. 7. and 14. 26. Romans
12. 6. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Yea it is the only end for which we were created,
Isa. 43. v. 7. and therefore it has always been the aim, end and mark which
all the Saints have ever endeavored to hit, though with several shafts; as the
same beams are many, but the light one. For whereas the ignorant ascribe the
effects and events of things to Fortune, the Atheist to Nature, the
Superstitious to their Idols, the Politician to his plots, the Proud-man to his
own power and parts, too many to second causes: in all these the Servants of
God look higher, resolving all such effects to their first principle, Digitus
Dei, the finger of God; ascribing to Him the praise, as I might abundantly show
from the Word, could I stand upon it: Yea, even Titus the Emperor when he was
praised for a victory that he had got, made answer, That it proceeded from God,
who made his hands but the instruments to serve him, as Josephus testifies. The
Godly, as they do all by his power, so they refer all to his glory.

CHAP. XLV.
BUt the Worldling has neither heart nor brain so to do, or once to cast an
eye, or have the least aim at God's glory, even in their greatest undertakings;
or whatever they either receive or do: but instead of giving glory to God, they
take it to themselves, as Herod did, Acts 12. 23. ascribing the increase of
their corn, wine and oil, their honors, successes, etc. either to the goodness
and sharpness of their Wit and skill, or to the greatness of their industry, or
of their power and authority; saying with proud Nebuchadnezar, Is not this
great Babel which I have built, by the might of my power? etc. Dan. 4. 30. Have
not I got all these goods, victories, preferments, etc. my self, and by mine
own wisdom and providence, which the Prophet calls, sacrificing to their own
net, and burning incense unto their drag, Hab. 1. 16. Even as it fared with the
children of Dan, Judges 18. who ascribed the honor of their success to their
Idols. Or as it fared with Israel, God gave them sheep and Oxen, and they
offered them up to Baal: He gave them Earrings and Jewels for their own
ornament, and they turned them to an Idol: Yea, poor silly souls, they are like
Swine, that feed upon Acorns, without ever looking to the Oak from whence they
fell. Or the Horse that drinks of the Brook, and never thinks of the Spring.
Christ rains down Mannah, they gather it and eat it, and scarce ever think from
whence they had it; at least the thought of his blessings is out of their
minds, as soon as the taste is out of their mouths. As but one of those Ten,
that could lift up their voices for cure of their Leprosy, returned with
thanks when they were cleansed; so it is ten to one if any give glory to God:
Luck, or wit, or friend, one thing or other still lies in their way, and takes
up Christ's glory, and the thanks ere it can come at him. Customary fruition
has made men scarce think themselves beholding to God. But as he that having
fed his body, and assuaged his hunger, and gives no thanks, steals his meat; so
in all other things. In visible benefits, not to see the invisible giv^r, is
great infidelity and blindness: and indeed, if any thing infallibly proves an
hypocrite, it is when base ends are the first movers of good duties.

Now what I have spoken of good men in this point, I might show of good Angels
and glorified Saints in Heaven; yea of Heathens and Idolaters; yea I might add,
that not to be thankful, nor to acknowledge what God our bountiful Benefactor,
bestows upon, and does for us, is to fall short of the very brute Beasts: The
Ox knows no Owner but man, and him he does acknowledge and love according to his
capacity, Isa. 1. 3. And it is well known what strange things are recorded of
Lions, Dogs, Eagles; yea, how often shall we see a Dog welcome home his Master,
with all possible expressions of love and thankfulness, when perhaps his Wife
entertains him with frumps and frowns: And certainly, had beasts the like
knowledge with us, of their Maker, they would worship and serve him better then
do their Masters; but for proof of this enough. Though indeed, if the very
worst of men did but know and consider how they should pleasure themselves in
being humble and thankful, they would use all their possible endeavors to that
end; As most pleasant it is to God, and most profitable to us, both for the
procuring the good we want, and for the continuance of the good we have.

CHAP. XLVI.
INto the humble and thankful soul, that gives him abundance of glory; his
Spirit enters with abundance of Grace, sowing there, and there only, plenty of
Grace, where he is assured to reap plenty of glory. But who will sow those
barren Sands, where they are not only without all hope of a good Harvest, but
are sure to loose their Seed and Labor? And in common Equity, he that is
unthankful for a little, is worthy of nothing; whereas thanks for one good
turn, is the best introduction to another. Holy David was a man according to
Gods own heart; and therefore he continually mixeth with his Prayers, Praises;
and being of a public spirit, he discovers the secrets of this skill: As
when he says, Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise
thee; then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God, even our God
shall give us his blessing, Psalm. 67. 5, 6, 7. When Heaven and Earth are
friends, then Summer and Winter, Seed-time and Harvest, run on their race. When
God was displeased, what was the effect? Ye have sown much, and have reaped
little. Again, when God was pleased, mark the very day; For from that very day
I will bless you, Hag. 2. 15. to 20 Whenever glory is given to God on high,
peace and good will shall be bestowed on men below, Luke 2. 14* Psalm. 84* 11,
12. Noah gave a Sacrifice of Praise for his deliverance from the Flood; And God
being praised for that one deliverance, he perpetuateth his blessing, and
promises an everlasting deliverance to the World from any more Floods.

Again, it is the only way to procure Gods Blessing upon our endeavors: It
happened that Bernard one day made a curious and learned Sermon, for which he
expected great applause, but received none: The next time he made a plain
wholesome Sermon, and it was wonderfully affected, liked and commended. A friend
of his noting it, asked him what might be the reason? Who answered, In the one I
preached Bernard, in the other Christ; in the one I sought to win glory and
praise to my self; in the other, the glory of God, and the salvation of souls,
which received blessing from above, and that made the difference; yea, were
there nothing good else in it, yet this were the way to gain true honor:

We cannot so much honor our selves, as by seeking to honor God: To seek a
man's own glory, (says Solomon) is not glory, Prove. 25. 25. 27. but to seek Gods
glory, is the greatest honor a man can do himself: For as Cicero said of
Julius Caesar, That in extolling of dead Pompey, and erecting his Statues, he
set up his own: So who are more venerably esteemed and spoken of, then such as
are most tender of Gods glory, and least seek their own. They are the Lord's
own words to Saul, They that honor me, I will honor; but they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30: The way for a man to be esteemed
the greatest, is to esteem himself the least. It is humility that makes us
accepted both of God and Man* whereas the contrary makes us hated and abhorred
of both: The Centurion did many excellent things, but he never did a Work so
acceptable in the sight of Christ, as was his disclaiming his own Works. While
Saul was little in his own eyes, God made him Head over the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and gave him his Spirit; but when out of his Greatness he abused his
Place and Gifts, God took both from him, and gave them to David, whom Saul
least respected of all his Subjects, 1 Samuel 15. 17. 28. and 16. 14. Other
proofs of such as he will honor, for honoring him, you have Genesis 39. 21. Zeph.
3 19, 20. Dan. 2. 19. to 50. as when Nebuchadnezzar sought his own honor, honor
departed from him, and he was made like a Beast; but when he sought God's
honor, honor came to him again, and he was made a King, Dan. 4. 34. to the end.
Before honor, goes humility, Prove. 15. 33. But when pride comes, then comes
shame, Prove. 11. 2. And commonly great Works undertaken for ostentation, miss
of their end, and turn to the Author's shame; nor have any less praise then
they that most hunt after it.

It Is true, the Lord sometimes gives wicked men even what in their thoughts
they ask; as some desire riches only, and God gives it them with a curse; some
honor and dignity, and they have it, that their fall may be the greater; others
fame and reputation (as loving the praise of men more then the praise of God)
and these have many times what they aim at; they are extolled to the skies, and
that shall be the reward of all the good that ever they do. Lastly, God's
people make spiritual and eternal things, Grace and Glory, and God's favor
their only option, and they have their desire; yea not seldom, are riches and
reputation super-added, though they seek them not; they seek only God's glory
on Earth; as for their own glory, they let that alone till they come to Heaven,
knowing that he only is happily famous, who is known and recorded there: True,
he lives so well, that the praise of men (especially good men) will follow; but
as I said before, so say I again, he will not follow it, least to gain the
shadow, he should lose the substance; as Absalom in seeking a Kingdom, lost
himself.

CHAP. XLVII.
IT is a sad thing to consider, how many formal Christians gul themselves, in
thinking that Christ will reward them, when they have done him no service: As
for example, we find the Jews in the 58. of Esaias, urging God with their
fasting, (as those Reprobates, Luke 13. allege unto him their preaching in
Christ's Name, and casting out Devils) We have fasted (say they) and thou see
it not; we have afflicted our selves, and thou take no notice thereof; they
expect some great reward; but the Lord answers, Have ye fasted to me? No such
matter; and therefore sends them away empty, ver. 25. to 29. And so will he say
unto these (that perhaps do many good works for the matter of them) Have ye
done these and these things in love, obedience, and thankfulness unto me, and
that in Christ's Name, that my Name may be magnified, and my People won and
edified? No, but in love to your own credit, profit, and such like carnal
respects; and therefore look to it (as you love your own souls) for if in doing
good, and discharging our places, we have served our selves, and sought our
selves rather then God; when we come for his reward, (as Esau when he had
brought the Venison, came for the blessing, making himself as sure of it, as if
he had had it, before he kneeled for it) God's answer will be, Let him reward
you whom you have served; Thou servedst thy self, reward thy self, if thou will; for I never reward any service but mine own: The Pharisaical giver, gives
to himself, not to God; Dat sibi non Domino; He aims at his own praise, what
reward can he look for, let him pay himself: But our Savior, Mat. 6. makes the
case so plain, that none can question it: Take heed (says he) that ye do not
your alms, that ye pray not, that ye fast not to be seen of men; otherwise, ye
have no reward of your Father which is in heaven, ver. 1: and in ver. 2. 5, 16:
speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees, that did give their Alms, prayed and
fasted to be seen and praised of men; he says affirmatively, That they had
their reward: And that we might the rather be warned, he adds to it. Verily,
Verily, v. 5. 16 Yea, in the next Chapter he gives us several instances of such
as shall at the last day knock at Heaven Gates, (as it were) and cry out, Lord,
Lord, open unto us, for by thy Name we have done many good things: To whom the
Lords answer will be, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, I know you not
whence ye are, ver. 22, 23. And the reason of it is, Civil men's good works* are
as a mere Carkase without the soul, since Faith is wanting: Nor is it any
excuse before God, to plead that the matter of the Work is good, when the end
is not so; for which, see Isa. 66: 3:

Secondly, That the proud and unthankful shall lose the reward of all their
performances, is not all; for as thankfulness and humility* are the only means
to enrich us with God's Bles^ings; so pride and unthankfulness is the only way
to make God withdraw and take from us both himself and his blessings, yea
instead thereof to send his curse, and to cross us in all we do, as may be
proved plentifully: When the people became murmurers, it displeased the Lord,
and the Lord heard it; therefore his wrath was kindled, and the fire of the
Lord burnt among them, and consumed the utmost part of the Host, Numb. 11. 1,
2: Because the King of Assyria said, By the Power of mine Arm have I done it,
and by my wisdom, for I am prudent; therefore (says the Lord) I have removed
the borders of the people, and have spoiled their treasures, and have pulled
down the Iuhabitants like a valiant man, Esaias 10: 13: When Nebuchadnezzar and
Herod took the praise of their greatness, wit, and worth, to themselves, which
was due to God, you know what came of it, Dan. 4. Act. 12, 21, 22, 23. Esop's
Crow, not content with her own likeness, went and borrowed a Feather of every
Bird, and then became so proud, that she scorned them all, which the Birds
observing, they came and plucked each one their feather back, and so left her
naked. Even so does God deal with all proud and ungrateful persons.

Hanani the Seer tells Asa King of Judah, Because thou have rested upon the
King of Syria, and have not rested in the Lord thy God; therefore is the Host
of the King of Syria escaped out of thy hand: adding thereto, The Ethiopians
and the Lubims, were they not a great Host, with chariots and horsemen exceeding
many? yet because thou did rest upon the Lord, he delivered them into thine
hand, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8. And again, being diseased in his feet, it is said,
That he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians; and what follows? As a
slept with his Fathers, and dyed; his Physicians could do him no good without
God: the same Chapter, ver. 12. 13.

CHAP. XLVIII.
THankfulness for one benefit, inviteth another: but how worthy is he to perish
in the next danger, that is not thankful for escaping the former? Ingratitude
forfeits mercies, as Merchants do all to the King, by not payment of Custom*
Because Pharaoh says, the River is mine own: therefore God says, I will dry
up the River, Ezekiel. 29. 3, 9. etc. Isa. 19. 5, 6. Tamberlain having overcome
Bajazet, asked him whether he had ever given God thanks for making him so great
an Emperor? He confessed ingenuously, that he had never thought of it: To whom
Tamberlain replied, That it was no mervail so ungrateful a man should be made
such a spectacle of misery. All which wise Solomon confirms, Prove. 11. 28.
and also Job, Chap. 31. ver. 24, 25, 28. Gods glory to him is as the Crown to
the King: Now there is less danger in stealing any thing from the King, then
his Crown, for if men rob him of his Tribute, or clip bis Coin, he may perhaps
pardon it: (though that were much, and he is not discreet that will run the
hazard.) But if they go about to take his Crown from him, there is no hope of
obtaining pardon for that.

God is very bountiful in all other things; his Wisdom he communicates, and his
Justice he distributes, and his Holiness he imparts, and his Mercy he bestows,
and his only Son he has freely given, as Paul shows, 1 Cor: 1. 30, 31. But
his Glory he will not give to another, as himself speaks, Isa. 42. 8. And
indeed this is the main fruit and return that comes unto God from all his
Works. This in the New Testament is as the fat of the burnt-offering was in the
Old: and we know all the fat was the Lords, and he that did eat that, was to be
cut off from his people, Levit. 3. 16. and 7. 25. If you will see it in an
example, look up on Herod; who in stead of giving the glory of his gifts unto
God, took it to himself, and was cut off from his people, by, or after a
strange and unheard of manner, Acts 12.

And thus we see by what has been said, that if pride, covetousness,
hypocrisy, or any the like springs, shall set the wheels of our hearts a
moving, our Honey will prove but gall, and our Wine, Vinegar; yea, if these be
the ends of our doing duties, such an end will follow it, as we had better be
without it, even such a misery at the end, as will know no end of misery.

Let men therefore beware they rob not God of his glory, which he so much
stands upon, least Satan by God's just permission, rob them of their souls,
which they ought so much to stand upon.

Again secondly, if the Grace of God be the Fountain ftom which all our
endowments flow, and that God may be honored by our gifts, is the only end of
our enjoying them; let us not so much as share with God in squinting one eye at
Gods, and another at our own honor; Yea if God will reward no Work, nor bless it
with his Grace, unless it be intended to his glory: Let us direct all our
thoughts, speeches, and actions to his glory, as he has directed our Eternal
Salvation thereunto: Let us make God the Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last, of all our actions and endeavors; Let us add this to all our other
gifts, that we give the glory of them to God: As what else should men propose
for their end, then that glory which shall have no end? Yea let us with one
unanimous voice say, He has given us all the Grace and Happiness we have, and
we will give him all the possible thanks and honor we can; let it be our main
request and daily prayer: Teach us, O Lord, to receive the benefit of thy
merciful favors, and to return thee the thanks and the glory, and that for
ever and ever. And so much of the Ends, which we are to propound to our selves
in our beneficence; the lets and impediment: follow.

CHAP. XLIX.
I Might mention many great lets and impediments, as Ignorance, Infidelity,
Pride, Intemperance, self-love, hard heartedness, and other the like, do much
hinder men's bounty and liberality to the poor, as may partly appear by what I
have already delivered; but nothing like Covetousness; yea name but
Covetousness, and that includes all the rest. Covetousness is the Grave of all
good, it makes the heart barren of all good inclinations; and it is a bad
ground where no flower will grow.

It cannot be denied, but enough has been said in this and the Poors Advocate,
to persuade any rational man, not only that there is a necessity of this duty,
but sufficient to inflame him with a desire of performing it, according to the
utmost of his ability: But so it is, that the Covetous Miser is so far from
being prevailed withal, that he will not come so near the same, as to give it
the hearing.

Or suppose such an one should be so ingenuous as to hear it, there is no hope
of prevailing with him: As what think you, when that rich man, Mark 10 17. etc.
who ran after Christ, kneeled down to him, and was so inquisitive to know how
he might attain eternal life; yea, who had from his youth squared his life
according to Gods Law, insomuch that Christ loved him; Yet when he was
admonished by our Savior to sell all and give to the poor, and he should have
Treasure in Heaven, he turned his back upon Christ, and went away very
sorrowful, because he was mavelous rich. He had a good mind to Heaven in
reversion; but for all that, he would not part with his Heaven, whereof he had
present possession: Whence our Savior so bewails the miserable condition and
difficulty of such men's being saved, v. 17. to 26. And the Apostle the like,
Ephesians. 5. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. For if he that had so good affections, made
conscience of all his ways, was so desirous to be saved, that Christ was taken
with him; What hope of this Wretch that has a blockish, seared, and senseless
Conscience, that is past feeling, and never made scruple of any thing from his
infancy? No, these solid Arguments, and strong inducements from Gods Word, will
be so far from prevailing with him, that it is rare if he do not slight and
scorn what has been spoken. The covetous man knows no other God then his
belly, and desires no other Heaven then his Coffers full of Angels.

Thirdly and lastly, admit the best that can be expected, viz. that he shall
not only lend a listening ear to all that has been said, but that it does also
convince, and almost persuade him to become liberal; As I dare appeal to their
own consciences that have hitherto heard what has been alleged out of God's
Word, whether it has not made their hearts burn within them; whether they have
not been convinced, and with Agrippa, almost persuaded to become merciful, Acts
26. 28. Whether with Pharaoh, their spirits have not began to thaw a little,
Go, do sacrifice to your God in this Land; yea in their judgments yielded to
all that has been demanded them, and been ready to pray some Moses to pray for
them: And yet harden and knit again, whereby all labor (like Moses Message, or
the sweet words of Paul) is utterly lost. The covetous man, though he be
convinced in his confcience, and does resolve to be bountiful, yet no hope of
his doing it; for his goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as a morning dew; it
goes away as the Lord once spoke to Ephraim and Judah, Hos 6. 4.

Good thoughts to carnal and covetous hearts, are only as Passengers, not
Inhabitants; they may make it a thorough-fare, but they can never settle or
remain there: If at any time they melt with Pharaoh, they suddenly knit again.
Nor is there any heart made of flesh, that will not at some time or other
relent. Even Flint and Marble will in some weather stand in drops. It is not
only recorded of Pharaoh, that he did thus melt, and of Agrippa, that he was
almost persuaded to become good; but the holy Ghost further testifies, that
Esau wept; Ahab put on Sackcloth, that Judas repented, and restored, that
Foelix trembled; that Pilate took Christ's part, and washed his hands in witness
that he was free from the blood of that just man; that Balaam wished to dye the
death of the righteous; that Herod delighted in John's Ministry: And yet we see
that all came to nothing.

CHAP. L.
GOod deeds flow from good men (such as know themselves deputed Stewards, not
Independent Lords of their wealth) as naturally as springs out of Rocks: But
with the covetous Cormorant it is far otherwise; as good persuade a Caniball,
as the covetous to show mercy: To wrest any good deeds out of the Dive's of
these days, (though there be millions in the case of Lazarus) is far more hard
then to wring Verjuice out of a Crab; yea, you may as well press water out of a
stone. We read 1 Samuel 25. that churlish Laban (Nabal I should say, though the
difference be so small, that these two infamous Churls spel each other's Name
backwards) when distressed David asked him victuals, he reviled him, when he
should have relieved him. Nothing more cheap then good Words* these he might
have given, and been never the poorer* but his foul mouth does not only deny,
and give him nothing, but that which was worse then nothing, bad* Language; So
fares it with these Churls, when any David is driven to ask them Bread, they
give him stones instead thereof; let them be moved by some one to give an Alms,
or do some charitable deed, they cannot hear on that ear.

Or if this Wretch for his credit sake, does speak fair, all his good deeds be
only good words; and he may be answered as that Beggar did the Bishop, when
instead of an Alms he gave him his blessing, That if his blessing had been
worth a penny, he would not have been so bountiful. So that if every house were
of his profession, Charities Hand would no longer hold up Poverties head.

Words from a dead man, and deeds of Charity from a covetous man, are both
alike rare, and hard to come by. The Mountains are not more barren of fruit,
then he of goodness; The Rocks are not so hard as his heart; he is a friend to
none but himself; His Charity begins at home, and there it ends. To urge or
persuade him to be liberal, is all one, as to entreat a Tiger to be tame and
gentle, or a Wolf to be pitiful and merciful.

There is such an antipathy between his heart, and one that is in distress,
that he has not the patience to hear a poor man speak; yea out of a desperate
resolution to give him nothing, he will not vouchsafe to look upon him, but turn
his face or eyes another way, as though the poor man were such an eyesore, as
might not be endured. And this he does for fear of being infected with the
contagion of the poor man's misery; or lest it should cause a spmpathy, and
scllow-feeling of his calamity; or lest his conscious eyes should check his
churlish heart, and put him in mind of his barbarous inhumanity.

But let all such be assured, that as they turn away their eyes from the poor
in the day of their misery, so the Lord will turn away his face from them in the
day of their calamity: And as they have stopped their ears at the cry of the
poor, so they themselves shall cry, and God will not hear them, as it is Prove.
21. 13. And just it is, that as the unmerciful will not hear others when they
stand in need, so God should not regard them when they shall stand in need:
Blessed are the merciful (says our Savior) but that stands not with his
disposition; for the penny which comes out of his purse, is like a drop of
blood drawn from his heart; and his reward shall be answerable.

The covetous man's heart is like his Chest, ever close shut, except it be to
receive. He is sparing and niggardly in giving, but open handed to receive
whatsoever is brought; like an Hog or Medler, he never does good to any til he
be dead and rotten, He is like a Butlers earthen box, out of which nothing can
be drawn til it be broken; Or some kind of Vermin, which is of no use til
uncased. He resembles a sponge that soaks up excessively; but til Death comes
with his Iron grasp to squeeze him, he will not yield one drop; Only then some
good comes of his Goods.

Indeed it is gteat pity the State does not by him, as Epaminondas did by such
another, who having notice of a rich man that had no care of the poor, (but
would answer them like churlish Nabal, Shall I give my meat and drink unto men
whom I know not? Or like Cardan Doctor of Physic in Rome, who when Outlandish
Scholars came to him, would answer them, What have I to do with Forraigners? I
am Cardan, I care for no man except he brings me money) sent a poor man to him,
and commanded him under great penalty to give him presently six hundred Crowns;
who hearing it, came to Epaminondas, and asked him the cause thereof; Who
replied, This man is poor and honest; and thou who have cruelly robbed the
Commonwealth, art rich; and so compelled him to be liberal in spite of his
teeth: Howbeit if they hanged him up (as Atillus a good King of this Land, did
all oppressors of the poor, and distributed their Goods to those they had
impoverished) they did him no wrong: But for want of this, like Horse-Leeches,
or a sort of Vermin too homely to name, that have no place for voidance of
their excrements, being nevertheless very insatiable, they swell with sucking
of blood, and so burst.

O the wretched and sad condition of a sordid, sensual self-lover, of a
covetous miserly muck-worm, and the small hope there is of his being better*

The salvage creatures, as Lions, Tigers, Bears, etc. by Gods appointment and
instinct, came to seek the Ark; men did not only slight it, but scorned and
scoffed at it. Nebuchadnezzar was more a Beast before he grazed in the Forest,
then while he did, or afterward.

The death of Christ darkened the Sun; shoke the earth, clave the Rocks, opened
the Graves, and raised the dead; all could not put faith into the Jews hearts,
brutish, yea even senseless Creatures, are more sensible then corrupted reason.
And of all the rest of the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees who were covetous,
were the least sensible, because they did shut their eyes, stopped their ears,
and barrocado their hearts against all our Savior did or said; which is just
the case of these men.

All objects to a meditating Solomon, (a wise and holy Christian) are like
wings, to rear and m^^nt up his thoughts to Heaven. But these sit like sots,
under the sound of Gods Word, and are not at all sensible; yea, though they
feel his Ax at the root of their consciences, and be smitten with some remorse,
yet they go on in sin: But what became of Pharaoh that would not hearken to
Moses, though he came with a Message from God? Of the rich Glutton, that made
no more reckoning of Moses and the Prophets? Of Lot's sons in Law, that counted
their Fathers fore-warnings a mere mockage?

The Birds of the Air seem to be wiser then we; for when they know the Gin,
they will avoid it: But we knowing the Devils illusions, yet wilfully run into
them. Sin blinded Sampson so, that finding Dallilah's treachery three times,
could not be warned, although he never found her true in any thing, Judge. 16.
The case of all impenitent sinners, but especially of the covetous, as
hereafter they will acknowledge when Hell Flames has opened their eyes, which
Covetousness hitherto has blinded, and made mere Atheists; for they
acknowledge no other God but Mammon: Every covetous man is a close Atheist, as
thinking it weakness to believe, wisdom to profess any Religion: The Children
of Israel would not believe Samuel before they saw a miracle, 1 Samuel 12. 16.
etc. should the covetous man see as many miracles as Moses wrought before
Pharaoh, he would be the same man still, and a rare miracle it will be if ever he
be saved, as our Savior shows, Mar. 10, 25.

CHAP. LI.
ANd so you have (in this, and the other two parts of the Poors Advocate) the
necessity, the matter, the manner, the nature, the kinds, the quantity, the
subject, the object, the time or continuance, the means, the motives, the ends,
the impediments, and the remedies of this most excellent Grace; or Christian
Duty, so often pressed, patterned, and commended in the Word. It remains only
that I should apply them; for I have more need to press the payment, then prove
the Debt, though sure I am, it is from the foulness of men's stomachs,
prevailing above the goodness of the food, if what has been delivered, does
not prove effectual. Wherefore in the first place, Has God so strictly
commanded it? And is there such a necessity of showing mercy to the poor
members of Jesus Christ? That there is no being saved without it, has God
therefore given us all, that we may impart some part thereof to others that
want? Shall God have glory by it? Has he promised to bless the merciful man in
his temporal, civil, spiritual, and eternal estate? Is there no such way to
grow rich, as by being bountiful to the poor? Is it the most certain and
infallible way never to want? Is sparing in this case, the worst thrift? Will
withholding from the poor, bring a man to poverty? Shall we have the benefit of
their prayers, and their loins to bless us? Is this the Way to obtain God's
blessing upon our persons, whereby we shall be kept in perpetual safety, and
delivered from the malicious practices of all our enemies? Will God hear us,
and send us succor in all times of need (as we hear and pity the poor) and even
make our beds when we are sick. Will what we have this way distributed, stand us
in more stead at the hour of Death, and Day of Judgment, then all the Wealth
in the World? Shall the merciful be rewarded with illumination and conversion?
Will these Works of Mercy bring such joy and peace, confirm our hope, and
sweeten all our afflictions? Are they evident signs of saving Graces? And do
they assure us of our future reward; and fruition of God's presence hereafter?
Is it the only way to an honorable and honest repute and report, living and
dead, procuring all love and respect from good and bad: Will God^bless the
merciful man with an happy match, and a godly offspring? Shall what we give,
be paid again unto our children, and posterity, with an addition of all other
blessings, who otherwise shall not prosper, but be Vagabonds, and beg their
bread. Is it a thing so pleasing to God, that he accounts what is given to
them, as lent to him: And so acceptable to Christ (by reason of the near union
that is between him, the poor and us, being but one mistical body, whereof he
is the Head) that what we do to them, his members, he takes as done to himself;
and will accordingly reward it, or plague the neglect thereof, both upon us and
ours here, and our bodies and souls hereafter: Is it so, that what we disburse
in this World, we shall receive again by Bill of Exchange in Heaven? And that
it is not so much given, as laid up? insomuch that we may truly say, What we
gave, that we have. If besides all this, God has promised to reward a little
money, meat and clothes, with an infinite and Eternal Kingdom of glory, have the
poor as true a right to it, as we have to the residue? Are we no less beholding
to the poor, then they are to us? Would we (were it our case) think the
contrary very unequal? (For if we look on the sufferings of others, as heavier
then our own, this will beget thankfulness; if we look on the doings, gifts and
graces of others, as better then our own, this will beget humility.) Shall they
thereby be the better able to serve God in their several stations? Shall they
have cause to pray for, and praise God for us? Will it stop our enemies mouths,
and make them think the better of our Religion, and happily win them to embrace
the truth; at least, seeing our good works, they will glorify our Father which
is in heaven? Whereas the Poor shall only have some outward relief and
comfott thereby? Shall we fare the better for it in our souls, bodies, names,
estates and posterities, with many the like which might be added for our
eucouragement to this duty? Then they should serve (as one would think) as so
many effectual and strong arguments to move every Christian to the diligent and
frequent doing of them.

Yea, by this time (as I hope) I have made some way in the Worldlings heart, to
relish the relieving of the poor; at least it concerns men to urge and press
these motives upon themselves, until they have compelled their unwilling wills
to resolve to interest themselves into so many promises and blessings, and to
shun the danger of so many threats and judgments, as the neglect thereof will
incur: As did we thus hide the Word of God in our hearts, and particularly
apply these things to our Consciences, it would work this Grace in us all:
Which otherwise will prove no other, then as a sweet harmony of Music to a
deaf man. It is not unknown to us, that Nathan wrought more upon David by a
particular, private admonition, then all the Lectures of the Law could do for
three quarters of a year together.

Yea, let but this be done, or indeed do but well weigh what has been said, and
it will be sufficient to persuade any covetous Nabal alive (if he has either
heart or brain) or indeed any care of, or love to himself or his, to become as
liberal as Zacheus himself. However I doubt not but some will be so wise as to
consider the premises, and thereupon to give as God in his Word injoins; And
that others will do the same, if it be but merely out of self-love; for there
cannot possibly be more rational or strong inducements, more rare and
remarkable Benefits and Promises to any duty, then is propounded to this
particular Grace. Wherefore if there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy
toward your selves or others, think of these things, accept of these
blessings; rush not upon so many Curses, but break off your sins and former
unmercifulness, by righteousness, and your iniquity by showing mercy toward
the poor, Dan. 4. 2. Distribute to the necessities of the Saints, minister unto
them of your Substance, like Mary Magdalen, Joanna, the wife of Chuza, and
Susanna; And give your selves to Hospitality, Romans 12. 13. Luke 8. 2. 3. Suffer
not the naked to lodge without garment, and without covering in the cold, Job
24. 7. Yea, if thou do but well weigh what benefit it will bring to thee, by
being bountiful to them, thou will be glad to meet with, and invite such an
object, or opportunity of doing good, and be thankful for it; even as Zerxes
the Persian Monarch said, when Themistocles came to him, being banished his own
Country; Let the Athenians send us more of such guests. And indeed, if men
will not be moved, nor drawn to good with the threefold cord, inerrableness of
Precepts, innumerableness of Examples, inestimableness of rewards, (and yet
here is more then a sevenfold Cord) no hope that any means should prevail with
them, as St. Austin speaks: If Othniel be told what preferment he shall get for
taking Kiriath Sephar, he will undertake that difficult task, Josh. 15, 16, 17.
And if David does but hear what shall be done to the man that kills Goliath, he
dares accept the challenge of that terrible Champion, 1 Samuel 17. If Moses has
once respect unto the recompense of the reward, he will be content to suffer
affliction with the People of God, Heb. 6. 11. 25, 26. And if the Apostles
expect to receive some great thing of Christ, they will soon forsake all, and
follow him, Matthew. 19. 27, 28. We should therefore be forward to keep this
Commandment of showing mercy to the poor, since in the keeping of it, there is
great reward, Psalm. 19. 11.

CHAP. LII.
AGain secondly, if Bounty be the best and surest way to Plenty; If such Gain
comes by giving; If this be the only way to have our Barns filled, and our
Presses to burst with abundance; If by giving to the poor for Christ's sake, our
riches shall increase and multiply, like the Widows handful of meal, or those
Loaves and Fishes in the Gospel, and that the more we give, the more we have:
That liberallity will make a man fastingly rich, as having Gods Word that such^
shall never want: If we can no way be so liberal to our selves, as by giving to
the poor, and in them to the possessor of all things; It should methinks make
rich men of all others, put the same in practice, since they are all for gain,
and looking after commodity; all for treasuring up, all for themselves, all
for riches, it being their only summum bonum; For no such way to increase
their Estates, or benefit themselves, can ever be found out; this will do it
above what they are able any other way, or what they were ever yet acquainted
with: How then should it take with them? How should it not whet them on, and
make them put the same in practice? For should you rich men plot and break your
brains to study and contrive all the days of your lives* how you may do your
selves the greatest good, this is the only way.

It is fabled of Midas, that whatsoever he touched, it was turned into Gold;
but it may more truly be so said of the hand of Charity; for that turns a Cup
of cold Water into a never failing Mine of Gold: As thus; if we but sow the
seed of our Beneficence, we shall not only reap an earthly crop, but have also
an heavenly harvest, which will never fail us; it will return unto us a double
Harvest, the crop of all temporal and spiritual benefits in this life, and of
everlasting blessedness in the life to come. This is the true Philosophers
Stone, yea it exceeds by far, all that any report of it. For the Lord will
repay and reward us, not only with the true Treasure of spiritual graces, and
eternal glory; but stooping to our infirmity, even multiply and pay us with our
own money also, even with the coin of worldly blessings, which is so current
among us. And what greater gain can be imagined, then to change Earth for
Heaven, transitory trifles for eternal treasures, the bread of men for the
bread of Angels, rotten rags for glorious robes, and a little drink, yea a cup
of cold water (if the Well or River be our best Celler) for the Water of Life,
which will infinitely delight and satisfy us, without glutting or satiety.
Then is our Saviors words, Luke 12. 33. worth harkening to of all rich men,
where he says; Give alms, provide your selves bags which wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts. And indeed it being so, a man would think there needed no
pressing, or persuading any to this duty, that have either grace or wit; for
who does not wish well to himself and his? and yet no duty more neglected;
insomuch that I can never enough admire! the little Charity of most rich men in
these days, or pity their simplicity. For the want of Charity is the strongest
conviction of folly that can be. Nor were it possible they should be so
close-fisted, if they were not as barren of Wit, as they abound in wealth. As
observe but the depth of such an one, he buies a Lease of seven years, with an
Inheritance that is everlasting.

There can be nothing more stange in my judgment, then that covetous men, who
are all for themselves, and for gain, should so neglect the greatest gain and
interest, (with infallible security) that ever was heard of! But Solomon gives
the reason, Prove. 17. 16. for what he speaks there of a Fool, is more true of a
Covetous and Uncharitable Rich man; He has a price put into his hand, but he
wants an heart to make use thereof. As O the brave opportunities such have ^ to
be happy, and to make their seed happy here, and much more hereafter, if they
were wise, and did but truly love themselves, and their precious souls. Whereas
now like ^ouls and mad men, they will needs be more miserable then thousands
that want those blessings, wherein they abound: yet so foolish and mad are most
rich men, as common experience does too well teach us: As, will they not lend a
man on his Bond for six in the hundred? sooner then accept God's hundred for
one, ensured on a Word so firm, that one lot^ of it shall not perish in the
general fire of heaven and earth; and how could this be? were not these words
of Christ, Matthew. 25. 41. to the end* and the great day, together with the
signs of God's love manifested on the Cross, a mere tale that is told, and of
no concernment to us: But

CHAP. LIII.
THirdly, If with what measure we mete to the poor, it shall be measured to us
again, as it fared with Dives touching Lazarus, Luke 16. 20, 25. If the
sentence of Absolution or Condemnation at the day of judgment, shall be
pronounced either for, or against us, according as we have performed or omitted
these works of mercy; to those and only those who have fed the hungry,
clothed the naked, visited the sick, etc. Come ye blessed, etc. And
contrarily, to those that have not done these duties in relieving Christ's
members, according to their abilities, and the others necessities; Depart ye
cursed, into everlasting Fire, etc. In what a case are all miserly and
unmerciful muckworms? Yea what will become of most rich men in these days, who
being worth thousands, will let the poor starve rather then relieve them with
any considerable supply? I profess it is wonderful to me, that ever such
fordid, self-lovers, can look for, or expect to find the least mercy from God
at the great Day of Retribution. Certainly they must needs think there will be
no such Day of Judgment as Christ speaks of, or that he is a notorious Liar,
and means not to be as good as his word; For if they do in the least believe
either of these; yea if they did but come so near believing, as to grant such a
thing may be, or it is possible, they could not be such careless, witless, and
wicked fools, as to venture and hazard the salvation or damnation of their
souls, upon the doubtful event of such a weighty business.

O my Brethren! bethink your selves (before your Glasses be run out) be
persuaded, be persuaded to love your money less, and your selves and souls
more. And do not lose your souls to save your silver; or if you do, you will one
day dearly rue it, I mean when you come in Hell: As let me ask your Consciences
but this question, What would you give in those scorching flames to be
delivered out of them, into Abraham's bosom, or the Kingdom of Heaven? Yea, what
would you not give, if you then had it? Let Nabal be but ransomed out of Hell,
he will no longer be a Churl: Let Dives return from that fiery Lake, to his
former riches, the sensible World shall admire his Charity. Let Judas be
ransomed out of Hell, he will no more betray his Master for money. Let Esau find
the same favor, he will never again sell his Birthright. Nabal then would no
longer oppress. Achitophel then will be no longer a false-Counsellor, nor Ahab a
bloody Tyrant. Finally, if all damned souls could but be admitted to come out
of Hell, and get a promise of Heaven upon condition of extraordinary obedience
for a thousand years, how precisely would they live? And how would they bestir
themselves, that they might please God, having once tasted of those torments
which now many are in doubt of, because no man ever saw Hell, that returned
back to make the relation? yea, if the offer were but made to these Churls on
their deathbeds, when Conscience begins to accuse, God appears to be angry,
and Satan is ready to seize upon their souls, they would then give all they
have, had they ten thousand worlds, for a short reprieve, to the end they might
have the like possibility; As certainly, when Pharaoh saw the Sea ready to
swallow him; he was heartily sorry that ever he had wronged poor innocents, and
oppressed God's own portion: How much more, when he felt the flames of
Hellfire about his ears? And the like of Ahab, touching Naboth, and all such
covetous and cruel men. What gained Laban, and Nabal, or Dives, or that rich
man in the Gospel, by heaping up Riches, and engrossing all to themselves, when
shortly after by their covetousness and cruelty, they both lost their Estates,
and themselves? The foolish Virgins to save, or spare a a shilling, brought no
Oil; but when their Lamps were out, and the Bridegroom was come, what would
they have given? Yea, what would they not have given for a little Oil, and for
entrance with the wise, into the Wedding? Such will on: day be the case of all
covetous men: Indeed at present none are wise but they; for they account poor
honesty but a kind of simplicity; but then they will acknowledge themselves to
have been of all fools, the greatest; nor deserve they any pity: Who pities
that man's death, that having the Medicine by him which can help him, dies and
will not take it? If ever you see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a
wilful Murderer.

O my Brethren ^ look not for Dives nor Judas to come out of Hell to warn you,
since all this that I have said, and much more, is written for your learning
and warning; lest if fare with you, as it did with the Greeks of
Constantinople, who had store of Wealth; but because they would spare none to
the reparation of the Walls, and maintenance of the Soldiers, they lost all to
the Turks, which afterward no money could recover. Or as it fared with
Hedelburough, which was lost through the Citizens Covetousness; for being full
of Gold and Silver, they would not pay the Soldiers that should have defended
them; Though neither their folly nor loss was comparable to this of yours; For
what is the Loss of Life or Country, to the loss of a man's Soul, and the
Kingdom of Heaven. The covetous Jews, spoken of by Josephus, loved their money
dearly; when being besieged, they did in gorge their Gold for all the night,
and seek it in their close Stools the next morning: But nothing so well as
these Cormorants I am speaking of, who by covetousness and overmuch sparing,
resolve to lose Life, Substance, Soul, Heaven, Salvation and all. O wretched,
wicked and foolish generation!

CHAP. LIVE.
FOurthly, If there needs no other ground of our last and heaviest doom, than,
Ye have not given, Ye have not visited: If the main point which Christ will scan
at the day of Judgment, is the point of mercy. If he will accuse the Wicked at
the last day, not only for taking the meat out of the poors mouths, or
plucking their apparel off their backs; but for not feeding them, and putting
clothes upon their backs, as is evident by Matthew. 25. and as I have made plain;
then are all Negative Christians in an ill taking.

It is strange to see how many several ways men have to deceive themselves: One
thinks it enough that he is of the outward visible Church, born of Christian
Parents, has been baptized, etc. Another so confidently hopes for Salvation by
Faith, that he little regards honesty, or true dealing amongst men. Another
sort flatter themselves with promises of mercy; as, Christ suffered for all;
God would have all to be saved; At what time soever a sinner repents, he shall
be forgiven, and the like; and with these they batten their own presumptuous
confidence, be their lives never so licentious. Yea where is the man that will
not boast of his love to Christ? though they even hate all that any way
resemble him; but of all others, such as live harmless Lives, and do no hurt,
think it sufficient, and that it greatly matters not for doing good, so they do
no evil. And in these conceits they go on to the end of their lives, without
once questioning how they shall enter in at the straight Gate. Their deceitful
hearts serve them as Jael did Sizera, who flatteringly said to him, Come in my
Lord, giving him Milk, and covering him with a Mantle, but withal, nailing his
head to the ground. As see how the Rich Glutton flattered himself with hopes,
until he was in Hel-flames: For notwithstanding he had denied poor Lazarus the
very crumbs that fell from his Table, yet he could challenge Abraham for his
Father, saying, Father Abraham have mercy on me, etc. Luke 16 But refused he
was, because he had not the works, nor indeed the Faith of Ahraham, though he
might seem to profess and pretend it. And the like of those Jews, John 8. For
they could boast to Christ, that Abraham was their Father; but he gave them a
cutting Answer, If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the works of
Abraham, ver. 39. Vainly do they speak of their love to Christ, who yet are
wanting to his members. Neither can there be a truer argument of a godless
person, then unmercifulness: If we know a man unmerciful, we may boldly say, He
is ungodly, John 3. 17. The lack of Charity, is the conviction of Hypocrisy, 1
Cor. 13. 1, 2, etc. The righteous is merciful, and gives, Psalm. 37. 21, 22.
But the Wicked are so far from this that they borrow, and pay not again. The
Father of Mercies has no Children but the merciful, Matthew. 5. 7. He that is
not a feeling. Member of others miseries, is not of that Mystical Body, whereof
Christ is the Head. It is not who is called a Christian, or who is baptized;
for in that number we shall find abundance of Heretics, no fewer Hypocrites,
and inn imerable ungodly persons; some not informed in their Judgments, the
rest not reformed in their lives; Neither is it enough that we are civil honest
men whom none can justly accuse; for we are commanded 1 Pet. 3. 11. to eschew
evil, and to do good; to eschew evil, is the first lesson of Christianity, but
not all; to do good is the second, and greater half, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let every
one that calls on the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity; that is one step,
but not high enough; We must also do the will of our Father, John 7. 17. Every
Tree that brings not forth good fruit, (for all it brings forth no bad) shall
be cut down for the Fire; And the servant that does not employ and increase his
Talent, (for all he returns it safe and whole to his Master) shall be bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, Matthew. 25. 30.

Thou have a servant who is neither Thief nor Drunkard, nor Swearer; no, none
is able to tax him with any vice or unthriftiness; yet because he sits all day
with his hand in his bosom, and does nothing, thou correctest him: Why what
harm has he done? Thou can not charge him with any thing but his not doing
of something, yet he deserves chastisement: So in this case there needs no more
to prove thee wicked, and to make thee of the number of those Goats which shall
be placed at Christ's left hand, and to whom he shall say, Depart ye cursed,
then that thou have not done these works of mercy, which are no less commanded,
then the wickedst actions are forbidden.

Good deeds are such, that no man is saved for them, nor without them. Indeed
Faith is the life of a Christian; but the breath whereby he is known to live,
is Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Faith does justify, our works do testify that we
are justified: Therefore justify thy Faith, that thy Faith may justify thee.
There is much Faith talked of, but little faithfulness manifested; abundance of
love, but not a spark of Charity, Gal. 5. 22. But let men pretend what they
will, he that has Grace, or the love of God in his heart, will show it in Works
of mercy, to the end, that God may be honored, and others won and edified
thereby. Blessed are the pure in heart, faith our Savior, for they shall see
God, Matthew. 5. 8. They must lead virtuous lives on Earth, that ever expect in
Heaven to see the Lord Jesus. Now the inward disposition of the heart is
outwardly engraven in the life. Show methy faith by thy works, says James,
Jam. 2. 18. That is, by thy active obedience, which consists in doing God's
Commandments; and passive obedience, in suffering his Chastisements. Though
Faith be alone in Justification, yet not in the justified; as the Eye, though
alone in seeing, yet not in him that sees, but joined with the Ears, Nose,
Hands, and many other members of the body.

Faith the Queen of Graces, has her Gentleman Usher before, and her Servants
following after. If you see not Repentance go before Faith; nor Works attending
on her: know that it is not she. There is a zeal without knowledge, and there
is a knowledge without zeal; there is a faith without obedience, and there is
an obedience without faith; there is a love without fear, and there is a fear
without love; and both are hypocrites. We are justified by faith, says Paul,
Romans 4. 3. We are justified by works, says James, Jam. 2. 21 St. James dealt
with them that stood too much upon Faith without Works, S. Paul dealt with them
that stood too much upon Works without Faith.

Wirked men, if we mark it, are all for extremes, and extremes only bear rule
in this World, because there is still but one virtue for two vices, which cowch
so close beside her, that the natural man can scarce see her; as for instance,
you shall ever see Pride on the one side, Rusticity on the other side, and
comeliness in the midst; Flattery on the one side, Malice on the other side,
and Love in the midst: Diffidence on the one side, Presumption on the other
side, and Faith in the midst. Superstition on the one side, Atheism on the
other side, and Religion in the midst: Ignorance on the one side, Curiosity on
the other side, and knowledge in the midst: Carefulness on the one side,
Carelessness on the other side, and Diligence in the midst: Covetousness on the
one side, Prodigallity on the other side, and Frugallity in the midst. But to
these Virtues, or to keep the mean, Worldlings are always to seek, as hereafter
they will be of a blessing.

Gods Servants are known by this, they square all their actions and intentions
by the Rule of the Word, as knowing that if they do never so much to satisfy
another Will, or their own, it avails nothing with God, if it be not done for
God. Therefore David prays, Teach me O Lord, to do thy will, not my Will; for
we need not be taught to do our own wills; every man can go to Hell without a
Guide. Now he that will do Gods Will, and live by the direct Rule of his Word,
must repent and believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 15. that is, join with his faith in
God's Promises, obedience to his Precepts; For Faith and Obedience are as
inseparable as life and motion, the Sun and its light.

And altbeit in our Justification, Christ says, Fiat tibi secundum fidem tuam;
be it unto thee according to the Faith, Matthew 9. 29. Yet in our salvation,
Redditur unicuique secundum opera sua; Every man shall be rewarded according to
his works, Matthew. 16. 27. Neither will Christ say when he shall sit upon his
throne, Ye have believed, but you have done; Come ye blessed, Matthew. 25. 35.
and in Matthew. 25. 21. Well done good Servants; not well known, nor well spoken,
nor well purposed, but well done: This is the perfect Rule, Gal. 6. 16. And as
many as walk according to this Rnle, peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Again, it is not knowing, or hearing, or preaching, or
casting out Devils in Christ's Name, nor praying, Lord, Lord, etc. but he that
does his will; and when he has done it, accounts himself an uprofitable (...)
that shall be saved, Luke 17. 10. And (...) men were not wilfully blind, and did
not (...) follow the deceitfulness of their own (...) then believe God's Word;
It were impossible they should ever hope for mercy without filial Obedience,
since the scripture thoroughout continually calls for practice, as to ad some
instances to the former. If you ask God who shall dwell in his holy Mountain,
he faith, The man which walks uprightly, Psalm. 15. 2. If ye ask Christ who
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven; he says, Not they which cry, Lord,
Lord, (though they cry twice Lord) but they which do the will of my Father,
Mat. 7. 22. If you ask him again, How you may come to Heaven; he says, Keep
the Commandments, Luke 18. 20. If you ask him again, Who are blessed? He says,
Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and do it; here are none but doers.
If you ask an Angel, who are blessed? he says, Blessed are they which keep the
words of this Book Revel. 22. 7. Here are none but doers. If you ask David Who
are blessed? He says, Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does
righteousness, Psalm. 106. 3. and 103. 18. If you ask Solomon, Who are blessed?
He faith, The man is blessed that keeps God's Law. Prove. 29. 18. Here are
none but doers. If you ask Esaias, Who are blessed? He says, He which does this,
is blessed, Esaias 56. 2. If you ask St. James, Who are blessed? He says, The
doer of the Word is blessed in his deed, James 1. 25. Here is none but doers
mentioned, Matthew. 7, 21. Romans 2. 13. So that blessedness and doing, go always
together; For as the works that Christ did, bore witness that he was Christ,
Job. 10. 25. So the works that we do, must bear witness that we are Christians.
And least any man should look to be blessed without obedience, as Christ
calls Love the greatest Commandment; so Solomon calls Obedience the end of
all; as though without obedience all were to no end, Eccles. 12. 13.

When God created the Trees in Paradise, Genesis 1. he commanded them to bring
forth fruit: So when he creates a lively faith in any one, he commands it to
bring forth Works. And when our Savior would prove himself to John, to be the
true Messiah indeed; he said to his Disciples, Tell John what what things you
have heard and seen; not only heard, but seen, Matthew. 11. 4. So if we will
prove our selves to be Christ's Disciples indeed, we must do that which may be
seen, as well as heard. John was not only called the Voice of a Crier, but a
Burning Lamp, which might be seen.

James does not say, Let me hear thy Faith; but let me see thy Faith: As the
Angels put on the shape of men, that Abraham might see them; so Faith must put
on Works, that the World may see it. The works which I do, says Christ, bear
witness of me. And he always linketh Faith and Repentance together; Repent and
believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 15. Therefore that which Christ has joined, let no
man separate, Mark 10. 9.

I know the Antinomians preach another Gospel; but this is the old Orthodox and
common received truth: They that in life will yield no obedience to the Law,
shall in death have no benefit by the Gospel. And though the Law have no power
to condemn us, yet it has power to command us: Lex datur ut gratia
quaereretur, Evangelium, ut Lex impleretur. The Law sends us to Christ to be
saved; and Christ sends us back again to the law to learn obedience. The former
is plain; The Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith, Gal. 3. 24. The other is as manifest; If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19. 17.

Let our Faith then be seen by our faithfulness, and our Love by our Charity:
and think not to partake of what God has promised, but by doing in some
measure what he has commanded. To conclude in a word, God's servants are
known, by humility and charity; the Devil's by pride and cruelty. Our Persons
are justified by our Faith, our Faith is justified by our Charity, our Charity
by Humility, and the actions of a Godly Life: And so much of the fourth Use.

CHAP. LV.
FIfthly, if we be but Stewards of what we have, and that our superstuities
really the Poors due: then let none object, (when told of their unmercifulness)
What I have is mine own: Or, May I not do as I list with mine own; for it is
neither their own, nor at their own disposing; their wealth is their Makers,
and they must do with it as he in his Word injoins them.

Nor does this argument alwayshold goodin civil matters: It Is a rule in Law, No
man may use his own right to the Commonwealths wrong, or damage. The Law
provides, that a man shall not burn his own corn, nor his own house: That he
shall not drown his own Land; nay, a man may not bind himself from marriage, or
the manuring or tillage of his own Land, because it is against the good of the
Commonwealth.

Wherefore flatter thy self no longer, but lookto it: thou have not two souls,
that thou might hazard one of them. Lose not thy soul, to save thy purse; but
show mercy, if ever thou look to find any. And hear the poor, if ever thou will have God to hear thee: For he has said it, (that will one day Audit the
poor man's complaints, and thy Stewardships account) that no sin but unkindness
to thy Savior in his suffering members, shall be cast into thy dish; to the
feeding of the never dying worm of conscience.

Sixthly art thou but a Steward put in trust? and art thou to give an account
unto God, how thou have husbanded thy Master's Goods; and will this be the bill
of particulars thou have to give up? Item, so much spent in pride, so much in
lust, so much spent upon revenge, so much upon dice, drunk enness, drabs, and
the like great sums all laid out upon thy self, in the pursuance of thy lust:
But when it comes to a work of mercy, as. What have you done for God? What for
Christ? What for the members of Christ? What for the advancement of Religion,
or any pious work, or service. Item, nothing, or as good as nothing. Or thus;
Item received strength, and laid out oppression: Item received riches, and laid
out covetousness: received health, and laid out riot and drunkenness. Item
received speech, and laid out swearing, cursing, lying: received sight, and
laid out lusting; or perhaps, Item so many score pounds laid out in malice and
suits of Law: so many hundreds in lusts and vanities, in feasting and foppery.
So many thousands in building great houses: Item to the Poor in my Will to be
paid at my death, forty shillings; to the Preacher for a funeral Oration to
commend me, ten or twenty shillings: Item to beggars when they came to my door;
or when I walked abroad, a few scraps that I knew not what else to do with, and
sometimes a few Farthings: Item so much spent in excess and superfluity, and
so little in performing the works of mercy: so much laid out upon worldly
vanities, and sinful pleasures; and so little for good uses, especially for
relieving Christ's poor members.

Will this Bill pass current, when God comes to cast it up? When thou have laid
out all for thy self, either in Apparel, or in Feasting, Drinking, etc. for thy
self, self-credit, self-delight and content, even amounting to scores,
hundreds, thousands; while for pious and charitable uses, there comes in here
and there only two-pences, three-pences, and such poor short reckonings, not
worthy to be summed up. Oh miserable man! how will thou answer this before the
Great, just and Terrible Judge of all the World? And how will thou fare? If
these accounts be not mended in this life, thou will never have thy Quietus
est in the life to come. Methinks I could pity these men whom the World so
adores, even with tears of blood, when I seriously consider their latter ends.

CHAP. LVI.
BUt seventhly, there is another sort worse then these, viz. Such as are not
only strangers unto mercy, but are opposites and enemies to it, walking in a
quite contrary way. These do not feed the poor, but they flay them; they do not
clothe them, but they strip them; they make not any provision for them, but
cast how utterly to ruin, and undo them; instead of healing them, they wound
them; instead of relieving, they rob and oppress them; and instead of being to
them any ease and comfort, they lay upon them heavy burdens and pressures.
These Hammons, hanging is too good for them; for if all those shall be bid,
Depart ye cursed, that have not given to Christ's poor members, What will become
of thee that have taken away from them? that have beaten the poor to pieces,
and ground their faces? that have not only eaten up the Vineyard, but keep
the spoil of the poor in thine house, as the Prophet Isaiah complains, Isa. 3.
14, 15. If the Levite be so severely sensured for not helping the distressed
man, Luke 10. 30. etc. What will be thy portion and punishment, that have robbed
him, and have dealt with him as the cunning Fowler deals with the poor birds;
who sets his limed ears of Corn, to catch them in an hard Frost, or great Snow,
when they be ready to starve.

Dives did but deny to give his own, thou have taken away other men's. Now if he
(says Austin) be tormented in endless flames, that gives not his own goods to
them that need, that gives not meat to the hungry, clothes to the naked, that
takes not the stranger into his house, that visits not his brethren when they
are in prison, as it is Matthew. 25. 41. etc. What shall become of him that takes
away other men's, that robs the poor, turns them out of their own house, and
casts them into prison? O remember I beseech you, if that servant in the Gospel
was bound to an everlasting prison, that only challenged his own debt, for
that he had not pity on his fellow, as his Master had pity on him, whither s^al
they be cast that unjustly vex their neighbors, quarrel for that which is none
of theirs, and lay title to another man's propriety?

When the Prophet that was slain by a Lion (though an holy man) buies so dearly
such a slight frailty, of a credulous mistaking: what shall become of heinous
and presumptuous sinners?

Christians should be like Christ: but how unlike to him are these men? Christ
made himself poor to make them rich: but they make many poor to make themselves
rich: yea, they sink others eyes into their heads with leanness, while their
own eyes start out with fatness: and to fill the other bag they will pare a
poor man to the very bones.

Again, many men be unreprovable, and yet rejected: alas, what then shall
become of our gluttony, drunkenness, pride, oppression, bribery, cozenages,
adulteries, blasphemies, and of our selves for them? If he shall have judgment
without mercy that shows not mercy; what shall become of subtraction and
rapine,, Psalm. 109. 11. Do thou not know, that with what measure thou metest
to others here, God will measure to thee again hereafter? Mat. 7. 2. And were
it not better then, to prevent a mischief before, then repent you did not when
it is too late? O that thou would but fore-think, what thy Covetousness will
one day cost thee. As how will it one day grieve these griping Ingrossers, and
Oppressors? when they shall receive a multiplicity of torments, according to
the multiplicity of their cruel and unconscionable deeds? and to the number
also of their abused benefits. They will then wish, that they had not done so
ill, nor fared so well upon earth; that they might have fared less ill in Hell.
For if for one sin at the first, God plagued a world of men; how will he plague
one man for a world of sin?

Consider but these things, thou cruel and unmerciful rich man, and thou ^anst
not choose but tremble* If then they be so terrible to hear, what will it be
everlastingly to feel them? If so intolerable to be felt and endured; be
accordingly careful, that thou may never feel nor endure them: Thou art
taking a Voyage to this Kingdom of darkness, and art near upon arriving; it
were happy if thou would return, before thou art at thy journeys end. And
certainly, did thou but know the place, and thy entertainment when thou
come there; thou would be bound for heaven, steer thy course thitherward,
and fraught thy self accordingly. You know, or may know, what a rich and brave
place Heaven is; the Pavement is of Gold, the Walls of Jasper, garnished with
all manner of precious stones, the Gates of Pearl, etc. Revel. 21. and 22.
chap. For I should but disparage it, by seeking to describe it. But

CHAP. LVII.
EIgthly, (that I may not be said to set in a Cloud) Is he that commanded thee
(this ^asie, and not costly, but most gainful service in the World) thy
Heavenly Father, Maker and Preserver, yea, thy Savior and Redeemer? Is he thy
Lord by a manifold Right? And thou his Servant by all manner of obligations?
As, First, He is thy Lord by the Right of Creation, thou being his Workmanship,
made by him. Secondly, By the Right of Redemption, being his Purchase, having
bought and ransomed thee out of Hell, by his precious Blood, where else thou
must have been frying in flames to Eternity. Thirdly, Of Preservation, Being
kept, upheld, and maintained by him, (all we have, being at his cost.)
Fourthly, Thou art his by Vocation, even of his Family, having admitted thee a
Member of his visible Church. Fifthly, His also (if it be not thine own fault)
by Sanctification, whereby he possesses thee. Sixthly and lastly, He would have
thee of his Court by Glorification, that he might crown thee. So that thou art
every way his. Yea, he has removed so many evils from thee, and conferred so
many good things upon thee, that they are beyond thought or imagination; then
certainly thou art of a sordid and base spirit, if thou deniest him so small a
matter as the surplusage of thy Estate to the relief of his poor and distressed
members; for were you loving children indeed, though there were no Hell to
fear, nor Heaven to hope for; no torments to dread, no rewards to expect; yet
you would obey your good and loving Father, and be the sorrowfullest creatures
in the World, if ye have but once displeased him, only for the mere love you
bear toward him, and for the unspeakble love he has showed toward you: How
much more in this case, when whatsoever we give to the poor, we give it not so
much to them, as to our selves, Dan. 4. 27. Prove. 11. 17.

CHAP. LVIII.
NInthly, Is it so, that what we give here to Christ's poor members, we shall
receive again in Heaven with ten thousand, thousand fold increase of God
himself; What wise man then will not disburse a good part of his Estate, even as
much as he can well spare, this way, when it will bring in such benefit? Yea,
one would think the more covetous men are, and the more they love their money,
the more liberal and bountiful this should make them. Some love their money so
well, that they would, if possible, carry in with them when they dye; If so,
this is the only way: The only means to have the fruit and benefit of our
riches for ever, is to send them before us into our Heavenly Country, where we
shall have our everlasting habitation: Nor can we carry any more of our Wealth
with us, then what we thus lay out; for these earthly things are lost by
keeping, and kept by bestowing. Neither can they and we long continue together,
seeing either they will leave us in our life time, or we shall leave them at
the hour of death, when all that we possess shall be left behind us, and that
only shall be our own, which we have sent before us. In which respect our
riches are fitly compared unto Seed, which can no other ways be truly kept,
then when we seem utterly to lose it; for if we keep it in our Garners, it will
either be spent in the use, or in time must corrupt and perish; but if we cast
it into the ground, where it seems to rot, and to be lost, it is the only
way to preserve and keep it from losing and perishing. Give then that which
you can no otherwise keep, that you may receive that which you can never loose;
for to part with that which you cannot keep, that you may get that you cannot
loose, is a good bargain.

Again, What folly is it, says Chrysostom, there to leave thy Wealth, whence
thou art a departing, and not to send it before thee, whither thou art going.
To leave and lose thy riches in thy Inn, and the place of thy Pilgrimage, and
not to transport it into thine own Country, and Mansion^house, where thou art
ever to reside; let thy Goods be where thy Country is: Let us imitate herein
wise Travelers, who being in a strange and dangerous Country, will not carry
their Riches and Treasures about them, because they be then in danger by
thieves and enemies, to be spoiled of them, hazarding also therewith the loss
of their lives, but deliver them rather to the Agents and Factors of sufficient
Merchants, dwelling in their own Country, that so taking from them Bills of
Exchange, they may receive them at their coming home. The best means of
transporting them thither is, to put thy money into the Lords Treasury, to
deliver it unto the poor, who like trusty Porters, will carry it for us;
whereas if we carry it our selves, it will like heavy burdens, hinder our
journey, and like the Camels Bunch, keep us from entering into the straight
Gate, whereas if the poor whom God has appointed for this service, carry it
for us, we shall avoid the trouble, and escape this danger.

Our Wealth can never do us so much good, as when it helps us in our way to
Heaven, where there is no use of such transitory things; for there the
valuation of Gold cease, Riches are of no use there; and in Hell it was a
drop of water that the Churl wished for; not a Bag of Gold, nor a Lordship of
many Acres, he had too large an Inheritance of them before: Wherefore ye rich
men, yea all men to the utmost of your ability, do that good before death,
which may do you good after death, as Austin speaks; put a good part of your
Goods (even as much as you can well spare from your own use, and for the well
furnishing of your Journey) into the hands of the poor, whom Christ has
appointed as his Agents and Factors, and so it shall most surely be repaid,
with infinite increase (here if we need it; however) having finished our
Pilgrimage, and safely arrived at our heavenly home, when Death has spoiled us
of all the rest, we shall most richly be provided. And this is the right course
to make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon, unto which our Savior persuades
us, Luke 16. 9. This is to play the wise Stewards, that when by Death we are
thrust out of our Stewardship, we having discreetly laid out our Master's
Goods, may be joyfully received into those everlasting Habitations.

Nor will it so much grieve a good man (at the upshot of all; that he has been
a poor Treasurer, as joy him that he has been a good Steward: Yea, it will be
the sweetest and joyfullest saying that ever our ears did hear, when Christ
shall say to us, as you heard before, Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherit
the Kingdom, etc. This will far more rejoice thy soul, then it does now refresh
the others body.

Again, Is there any place so safe as Heaven? where no thief comes, where no
Plunderer comes, where no rust comes: Is there any place like that? Or can you
put it into a better and safer hand, then into the hands of God himself? If
then you will lay it where you may be sure to have it forthcoming, put it into
Gods hand, ^ay it up in Heaven. But if thou will not, or if contrariwise, thy
only care is to hoard up Riches upon the earth, this does plainly show, that
this World is thy native home and Country, and that thou have no right or
inheritance in the Heavenly Canaan; As how is Heaven our Country, when as we
will send none of our Wealth thither before us?

CHAP. LIX.
BUt many to save their purses, will object, that they are poor themselves, and
have nothing to spare them when they want relief: And many of them speak more
truly then they are aware; for though they abound with earthly Riches, yet are
they bare and beggarly in respect of the chief riches, and spiritual Treasure;
though they are rich in goods, yet are they poor in Grace, poor in Love toward
God, and their Neighbors; poor in Faith and Obedience, and poor in Pity, Mercy
and Compassion toward their Brethren, which makes them so niggardly and close
handed, that they will part with nothing for their relief. They have not for the
poor, a few scraps to preserve them from perishing with hunger; but they have
enough for themselves to pamper their bellies, and with the Rich Glutton, to
fare deliciously every day: They have enough to entertain their rich friends
with superfluous pomp and plenty; and they, they will not leave to their own
appetite, but press them with their importunity, to eat still more, when
already they have eaten enough, and too much; but to the poor they will not
allow some poor pittence to keep them from famishing. They who make no spare of
their most costly Wines, but swallow them down themselves with great excess,
and provoke, yea even compel others to drink of them unto drunkenness, will not
give a little small drink to the poor members of Jesus Christ, to quench their
thirst; they have not for the poor some worn and cast Apparel, to cover their
nakedness, and keep their bodies from the injuries of Wind and Weather; but
they have enough not only for their own use, but also for pride and
ostentation, their Chests full thrust with rich Clothing, and their Wardrobes
thoroughly furnished with gorgeous Garments, which serve for little other use,
then to keep those from sloth and idleness, that keep them from moulding and
Moth-eating: And whereas they have no course Clothes to cover naked Christ,
they have costly Ornaments of Arras and Tapastry, for their walls. Finally,
They have not a few pence to spare for the relieving of naked and hungry
Christ, be he in never so extreme necessity; but they have many shillings and
pounds to spend wastfully and riotously upon Dicing and Gaming, vain Sights,
and obscene Stage Plays, and so upon all other sinful pleasures and worldly
delights, which their carnal appetites can any way desire.

But what a fearful reckoning have these men to make at the day of Judgment,
when they give in their accounts unto God? And with what indignation will
Christ look upon them, who have thus meanly and basely regarded him. Then they
will have the wit (or cause) to wish that they had not thus occasioned Christ to
deal with them, as they have dealt with him and his. But there is no persuading
them to believe, that are ordained to perish.

But say thou have but a small pittance of this World^s goods, and not such
plenty or superfluity as is before spoken of; yet ought thou out of that
little thou have, to spare somewhat to relieve those that are in extreme
necessity, either by selling what thou can spare; or if thou have nothing to
sell, yet God commands thee, rather then thou should neglect these Works
of Mercy; to labor with thy hands, that thou may have to give unto him that
needs, Epbes. 4. 28. And therefore excuse not thy neglect of this duty by
saying that thou have nothing for them, unless thou have nothing to waste upon
thy superfluous vanities, nothing to sell; unless thou art unable by thy honest
labor, to earn thy living, and art thy self such an one, as needs by others
to be relieved: that the poorest are not exempted from this duty, we may see in
the example of the poor Widow, who was so commended by our Savior for casting
into the Treasury her two mites, which was all her substance, Mark 12. 43. In
the Macedonians, who being themselves poor, gave even above their ability to
the relief of those that were poorer, 2 Cor. 8. 2. In the Apostles, Acts 3. 6.
and in our Savior Christ himself, who though he were so poor, that he lived
upon what others out of their love and duty ministered unto him, as appears Luke
8. 3. yet he himself gave Alms to those who were in greater want, as we may
gather John 12. 6. 8.

Yea, if we did indeed rightly consider it, our small means should move us the
rather to give, and the more carefully to exercise this Christian duty, since
this is the means whereby being poor, we may become richer, as I have
plentifully proved in the Prevention of Poverty, Chap. 30. which I may not
stand to repeat. See Prove. 3. 9, 10, and 11. 24, 25. and 28. 27. Psalm. 112. 3.
Isa. 32. 8. Luke 6. 38. 2 Cor. 9. 6. Which Scriptures show, that giving to the
poor does not weaken, but much strengthen our Estates, and is so far from being
the cause of our want and poverty, that it is the only means to keep us from
it, and bring to us plenty and abundance.

Besides, if having little we are content in obedience to God, to part with
somewhat, we perform a duty the more acceptable to God, and in the day of
Christ's appearing we shall be so much the more richly rewarded; and for the
present, our Work will be so much the more commendable, as we may see, Mark
12. 43. 2 Cor. 8. 2.

Neither are we to imagine, that if we be careful in feeding Christ, that he
will be careless in feeding us; that he will deny us meat, who has given us
his precious blood; that he will suffer us to want Earthly tr^^les, who has
provided for us heavenly riches. Let such more then heathenish diffidence, be
far from us, who profess our selves to be of the Household of Faith. But rather
let us believe God, under hope, above hope; that is, when in respect of humane
means and second causes, we have cause to despair, as Abraham's in the case of
a Child, when there was no possibility in Nature, nor prohability in Reason.

CHAP. LX.
Obj. BUt there are many Richer by far then thee, who give as little as thou
do; therefore if they neglect to give, much more may thou, as thou
supposest, and yet be excused.

To this I answer; If thou will do as others, or as the most and richest do,
then woe unto thee; for the most and greatest go the broad way to destruction;
or if thou will not live by Precepts, but by Examples, why do thou then
propound for thy pattern those who are carnal and covetous, and not rather the
example of our Savior Christ, and the holy men of God, whose bounty even out
of their poverty, is for this very purpose recorded in the Scriptures.

I, but will the Worldling say, I have a great Charge, and many Children, and
therefore I must not give away my Goods to strangers, for the Apostle teaches
us, that Parents must lay up for their Children, and that he who neglects
this duty, has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Unto whom I answer with Bazil; They who are miserable having Wife and Children,
would not be liberal if they were without them. Again, Was not the Gospel
written a^wel to the married, as unmarried? To Parents, as well as to those who
have no Children? Thirdly, Did thou desire Children of God? or did he give
thee Children, that thou might make them a Plea and Privilege to neglect
his Commandments, and thy duty and love to Christ? Or may thou not justly
fear, if thou thus abusest the blessing of posterity, that God will lessen their
number, lighten thee of this Charge, and so take away thy excuse, by depriving
thee of thy chiefest comfort? The which should be most just with God so to
punish thee, seeing thou make Idols of them, loving them better then God who
gave them.

But thy Children are dear unto thee, and must be provided for; and reason
good: Yet let thy God be dearer; and let them not make thee to neglect him who
gave thee to thy self, and them unto thee; and has provided all that thou
enjoyest both for thee and them. Provide for them a competency or sufficiency;
but deny not unto God of thy abundance and superfluity.

But I may answer thee in thine own words; He that provideth not for his
family, is worse then an Infidel. If thou art a Believer, Christ's Family is
thy Family, Epth. 3. 15. Heb. 2. 11, 13, 14, 16, 17. They are thy Mother
Brethren and Sisters. If we be members of one body, we should think the
discommodities of our Brethren pertain to our selves: Men do well to provide
for their Wife and Babes, but not then when the present necesstities of others
cannot be supplied, without the same be lessened. How did they in the second
and fourth of the Acts, provide for their Families, Wives and Children, when
they sold their Houses and Lands, and gave away all the money? Were they worse
then Infidels, because they were more careful to supply the present wants of
the Saints, then to provide for themselves, Wives and Children, 2 Cor, 8. 14.
Acts 4. 34, 35, 36, 37. The Psalmist speaking of the wicked, says, They leave
their substance to their Babes, Psalm. 17. 14. They put Wife and Children into
their Wills, but leave out Christ and his Children, because they love Wife and
Children more then Christ. But let such know, He that loves Father or Mother
more then me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10. 37. Luke 10: 36, 37, ^8. If any
man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, yea
and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26. And the Apostles
could say, Behold, we have for saken all, and followed thee, Mat. 19. 27. 29. 2
Cor. 4. 18.

But lastly, let men leave to their Children never so great Estates, they shall
be never the better for thein, if they have not the blessing of God withal: And
is it likely that he will bless unto them thine Estate, which is gotten and
raked together by unjust keeping that which he has enjoined thee to bestow;
and by the utter neglect and contempt of his Commandment? Or that God will
regard and feed thy Children, who have neglected his, and suffered them to pine
and perish for want of Relief? No, the only means to obtain God's blessing
upon thy self and thy posterity, is to obey his Commandments, to trust him upon
his word, and to give liberally unto the poor; for the righteous man, who is
merciful and lends, not only himself, but his seed also is blessed, Psalm.
37. 26. He does not say, That his children shall live in a rich and pompous
Estate, for so they may do, and yet with the rich Glutton, be everlastingly
condemned; yea, they may be wasters and prodigals, who will wickedly and
riotously spend what thou have as wickedly gotten and reserved; yea, it may be
this Worldly Wealth which thou leavesh them, may be the means of furthering and
increasing their everlasting ruin, and fearful condemnation: As how commonly
does the leaving great Estates to children (which the rich Father minds not)
make them so much the greater sinners, and to spend their days in pride,
pleasure, idleness, uncleanness, t^^anny, oppression, and in all excess of
Wickedness? but that they shall have Gods blessing upon that which they enjoy,
which whether it be less or more, will make it sufficient, and so sanctify it
to their use, that it shall be unto them a pledge of God's love, and a pawn or
earnest penny of their eternal salvation. Whereas if we will not so far forth
trust God, as we would one another; if we will give nothing for God's and for
Christ's sake, who have given us our selves, and all we have: just it is he
should suffer us to beg ourselves, and have our children beggars, permitting
none to extend mercy toward them, as he has peremptorily threatened, Psalm.
109. 10, to 17.

As without God's special Providence, Blessing, and gracious Guidance, thine
and their Estates is subject to such innumerable casualties, that our of the
highest flow of plenty; they may easily be brought to as great an ebb of want
and penury. They may be oppressed by those who are more mighty; or be defrauded
by those that are more crafty; the States displeasure, or their own faultiness
may turn them out of all: or in this cunning Age, wherein there are none more
skilful to build strongly, then others are to undermine, and supplant: there
may some crack or flaw be found in their Title; and so for want of words or
letters to carry it, thy Children may be deprived of the benefit of thy care
and providence. But if God take the care and charge over them, he is such a
faithful and powerful Guardian and Protector, that none shall be able to wrest
their portion and patrimony out of his hands.

CHAP. LXI.
BUt admit we were assured, that the goods which we spare from the relief of
the poor, and leave to our children, should prosper with them, and make them
great on the earth; yet were there no reason, why for this we should neglect
these works of mercy: For why should thou love thy children better then thine
own person, and in providing for them, neglect thy self? Yea, why should thou
prefer their Wealth before thine own soul? and their flourishing Estate in the
World, which is but momentary and mutable, before the fruition of those joys
which are infinite and everlasting? What comfort will it be unto thee, if for
getting some trifles for thy posterity on Earth, thou have lost Heaven? or to
remember that thy children ruffle it out in worldly wealth, and superfluous
abundance, when thou shall be stripped of all, and want a drop of cold water to
cool thy scorching heat.

But this is the case, (with which I will conclude:) First, the gain of giving
is inestimable: God and Christ, who are owners of the whole World, has
promised we shall be repaid with the increase of an hundred fold here, and ten
thousand, thousand fold in Heaven, and that our children and posterity shall
reap the fruits of our benevolence. And

Secondly, The security is beyond all exceptions; for we have God's Word and
Handwriting for it, even express Testimonies, Precepts, and Promises out of
both Testaments; who is so true of his word, that he never failed a tittle in
the performance thereof, and also all-sufficient to perform: Nihil promittit,
and non reddit; fidelis ille factus est debtor, esto tu avarus exactor, as
Austin on Psalm. 32. Only herein lies the defect, in this Atheistical age, most
men believe not that there is a God; or if so, they will not, or dare not trust
him so far as they would do a man whom they take to be able and honest. This
must of necessity be the main and only reason why men are no more liberal to
the poor: As for instance, If a man of Worship or Credit should, speak or write
to one of us, and wish us to disburse such, or such a sum of money to the poor
about us, and he would take it as his own Debt, and not only pay it us again,
but take it as a great favor; We would willingly do it without any reluctance,
yea rather then fail, we would borrow it, though we had our selves many
children; yea, there is no man when he sows his ground, thinks that it is lost
and cast away, or so buried in the Earth, that he shall never see it more: No,
he looks that that should bring him in a great deal more, and pay him with
overplus, for all his cost; and this hope makes him prodigal of his Seed, so
that it shall have as much by his good will, as the ground can bear or bring
forth: And does not this plainly prove, that we will give credit to a man's Word
or Bond; yea, that we will trust the very ground itself, rather then take God's
or Christ's Bond, or the Bible-Security? You know the place well enough, where
God has given his Bill to you, for the re-payment of what you give to the
poor, Prove. 19. 17. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord; and that
which he has given, he will repay him again, Lo brethren, the bil of Gods own
hand (as I may call it) in which he has both acknowledged the Debt, and
promised payment. Be it known unto all men by this present promise, That I the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, do won and acknowledge my self to be indebted to
every merciful or liberal man, all those sums of money which he has bestowed,
or shall bestow in relieving the distressed, to be paid back unto him whenever
he shall demand it, (for a Bond or Bill that names no day of payment, binds to
pay it at demand) and to this payment well and truly to be paid, I bind my self
firmly by this present promise, sent, sealed and delivered by Solomon my known
Secretary or Scribe. So that not to give readily upon this consideration, is to
proclaim the Lord an insufficient or a dishonest Play Master; either that we do
not believe God's Promises, nor give that credit unto him on his Word, which we
would give to a Turk or Infidel dwelling among us; or that we do not esteem the
payment of his spiritual Grace, or Heavenly Glory (which together with
pecuniary pay, is super-added) for current money, or of equal value to these
transitory trifles, which we impart unto the poor; for if a man of any credit
should promise for the laying out of an hundred pounds, that we should have
Annuity of a hundred pounds a year, for term of life; how eagerly would we
catch at such an offer, though the quick approach of Death might make us
loosers by the bargain? But God promises, that if we will lay out our money on
these uses, we shall have an hundred for one of these Earthly trifles, together
with Spiritual, heavenly, and everlasting Treasures to boot, in the Life to
come. So that it is undeniable, if we do not obey the Precept of God herein, we
charge God with flat falsehood: For consider, God says he will repay it; thou
say, He will not. He says, That to give, is the only way to have, and to
grow rich; yea, never to want, nor to have thy Children want: Thou say, if I
give so much, I shall never be rich, yea I shall be a Beggar. What is this, but
to give God the Lie, and to make the excuse worse then the fault.

For shame then, let us acknowledge the sufficiency, and faithfulness of God:
and go away assured, that he will abundantly perform more then we can imagine,
according to the riches of his grace, in Jesus Christ. Nor can we doubt, but
God is as good a Debtor, as a giver; for if he freely give us wherewithal to
lend, and grace to give, he will much more pay us what we have lent, and give us
because we have given: that is his Bounty, this his Justice. As what says Saint
Paul? God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of
love, which ye showed toward his Name; in that ye have ministered unto the
Saints, and yet minister. As if he should say, that God were unrighteous, if
he should do so, Heb. 6. 10. Do thou then love thy money? and would thou
have it increased? Deliver it not into the hands of men (says Saint Austin)
who will rejoice when they borrow, and mourn when they repay it: entreat, that
they may receive; and calumniate when they should restore: who may be bankrupt
and cannot, or deceitful and will not pay; or who will put thee off with many
delays, and trouble thee with expecting, as they have formerly troubled thee
with their importunity in borrowing. But if thou be a wise Usurer, choose God
and Christ for thy Debtors; who are owners of the whole world, and
all-sufficient sureties (not subject to any casualties) and just beyond all
exceptions, or comparison. Nihil promittit and non reddit, fidelis ille factus
est debtor, esto tu dvarus exactor, at Austin on Psalm 32. And as the payment
is most assured, so the gain is inestimable; so that we cannot lay up our
wealth in a safer, or better hand: we cannot have a better Debtor then our
Maker; nor a better Bond then the Bible, Prove. 19. 17. Luke 6. 35.

CHAP. LXII.
BUt thou see not this increase in thy worldly estate by giving Alms, nor
do thou perceive, that it brings thee any such blessedness as has been
talked of.

Answer, This Objection makes me conclude, that thou art a Miser, and deservest
not the name of an Alms-giver: or if so, let me add, that if thou believe no
more then thou see, why do thou take upon thee the name of a Christian? who
lives by Faith, rather then by Sense: For by how many secret passages can God
conveigh unto thee the reward of thy Alms-deeds? though he writes no
Superscription upon them, to certify thee for what it is sent; it is
sufficient that thou have it, and that thou know that he sent it: As for the
reasons which moved him to give these benefits unto thee, he will acquaint thee
with them more particularly when he shall call thee to make up thy recknoning.
Thou growest in thy stature from a Child unto a Man, and thou see not thy
growing, though thou perceivest that thou art grown: neither know thou the
particular time, and means when, or whereby thou come to this height: And
thou know and acknowledgest, that thou art nourished by thy meat, though
thou see not the secret passages whereby it is carried from the stomach to
the several parts; nor can tell at what time, or by what food thou have been
chiefly nourished. Why then have thou not the like faith? and much stronger in
spiritual, then thou have in respect of natural things? seeing they are much
more secret and insensible; and when thou have God's promise of reward, and
see it performed by his blessings multiplied upon thee, why do thou doubt?
or call them into question? or ascribe them to thy self, or other helps? seeing
whatsoever the means are, they are of God's sending. Finally, if thou say,
that thou see no possibility of increasing thy wealth, by giving away a great
part of it unto the poor; I answer, And what more reason have thou by the
collection of Sense? that thy seed which thou sowest should be multiplied,
which thou castest away, and let to rot in the earth, unless thou have
learned it by experience: And is not God's Word a more infallible Teacher, and
surer ground for thy faith to rest on: especially when thou art not without
experience of the like increase, springing from the sowing of the seeds of thy
beneficence.

To conclude this point, if thou doubtest of these promises of God, made unto
those who relieve the poor; because thou see not how, or when they are
performed; why do thou believe the Remission of thy sins? Salvation by
Christ? and everlasting life? when as thou see none of these, nor have any
other ground but God's promise, even as thou have for the reward of thine
Alms-deeds: And therefore if thou doubtest of the one, thou doubtest of the
other: and were not the profession of thy faith, concerning those spiritual
things good cheap; but that it should cost thee as dear, as the giving of Alms:
thou would doubtless discover and proclaim thy infidelity there, as well as
here; and plainly show, that it was in mere formality and hypocrise. Methinks
our mistrust, or at least the small confidence we have in what God speaks in his
Word; especially touching temporals, is the greatest wonder in the world. And
certainly if we cannot trust him for our bodies; how do we, or how can we trust
him with our souls? which is the greater trust. But beloved, what I speak I
speak not to all; for we have persuaded our selves better things of you, and
such as accompany salvation, though we thus speak, Heb. 6. 9.

And so I have finished, what at first I promised; with an overplus in behalf
of the Poor: But as John could only Baptize with water; so I can but teach you
with Words; and when God withholds his contemned Grace, Paul himself cannot
move a soul.

If the Holy Ghost shall set it home to your hearts, that you may so meditate
on what has been spoken, and so practice what has been prescribed; that God
in Christ may be pacified, your sins by free grace pardoned, and your souls
eternally saved: That while you are here, you may enjoy the peace of God which
passes all understanding, Philip. 47. and when you depart hence, you may
arrive at the Haven of all happiness in Heaven; where is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore, blessed and happy are ye, Psalm. 16. 11. Which being my
prayer and hope, I shall not only take my work off the Loom, or turn my
Pinnace into the Harbor; by making a conclusion of this subject (as well
considering, that those who are most insatiable in other things, will soonest
be cloied with Mannah) but likewise take leave of the Press; and that for these
Reasons:

First, according to my scantling I have said something (if not sufficient) in
one or other of my Six and thirty Pieces, to each soul seduced, or afflicted.

Secondly, (which would by the Reader be considered:) As he gathers that reads;
so he spends that writes: and who so spends ere he gathers, shall soon prove
Bankrupt.

Thirdly, because the Bow that is always bent; will soon grow weak, and
sluggish.

Fourthly I have bestowed so many years, and taken so much pains in gleaning
ears of corn with Ruth, grinding at the Mill with Samson; in binding Sheaves,
carrying to the Mill, Barn and Garner, in threshing, Winnowing, Garbling,
Kneading it into Paste, making it into Loaves, and baking it into Bread, that
so I might have fine Manchet to set before you, (my most welcome Guests) that
(with Martha, in entertaining her Savior) I have wearied my self. And the
truth is, no money could have hired me to have taken the pains; had not an
earnest desire and hope of the common good continually spurred me to go on.
Only for this cause, and the great pleasure I have taken in the work or
imploiment: I would not for a world have been debarred from it. This may seem a
Paradox; but it is the immediate gift of God, (to those that he imploies in
such his service) thus to counterpoise their labor with more then answerable
delight.

Now unto the King Everlasting, Immortal, Invisible; unto God only Wise: be
Honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Timothy 1. 17.

If you cannot remember all that I have said; yet at least remember what the
Holy Ghost says in these ensuing places: Godliness is profitable for all
things; and has the promises both of this life, and of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord,
shall want nothing that is good: Psalm 34. 9, 10. Many sorrows shall be to the
wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about on
every side. Psalm 32. 10. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack. Prove. 28.
27. All things shall work together for the best, unto those that love God. Romans
8. 28.

FINIS.
The sad and doleful Lamentation of ORIGIN after his Fall: Set up as a Sea-Mark
to make others beware of doing the least Evil, that good (even the greatest
good) may come of it.
Being much affected with this Example of Origin, as deeming it exceeding rare,
remarkable, and forcible to make others beware: I have much desired, that some
Stationer would print it with some other small piece, for the common good; and
thereupon I engaged first one, and after that another, who were to print Spira,
that they would add this of Origin unto it, leaving my Copy with them; but
neither of them kept their promise, because forsooth, that of Spira alone would
sell for six pence, and both together for no more. A solid reason! while a
little gain shall be more stood upon, then the glory of God, and good of Souls.
Yet this is the worlds method, and as common, as cursed and barbarous. All
which considered, none of them (I hope) can justly blame me for filling up the
void pages of this sheer with that which may pleasure thousands. For I dare
say, there is not one Reader of forty, that have formerly met with the same in
any Author.

IN the days of Severus lived Origin, a man famous for Learning, and in mental
excellencies most rare and singular: he was bold and servent under the reign of
Severus, Maximinus, and Decius, in assisting, comforting, exhorting and
cherishing the Martyrs that were imprisoned, with such danger of his own life,
that had not God wonderfully protected him, he had bin stoned to death many
times of the heathen multitude; for such great concourse of men and women went
daily to his house to be catechized and instructed in the Christian Faith by
him, that Soldiers were hired of purpose to defend the place where he taught
them.

Again, such search sometimes was set for him, that neither shifting of place
nor Country could hardly serve him. In which laborious travels and affairs of
the Church, in teaching, writing, confuting, exhorting and expounding, he
continued about fifty two years, unto the times of Decius and Gallus; diverse
and great persecutions he sustained; but especially under Decius, in his Body
he sustained Bonds and Torments, Rackings with Bars of Iron, stinking and dark
Dungeons, besides terrible threats of Death and Burning; all which he manfully
and constantly suffered for Christ: Yet at length (like an Isickle) he that
could endure the rough Northern wind of Persecution well enough, melted with the
heat of the Sun, (sweet Allurements and fair Promises of Satan and his
Adherents; his own flesh also, proving a treacherous Solicitor:) For in the
end, being brought by the Idolatrous Infidels to an Altar of theirs, he
shamefully condescended to offer Incense the reupon, in manner as follows, by
his own Confession.

When (faith he) I sought to allure and win these Idolaters by cunning means to
the knowledge of the Son of God, after much sifting they promimised me (unhappy
man!) that they would by crafty conveyances avoid the subtilty of Satan, and be
baptized; But being ignorant, and unskilful in their diverse cunning slenghts,
they (together with the Devil) undermined my simplicity, and Satan turning
himself into an Angel of light, reasoned with me that same night, saying, When
thou art up in the Morning, go on and persuade them, and bring them unto God;
and in case they demand ought of thee, so they will hearken and condescend unto
thee, do what thou shall think necessary, without staggering at all at the
matter, to the end many may be saved. And again, the Devil going before to
prepare the way, whetted their Wits to devise mischief against me, silly
Wretch, and sowed in their minds hypocrisy, dissimulation, and deceit. But I,
O unhappy creature, skipping out of my Bed at the dawning of the day, could not
finish my wonted Devotions, neither accomplish my usual prayer: But wishing
that all men might be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth. I folded
and wrapped my self in the snares of the Devil, I got me unto the wicked
Assembly, I required of them to perform the Covenant, made the night before;
and coming (as I thought) unto the Baptism; I (silly soul) not knowing of any
thing, answered but in a word, and became reproachfully defamed. I spoke
without malice, yet felt I their inveterate and deadly spite; for instantly the
Devil raised an Assembly about me, who carried me to an Altar of theirs, where
a foul filthy Ethopian being appointed, this option or choice was offered unto
me, namely; Whether I would sacrifice to the Idol; or have my Body polluted
with that foul and ugly Ethiopian. In which strait, I having ever kept my
Chastity undefiled, and much abhorring that filthy villainy to be done to my
body, brake out into many moans, lamentations and cries against both. Yet (O
wretched man that I am) at length yielded rather to sacrifice. Whereupon the
Judge putting Incense into my hand, caused me to set it to the fire upon the
Altar; for the which impiety I was delivered both from that and Martyrdom. But
upon my discharge, the Devil raised such an outcry in the City, in pronouncing
against me that just, and yet unjust sentence, Origin has sacrificed.

Whereupon he was excommunicated out of the Church and driven with shame and
sorrow out of Alexandria; and going to Jerusalem, and being there among the
Congregation, was requested by the Priests to make some Exhortation in the
Church to the people; the which he refused to do for a great while; but at
length being constrained through importunity, he rose up, and turning the book
as though he would have expounded some place of the Scripture, he happened upon,
and read only the 16. verse of the 50. Psalm, where he found it thus written;
But God said unto the sinner, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth; seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my Word behind thee? Which being read, he shut the
Book, and sat down weeping and wailing, the whole Congregation weeping and
lamenting with him; he said unto the Church, Woe is me; my Mother which brought
me forth as an high and lofty Terret, yet suddenly I am turned down to the
ground; as a fruitful Tree, yet quickly withered; as a burning Light, yet
forthwith darkened; as a running Fountain, yet by and by dried up. Woe is me that
ever I was decked with all gifts and graces, and now seem pitifully to be
deprived of all. The Lord has made and ingrafted me a fruitful Vine, but
instead of pleasant Clusters of Grapes, I brought forth pricking Thorns: Let
the Well-springs of tears be stirred up, and let my Cheeks be watered; let them
flow upon the earth, and moisten it; for that I am soaked in sin, and bound in
mine iniquity; every creature sorroweth, and may well pity my case, for that I
was wont heretofore to pour out my prayers unto God for them all; but now there
is no salve for me: Where is he that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, who
also salved and cured him that was wounded of the Thieves? Whenas I went about
to enlighten others, I darkened my self; when I endeavored to bring others from
death to life, I brought my self from life to death.

Oh blinded heart! how did thou not remember? O foolish mind! how did thou
not bethink thy self? O witless brain! how did thou not understand? O thou
Sense of Understanding! Where did thou sleep? But it was the Devil which
provoked thee to slumber and sleep, and in the end to slay thy unhappy and
wretched soul: He bound my power and might, and wonded me. I bewail sometime
the fall of Sampson, but now have I fallen far worse my self. I bewailed
heretofore the fall of Solomon, yet now am I fallen far worse my self. I have
bewailed heretofore the estate of all sinners, yet now am I plunged worse then
them all, Sampson had the hair of his head clipped off, but the Crown of Glory is
fallen off my head. Sampson lost the curnal eyes of his body, but my spiritual
eyes are dug out: Even as he was severed from the Israelites, and held
captive among Idolaters, so I have separated my self from the Church of God,
and am joined with evil spirits. Alas! my Church lives, yet am I a Widower,
Alas! my Sons be alive, yet am I barren, Alas O Spirit which came heretofore
down upon me, why have thou forsaken me? O thou Devil, what have thou done unto
me? O Satan, how have thou wounded me? It was the wiliness of a Woman that
brought Sampson to his confusion; but it was my own Tongue that brought me to
this sinful Fall. Alas! every Creature rejoiceth, and I alone forsaken and
sorrowful. Bewail him that is bereaved of the Holy Ghost; bewail me that am
thrust out of the Wedding-Chamber of Christ; bewail me that am tormented with
the prick of Conscience; for now it behooves me to shed infinite tears for my
great sin. Who knows whether the Lord will have mercy upon me? Whether he will
pity my fall? Whether, he will be moved with my desolation? Whether he will
have respect unto my humility, and incline his tender compassion toward me?
Now let the Elders mourn, for that the staff whereto they leaned is broken.
Now let they young men mourn, for that their Schoolmaster is fallen. Now let the
Virgins mourn, for that the advancer of Virginity is defiled. Now let the
Priests mourn, for that their Patron and Defender is shamefully fallen from the
Faith. Assist me holy Spirit, and give me Grace to repent. Let the fountain of
tears be opened, and gush out into streams, to see if that peradventure I may
have the grace worthily and thoroughly to repent: Why have thou shut my mouth by
the holy Prophet David? Am I the first that have sinned? Or am I the first that
fell? Why have thou forsaken me, and banished me from among the Saints, and
astonished me to preach thy Laws? Saint Peter the Pillar of truth, after his
fall, wiped away that bitter passion of forswearing his Master, with monrnful
tears, and was purged from the venom of the Serpent in a short time, Restore me
again to my former health of salvation. O all ye which behold my wounds,
tremble for fear, least God forsake you, and you fall into the like crime. O woe
is me that I am fevered from among the company of the blessed Assemblies: I
have my death's wound: I see the Clouds in the Sky shadowing the Light from
me, and the Sun hiding from me his bright beams. O Satan! What mischief have
thou wrought unto me? How have thou pierced my breast with thy poisoned Dart?
Think thou that my ruin will avail thee any thing at all? Think thou to
procure unto thy self ease and rest, whiles that I am grievously tormented? But
how can I speak, whenas my Tongue is tied? My lips dare not once move; my
throat is dammed up; all my senses and instruments are polluted with iniquity.
But I will proceed on; and first, I will fall to the ground on my bare knees,
and make mine humble supplication unto all the faithful, and blessed of God,
both great and small, that they will help me, silly wretch, which by reason of
the superstuity of my sin, dare not crave ought at the hands of God: O ye
Saints and blessed of God, with waterish eyes, and wet cheeks soaked in dolor
and pain. I beseech you to fall down before the Mercy-seat of God for me
miserable sinner, woe is me, that am compassed thus on every side, and shut up
in my sin: The Lord has made me an Angel, I have made my self a Devil: I was
as as a skilful lawyer, yet am I overthrown by my unrighteous dealing: I was an
heir of the Kingdom of God, but now am an inheritor of the Kingdom of the
Devil: I am choked with infamous doings; but wh^ will Minister Moisture unto
the Temples of my (...)? and who will give streams of tears unto my Eyes, that I
may bewail my self in this my sorrowful plight? O all ye my friends, tender my
case, pity my person, in that I am dangerously wounded, in that I am a scorn to
all men; for having trodden under foot the the Seal and Cognizance of my
Profession, and joined in League with the Devil. In that I am rejected and cast
away from the face of God; it is for my lewd life that I am thus polluted. I
see the Spider over my seat building his Cobweb: There is no sorrow like to my
sorrow; there is no affliction that exceeds my affliction; there is no
bitterness that passes my bitterness; there is no lamentation more lamentable
then mine? Neither is there any sin greater then my sin, for there is no salve
for me. Where is that good Shepherd of Souls? I have broken my Vow I made in
Baptism: Alas that ever I was Doctor, and now occupy not the room of a
Disciple! Thou know, O Lord, that I fell against my Will: Who is able to
signify unto me, when again I shall be coupled, and made Companion of the
Saints of God? O! I am not worthy to hear the Message of them that bring such
tidings; for the threats of the Prophets and Evangelists only belong unto me.
O the bosom of Abraham, the which I am deprived of! I am become partaker with
the Rich Man in his Condemnation, and scorching flames in the horrible pit? I
am tormented with the prick of Conscience; I do fear the dreadful day of
Judgment, for that I am damned for ever, I do fear the punishment, for that it
is eternal. I will prostrate my self before the Threshold and Porches of the
Church, that I may entreat all people both small and great, and will say unto
them, Trample and tread me under foot, which am the foolish Salt, the unsavory
Salt; tread me which have no taste nor relish of God: Woe is me that I fell
most dangerously, and cannot rise again. Assist me, O Holy Syirit, and give me
grace to repent, and wipe out of the Book of the Conscience, the Accusation
printed against me: But thou, O Lord, think upon me, though I am of polluted
lips, and have uttered lewd things with my Tongue; and accept thou Repentance,
Affliction, and bitter tears, the dolor of my heart, and the heaviness of my
soul; and have mercy upon me, and raise me up from out of the Mire of
Corruption and Filth; for the puddle has even choked me up. Woe is me, that
sometime was a Pearl glistering in the golden garland of Glory, but now thrown
into the dust, and trodden in the mire of contempt? Woe is me, that the Salt of
God now lies on the Dunghill! O how many great streams of Lamentation and tears
will wash away and purge mine humble heart? I will turn my talk to God: Why
have thou lift me up, and cast me down? I had not committed this impiety,
unless thou had withdrawn thy hand from me. David sinned too bad in thy
sight, yet after his Repentance thou receivedst him to mercy: Grant that I may
not become and habitation for Devils, but that I may trample under foot the
Devil, which has trod upon me. I have fallen and am bruised, there is no
health in me. Why have thou, O Lord, broken down my hedge and strong holds. The
wild Boar (...) of the Wood has destroyed me, and the wild Beasts of the
field has eaten me up. Rid me, O Lord, from the roaring Lion, that the Bill of
si^ written against me may be blotted out; that I may cease from my Lamentation
in the evening, and receive joy in the morning. Let my sack cloth be rent in
sunder, and gird me with joy and gladness.

Thus in his bitter affliction, and ^^ief of mind he uttered these things can
hardly, and out of order.

FINIS.

