A Sovereign ANTIDOTE, Or, A Precious MITHRIDATE: For Recovery of Souls twice
dead in SIN, and buried in the Grave of Long Custom, to the Life of Grace.

With hopeful Means (God blessing the same) to prevent that threefold (and
worse than Egyptian) Plague of the Heart; Drunkenness, Swearing, and
Profaneness.

Wherein is a sweet composition of Severity and Mercy: Of Indignation against
Sin, of Compassion and Commiseration to the Sinner; with such Christian
moderation, as may argue Zeal without Malice; and a desire to win Souls, no
will to gall them.

By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in Essex.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aed. Lamb. Feb. 5. 1663.

G. Stradling, S.T.P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac.
Domestic.

London, Printed by J. Hayes, and are to be sold by Mrs. Crips in Pope's Head
Alley, with 39 other Pieces composed by the same Author, 1664.

A Sinner rescued from Satan's subtilty and slavery.
SECTION I.
NOt to admonish our brother is to hate him, as the Holy Ghost witnesses, Lev.
19.17. But to scorn our brother should admonish us, is more to hate our selves.
That little which Croesus learned of Solon, saved his life. And had Pilate
taken that fair warning his wife gave him, it might have saved his soul; which
once lost, cannot be redeemed with ten thousand worlds: no not with the
enduring of ten thousand thousand years torments in Hell. Enough I suppose
(together with a desire of my Readers eternal welfare) to encourage me to
speak, others to hear. Wherefore let none in the least be offended with what I
shall deliver, or with me for it: For (not only the searcher of hearts, but)
the world shall witness, that I fight not against you, but against your sins;
and you have no such foes as your faults. And these are they I seek to subdue,
and batter down before you: as well knowing, that unless they die, you cannot
live.

Yea, if I make you smart, give me the more thanks, love me the better for it:
Sharp reprehension is the healing of the soul; and love to the soul, is the
soul of love* And let this serve for an Apology, and if you please for a
Protection.

Sect. 2. Considering the numberless number of those that by professing
themselves Protestants, discredit the Protestant Religion: Who because they
have been Christened, as Simo^ Magus was, received the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, like Judas; and for company go to Church also as Dogs do, are called
Christians, as we call the Heathen Images gods: yea* and ( being blinded by the
Prince of darkness, 2. Cor. 4.4.) think to be saved by Christ, though they take
up Arms against him; and are no more like Christians, then Michals Image of
Goats-hair was like David: Who make the world only their god, and pleasure or
profit alone their Religion: Who are so graceless, that God is not in all their
thoughts; except to blaspheme him, and to spend his days in the Devil's
service: Who being Christians in name, will scoff at a Christian indeed: Who
honor the dead Saints in a cold profession, while they worrey the living
Saints in a cruel persecution: Who so hate Holiness, that they will hate a man
for it; and say of good living, (as F^stus of great Learninq) It makes a man
mad: whose hearts will rise at the sight of a good man, as some stomachs will
rise at the sight of sweet meats: Whose Religion is to oppose the power of
Religion; and whose knowledge of the Truth, to know how to argue against the
Truth: Who justify the wicked, and condemn the just: who call Zeal, madness;
and Religion, foolishness: Who love their sins so much above their souls, that
they will not only mock their Admonisher, scoff at the means to be saved, and
make themselves merry with their own damnations; but even hate one to the
death, for showing them the way to eternal life: who will condemn all for
Roundheads, that have more Religion then an Heathen, or knowledge of heavenly
things, then a child in the womb has of the things of this life; or
conscience, then an Atheist, or care of his soul, then a Beast, and are mockers
of all that march not under the pay of the Devil: Who with Adam will become
Satan's bondslaves for an Apple; and like Esau, sell their birthright of Grace
here, and their Blessing of Glory hereafter for a mess of pottage: Who prefer
the pleasing of their palates before the saving of their souls: who have not
only cast off Religion, that should make them good men; but reason also, that
should make them men: Who waste virtues faster then riches, and riches faster
then any virtues can get them: Who do nothing else but sin, and make others sin
too: who spend their time and patrimonies in Riot, and upon Dice, Drab,
Drunkenness: who place all their felicity in a Tavern or Brothel house, where
Harlots and Sycophants rifle their Estates, and then send them to rob: Who will
borrow of every one, but never intend to satisfy any one: Who glory in their
shame, and are ashamed of that which should and would be their glory: Who
desire not the reputation of honesty, but of good fellowship: Who in stead of
quenching their thirst, drown their senses; and had rather leave their wits,
then the wine behind them: who place their Paradise in their throats, Heaven in
their guts: and make their belly their god: Who pour their Patrimonies down
their throats, and throw the house so long out at windows, that at length their
house throws them out of doors: Who think every one exorbitant that walk not
after their Rule: Who will traduce all whom they cannot seduce; even condemning
with their tongues, what they commend in their consciences: Who as they have no
reason, so they will hear none: Who are not more blind to their own faults,
then quick-sighted in other men's: Who being displeased with others, will fly
in their Makers face, and tear their Saviors Name in pieces with oaths and
execrations, as being worse then any mad dog that flies in his Masters face
that keeps him: Who swear and curse even out of custom, as Currs bark; yea,
they have so sworn away all grace, that they count it a grace to swear; and
being reproved for swearing, they will swear that they swore not.

Sect. 3. Or perhaps they are covetous Cormorants, greedy Gripers, miserly
Muck-worms; all whose reaches are at riches: Who make gold their god, and
commodity the stern of their consciences: Who hold every thing lawful, if it be
gainful: Who prefer a little base pelf before God, and their own salvation; and
who being fatted with Gods blessings, do spurn at his precepts: Who like men
sleeping in a Boat, are carried down the stream of this World, until they
arrive at their Graves-end [Death] without once waking to bethink themselves
whither they are a going [to Heaven or Hell.]

Or Ignorant and Formal Hypocrites: who do as they see others do, without
either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason: Who do what is morally good,
more for fear of the Law, then for love of the Gospel: Who fear the Magistrate
more then they fear God or the Devil; regard more the blasts of men's breath,
then the fire of Gods wrath; will tremble more at the thought of a Bailiff, or
a Prison, then of Satan, or Hell, and everlasting perdition: Who will say, they
love God and Christ, yet hate all that any way resemble him; are slint unto
God, wax to Satan; have their ears always open to the Tempter, shut to their
Maker and Redeemer; will choose rather to disobey God, then displease great
Ones; fear more the Worlds scorns, then His anger; and rather than abridge
themselves of their pleasure, will incur the displeasure of God: Who will do
what God forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what He threatens: Who will do
the Devils works only, and yet look for Christ's wages; expect that Heaven will
meet them at their last hour, when all their life long they have galloped in
the beaten Road toward Hell: Who expect to have Christ their Redeemer and
Advocate, when their Consciences tell them, that they seldom remember him, but
to blaspheme him; and more often name him in their oaths and curses, than in
their prayers: who will persecute honest and Orthodox Christians; and say,
they mean base and dissembling hypocrites: Who think they do God good service
in killing his servant^, Joh. 16.2. Who will boast of a strong faith, and yet
fall short of the Devils in believing, Jam. 2.19. who turn the grace of God
into wantonness; as if a condemned person* should head his Drum of Rebellion
with his pardon; resolving to be evil, because God is good: Who will not
believe what is written, till they feel what is written, and whom nothing
will con^ute, but fire and brimstone: who think their villainy is unseen,
because it is unpunished; and therefore live like Beasts, because they think
they shall die like Beasts.

Sect. 4. Considering the swarms, legions, millions of these I say, and many
the like, which I cannot stand to repeat. As also in reference to Levit.
19.17. Isa. 58.1. I have deemed it no desertless office, to say something
toward the saving of those poor ignorant and impotent vvretches, that are
neither able, nor vvilling to help themselves. And indeed, what heart would it
not make to bleed, that has any Christian blood in his veins, to see what
multitudes there are that go blindfold to destruction; and no man offer to
stop or check them before they arrive there, from whence there is no
redemption, Matthew. 7.13, 14. 1 John. 5.19. Rev. 20.8. and 13.16. Isa. 10.22.
Romans 9.27. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.1, to 4. Phil. 3.18. Joh^* 8.44. and
1^.30.

Yea, how should it not make all, that are themselves got out of Satan's
clutches, to plot, study, and contrive all they can, to draw others of their
brethren after them.

We read that Andrew was no sooner converted and become Christ's Disciple, but
instantly he drew others after him to the same Faith, John 1.41. and the like
of Philip, ver. ^5. and of the woman of Samaria, John 4.28, to 41. and of
Peter, Luke 22 32. Act. 2.41. and chap. 3. and 4.4. and so of all the Apostles*
Yea, Moses so thirsted after the salvation of Israel, that rather than he
would be saved without them, he desired the Lord to b^ot him out of the Book
of Life, Exodus 32.32. And Paul to this purpose says, I could wish my self to
be separated from Christ for my brethren, that are my kinsmen according to the
flesh, meaning the Jew^, Romans 9.3. And indeed all heavenly hearts are
charitable. Neither are we of the communion of Saints, if we desire not the
blessedness of others, it being an inseparable adjunct, or relative to grace;
for none but a Cain will say, Am I my brothers keeper? Yea, where the heart
is thankful, and inflamed with the love of God, and our neighbor, this will
be the principal aim: As by my sins and bad example, I have drawn others from
God: so now I will, all I can, draw others with my self to God. Saul converted,
will build up, as fast as ever he plucked down, and preach as zealously as ever
he persecuted: and we are no whit thankful for our own salvation, if we do not
look with charity and pity upon the gross mis-opinions and mispr^sions of our
Brethren. And what though we cannot do what we would? yet we must labor to do
what we can, to win others; not to merit by it, but to express our thanks.
Besides it were very dishonorable to Christ not to do so. Did you ever know
that wicked men, thieves, drunkards, adulterers, persecuters, false prophets,
or the like, would be damned alone? no, they mislead all they can, as desiring
to have companions. Yea, the Pharisees would take great pains, compass sea and
land, to make other* twofold more the children of hell than themselves, as our
Savior expressly says, Mat. 23.15. which may cast a blush upon our cheeks, who
are nothing so industrious to win souls to God. And what a shame is it, that
our God should not have as faithful servants, as he has unfaithful enemies?
that wickedmen should be at more cost and pains to please an ^ll mast^^, then
we can afford to please so good a God, so gracio^s, and so loving a (...) they
labor so hard, for that which will but (...) be^^ damnation? (...) shall we
think any pains too much for that which will ad^^ to the we (...) our eternal
glory and salvation?

Sect. 5. And what though their case be not only desperate, but almo^^
hopeless? yet there is a mercy due even to them: and it is our duty to ^se the
means; leaving the issue to him who is able to quicken the d^ad, and to make
even of stones children to Abraham? Witness Manasses in the Old Testastament,
and Paul in the New. Yea, I suppose, that this their sad on (...) calls for our
more than ordinary compassion. Since they have precious so^ls, that must
everlastingly live in bliss, or woe. And hence it is, that the A^gels are said
to rejoice more at the conv^^sion of such a sinner, than for the building up of
ninety and nine that are already converted, Luke 15.7. because he to whom God
has given a new heart, and spiritual life, will be sure to seek out for, and
use the means of growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Whereas the former, are not only dead in sin, but so buried in
the grave of long custom, that they cannot stir the least joint; no, not so
much as ^eel their deadness, nor desire life, but resist all means tending
thereunto. Insomuch, that the conversion of such an one is held by Divines a
greater work, or miracle, than the creating of the whole World: For in every
new creature are a number of miracles; A blind man is restored to sight; a deaf
man to hearing; a man possessed with many Devils, dispossessed; yea, a dead man
raised from the dead, and in every one a stone turned into flesh: in all which
God meets with nothing but opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

I know this is Greek to a Sensualist, that has only the Flesh for his Tutor
whence it will not be amiss to show, how it fares with the parties with
whom I am, to encounter; Drunkards, Blasphemers, and Profane persons.

Sect. 6. Even such is the power of sin, that it made God become man, Angels
become Devils, and men become beasts. For each man by nature, every one, whose
heart is not changed by the Loadstone of the Gospel, is a very beast in
condition, as Jeremy affirms, Jer. 10.14. and St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.12. But
that is not all; for when the custom of sin, has so brawned men's hearts,
seared their consciences, and blinded their minds, that they can swear and
curse as familiarly as Dogs bark: When the just and true God, has for their
rebellious wickedness in rejecting him, and despising all good means of being
bettered, given them up to their own hearts lusts, and to Satan the God of this
world, to be taught and governed by him: even as a just Judge, having passed
sentence upon some heinous Malefactor, gives him up to the Jailer, or
Executioner: (as you may see by sundry places, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. 1 Kings
22.20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. Joh. 13.2. Acts 5.3. 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
Genesis 3.1, to 6. Rev. 2.10.3.15. Joh. 8.44. and 12.31. and 14.30. 2 Cor. 4.4.)
Then they become so devilized, that as Paul being guided by the good Spirit of
God could say, I live not, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. So may they say,
we live not, but the Devil lives in us. For he is not only their Father, Genesis
3.15. Joh. 8.44. But their God, 2 Cor. 4.4. And their Prince, Joh. 14.30. And
works in them his pleasure, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. So that they are ready and
willing to say or do, what he will have them: as you may plainly read, Joh.
13.2. Acts 5.3. and 12.1, 2, to 12. 1 Chro. 21.1. Genesis 3.1, to 6. Rev. 2.10.

True, these poor simple souls know none of all this: as those four hundred of
Ahabs Prophets, in whom this evil Spirit spoke, did not know that Satan spoke
by them, 1 King. 22.22. Neither did Judas know when he eat the sop, that Satan
entered into him, and put it into his heart to betray Christ, Joh. 13.2. Nor do
Magistrates when they cast the servants of God into prison, once imagine that
the Devil makes them his Jaylors, but he does so. They are his Instruments, but
he is the Principal Author; as is plain by Rev. 2.10. Neither did Ananias and
Saphira once think, that Satan had filled their hearts, or put that lie into
their mouths, for which they were struck dead, Acts 5. yet the Holy Ghost tells
us plainly, that he did so, Verse. 3. Nor Eve in Paradise, had not the least
suspicion, that it was Satan that spoke to her, by the Serpent: Nor Adam, that
it was the Devils mind in her mouth, his heart in her lips, when tempted to eat
the forbidden fruit. Nor did David once dream, that it was Satan, who moved him
to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Much less did Peter, who so loved Christ,
imagine that he was set on by Satan, to tempt his own Lord and Master with
those affectionate words, Master pity thy self: For if Christ had pitied
himself, Peter and all the world had perished. Yet it was so, which occasioned
Christ to answer him, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.22, 23.

Much less do Drunkards, Blasphemers, and profane persons know, that it is not
they, but the Devil in them, when they scoff at Religion and holiness; when
they tear Heaven with their blasphemies, and bandy the dreadful Name of God in
their impure and poluted mouths, by their bloody Oaths and Execrations.

These things premised, I come to deal with the parties first mentioned, with
whom my business lies: and they are Drunkards, Blasphemers, and profane
persons, who swarm so in all places. And to these, their faithful and impartial
Monitor presents a few Considerations. I Will begin with Drunkards; O that they
would mind what I shall say, but so much as it concerns them!

The Blemish of Government, the Shame of Religion, the Disgrace of Mankind; or
a Charge drawn up against Drunkards, and presented to his Majesty, in the name
of all the sober Party in the three Nations. Humbly craving, that they may be
kept alone by themselves from infecting others; compelled to work and earn what
they consume: And that none may be suffered to sell Drink, who shall either
Swear, or be Drunk themselves, or suffer Others within their Walls.
1. BRANCH of the Charge.
THat as the Basilisk is chief of Serpents: so of sinners, the Drunkard is
chief. That Drunkenness is of sins the Queen: as the Gowt is of diseases: even
the root of all evil, the rot of all good. A sin which turns a man wholly into
sin. That all sins, all beast-like, all serpentine qualities meet in a
Drunkard, as rivers in the sea: and that it were far better to be a Toad, or a
Serpent, then a Drunkard. That the Drunkard is like Ahab, who sold himself to
work wickedness. That he wholly dedicates, resigns, surrenders, and gives
himself up to serve sin and Satan. That his only employment is to drink, drab,
quarrel, swear, curse, scoff, slander and seduce: as if to sin were his Trade,
and he could do nothing else; like the Devil, who was a sinner from the
beginning, a sinner to the end. That these sons of Belial, are all for the
belly: for to drink God out of their hearts, health out of their bodies, wit
out of their heads, strength out of their joints, all the money out of their
purses, all the drink out of the Brewers barrels, wife and children out of
doors, the house out at windows, the Land out of quiet, plenty out of the
Nation, is all their business. In which their swinish swilling, they resemble
so many frogs in a puddle, or water-snakes in a pond: for their whole
exercise, yea, Religion, is to drink; they even drown themselves on the dry
land. That they drink more spirits in one night, then their flesh and brains be
worth. That more is thrown out of one swines nose, and mouth, and guts, then
would maintain five sufficient families.

2. Br. That it is not to be imagined, what all the Drunkards in one Shire or
County do devour, and worse then throvv away in one year: when it has been
known (if we may give credit to Authors, and the Oaths of others) that two
and thirty in one cluster have made themselves drunk; that six and thirty have
drank themselves dead in the place, with carovvsing of healths; that at one
Supper, one and forty have killed themselves, with striving for the conquest:
that two have drank each of them a peck at a draught: that four men have drank
four gallons of wine at a sitting: that one man has drank two gallons of
wine; and two more, three gallons of wine a piece at a time: that one
Drunkard in a fevv hours, drank four gallons of wine: that four ancient men
drank as many cups of wine at one sitting, as they had lived years, which
was in all three hundred cups of wine amongst four men: and lastly, that
three women came into a Tavern in Fleet Street (when I was a boy, take it
upon Claptons Oath and credit, who drevv the Wine) and drank forty nine quarts
of Sack; two of them sixteen a piece, and the third to get the victory,
seventeen quarts of Sack. Which being so, what may the many millions of these
ding-thrifty dearth-makers consume in a year in all the three Nations? It is
much to be feared, that as we turn the sanctuary of life into the shambles of
death: so God may send a famine after such a satiety, and pestilence after
famine. Or rather, that our Land, which has been so long sick of this disease,
and so often surfeted of this sin, should spue us all out who are the
Inhabitants.

Nor need it seem incredible, that common drunkards should drink thus: for they
can disgorge themselves at pleasure, by only putting their finger to their
throat; and they will vomit, as if they were so many live Whales spuing up the
Ocean: which done, they can drink a fresh.

Or if not so, yet custom has made it to pass through them, as through a
tunnel, or streiner; whereby it comes out again as sheer wine as it went in, as
has been observed.

Nor has the richest Sherry or old Canary any more operation with them, than a
cup of six has with me. And no marvel! for, if Physic be taken too often, it
will not work like Physic: but nature entertains it as a friend, not as a
Physician. Yea, poison by a familiar use becomes natural food. As Aristotle (in
an example of a Maid, who used to pick spiders off the walls and eat them,)
makes plain.

3. Br. That as Drunkards have lost the prerogative of their Creation, and are
changed (with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.16.) from men into beasts, so they turn
the sanctuary of life into the shambles of death: yea, thousands (when they
have made up the measure of their wickedness) are taken away in Gods just wrath
in their drink; (as it were with the weapon in their bellies) it faring with
them as it did with that Pope, whom the Devil is said to have slain in the very
instant of his Adultery, and carry him quick to hell, being suddenly struck
with death, as if the execution were no less intended to the soul, than to the
body.

That by the Law of God in both Testaments; He that will not labor, should not
eat, Genesis 3.19. Pro. 20.4. 2 These. 3.10. because he robs the Commonwealth of
that which is altogether as profitable as land, or treasure. But Drunkards are
not only lazy get-nothings, but they are also riotous spend-alls; and yet
these drunken drones, these gut-mongers, these Quagmirists, like vagrants and
vermin, do nothing all their life-long that may tend to any good, as is
storied of Margites, and yet devour more of the fat of the Land, than would
plentifully maintain those millions of poor in the Nation that are ready to
fami^h. A thing not fit to be suffered in any Christian Commo^-wealth: yea, far
sitter they were stoned to death, as by the Law of God they ought, Deuteronomy. 21.20,
21. since this might bring them to repentance; whereas now they spend their
days in mirth, and suddenly they go down into hell, Job 21.13. Drunkards being
those swine whom the legion carries headlong into the Sea, or pit of perdition.

4. Br. That every hour seems a day, and every day a month to a drunkard, that
is not spent in a Tap-house; yea, they seem to have nailed their ears to the
door of some Tavern or Tap-house, and to have agreed with Satan, Master, it is
good being here. That where ever the Drunkards house is, his dwelling is at the
Alehouse, except all his money be spent, and then if his wife will fetch him
home with a lanthorn, and his men with a barrow, he comes with as much sense
as Michals image had.

That the pot is no sooner from their lips, but they are melancholy, and their
hearts as heavy, as if a millstone lay upon it. Or rather they are vexed like
Saul, with an evil spirit, which nothing will drive away but drink and Tobacco.
They so wound their consciences with all kind of prodigious wickedness, and so
exceedingly provoke God, that they are rackt in conscience, and tortured with
the very flashes of bell-fire. That they drink to the end only, that they may
forget God, his threats and judgments; that they may drown conscience, and put
off all thoughts of death and hell; and to hearten and harden themselves
against all the messages of God, and threats of the Law: which is no other in
mitigating the pangs of conscience, than as a saddle of gold to a galled-horse,
or a draught of poison to quench a man's thirst. That if they might have their
wills, none should refuse to be drunk unpunished, or be drunk unrewarded at the
common charge. As how will they boast what they drank, and how many they
conquered at such a meeting, making it their only glory. That the utmost of a
Drunkards honesty is good-fellowship: that temperance and sobriety with them is
nothing but humor and singularity; and that they drink not for strength or
need, but for lust and pride; to show how full of Satan they are, and how near
to swine.

That though these swinish swill-bowls make their gullet their god, and
sacrifice more to their god-belly, than those Babylo^ians did to their god Bell,
Bell and the Dragon, v. 3. yet they will say, yea swear, that they drink not for
love of drink; though they love it above health, wealth, credit, child, wife,
life, heaven, salvation, All. They no more care for wine, than Esau did for his
pottage, for which he sold his birthright, Isa. 56.12.

5. Br. That Drunkards are the Devils capti^es, at his command, and ready to do
his will; and that he rules over, and works in them his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26.
Ephesians. 2.2. that he enters into them, and puts it into their hearts what he will
have them to do, Joh. 13.2. Acts 5.3. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. opens their mouths, speaks
in and by them, Genesis 3.1, to 6. stretches out their hands, and they act as he
will have them, Act. 12.1, 2. Rev. 1.10. he being their father, Genesis 3.15. Joh.
8.44. their king, Joh. 12.31. and 14.30. and their god, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.
And which is worst of all, that drunkenness not only dulls and dams up the head
and spirits with mud, but it beastiates the heart, and (being worse than the
sting of an Asp) poysoneth the very soul and reason of a man, whereby the
faculties and organs of repentance and resolution are so corrupted and
captivated, that it makes men utterly incapable of returning, unless God should
work a greater miracle upon them, than was the creating of the whole world.
Whence Austin compares it to the very pit of hell, out of which (when a man is
once fallen into) there is no hope of redemption.

That Drunkenness is like some desperate plague, which knows no cure. As what
says Basil, Shall we speak to drunkards? we had as good speak to liveless
stones, or senceless plants, or witless beasts, as to them; for they no more
believe the threats of Gods Word, than if some Impostor had spoken them. They
will fear nothing, till they be in hellfire; resembling the Sodomites, who
would take no warning, though they were all struck blind; but persisted in
their course, until they felt fire and brimstone about their ears, Genesis 19.11.

That there is no Washing these Black-moors white, no charming of these deaf
Adders; blind men never blush; fools are never troubled in conscience, neither
are beasts ever ashamed of their deeds.

That a man shall never hear of an habituated, infatuated, incorrigible,
cauterized Drunkard, that is reclaimed with age.

6. Br. That as at first, and before custom in sin has hardened these
Drunkards, they suffer themselves to be transformed from men into swine; as
Elpenor was transformed by Circes into a hog; so by degrees they are of swine
transformed again into Devils, as Cadmus and his wife were into serpents, as
palpably appears by their tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition.

That these Age its for the Devil, Drunkards, practice nothing but the Art of
d^baunching men; that to turn others into beasts, they will make themselves
devils, wherein they have a notable dexterity, as it is admirable how they will
wind men in, and draw men on by drinking first a health to such a man, then to
such a woman my mistress, then to every ones mistress; then to some Lord or
Lady; their Master, their Magistrate, their Captain, Commander, etc. and never
cease, until their brains, their wits, their tongues, their eyes, their feet,
their sense, and all their members fa^l them: that they will drink until they
vomit up their shame again, like a filthy dog, or lie wallowing in their
beastliness like a bru^ish swine. That they think nothing too much either to do
or spend, that they may make a sober man a drunkard, or to drink another
drunkard under the table; which is to brag how far they are become the Devils
children: that in case they can make a sober and religious man exceed his
bounds, they will sing and rejoice, as in the division of a spoil; and boast
that they have d^eached sobriety, and blinded the light; and ever after be a
snuffing of this tape^, Psalm. 13.4. But what a barbarous, graceless, and
unchristian-like practice is this, to make it their glory, pastime, and
delight, to see God dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his Name blasphemed, his
creatures abused, themselves and their friends souls damned. Doubtless such men
have climbed the highest step of the ladder of wickedness; as thinking their
own sins will not press them deep enough into hell, except they load themselves
with other men's; which is Devil-like indeed! whose aim it has ever been,
seeing he must of necessity be wretched, not to be wretched alone.

That as they make these healths serve as a pulley, or shooing-horn to draw men
on to drink more, then else they would or should do: so a health being once
begun, they will be sure that every one present shall pledge the same, in the
same manner and measure, be they thirsty, or not thirsty, willing, or not
willing, able, or unable: be it against their stomachs, healths, natures,
judgments, hearts and consciences, which do utterly abhor, and secretly condemn
the same. That in case a man will not for company grievously sin against God,
wrong his own body, destroy his soul, and wilfully leap into hellfire with
them; they will hate him worse then the hangman; and will sooner adventure
their blood in the field, upon refusing or crossing their healths, then in the
cause and quarrel of their Country.

7. Br. How they are so pernicious, that to damn their own souls, is the least
part of their mischief; and that they draw vengeance upon thousands, by
seducing some, and giving ill example to others. That one Drunkard makes a
multitude, being like the bramble, Judge. 9.15. which first set it self on fire,
and then fired all the Wood. Or like a malicious man sick of the plague, that
runs into the throng to disperse his infection: whose mischief out-weighs all
penalty. And this shows, that they not only partake of the Devils nature, but
that they are very Devils in the likeness of men: and that the very wickedness
of one that fears God, is far better than the good entreaty of a Drunkard.

That with sweet words they will tole men on to destruction, as we tole beasts
with fodder to the slaughterhouse: And that to take away all suspicion, they
will so mollify the stiffness of a man's prejudice, so temper and fit him to
their own mold, that once to suspect them, requires the spirit of discerning.
And that withal, they so confirm the profession of their love with oaths,
protestations, and promises, that you would think, Jonathans love to David
nothing to it. That these pernicious seducers, devils in the shape of men, have
learned to handle a man so sweetly, that one would think it a pleasure to be
seduced.

But little do they think, how they advance their own damnations, when the
blood of so many souls, as they have drawn away, will be required at their
hands! For know this thou tempter, that thou do not more increase other men's
wickedness on earth, (whether by persuasion, or pro^ocation, or example) than
their wickedness shall increase thy damnation in hell, Luke 16.27, 28. Non
fratres dilexit, sed seipsum respexit. And this let me say to the horror of
their consciences, that make merchandise of souls; that it is a question when
such an one comes to hell, whether Judas himself would change torments with him.

8. Br. That the Drunkard is so pleasing a murderer, that he tickles a man to
death, and makes him (like Solomon's fool) die laughing. Whence it is, that many
who hate their other enemies (yea, and their friends too) embrace this enemy,
because he kisseth when he betrayeth. And indeed, what fence for a pistol
charged with the bullet of friendship? Hence it is also, that thousands have
confessed at the Gallows, I had never come to this, but for such and such a
Drunkard. For commonly the Drunkards progress is, from luxury to beggary, from
beggary to thievery, from the Tavern to Tyburn, from the Alehouse to the
Gallows. Briefly, That these Bawds and Panders of vice breathe nothing but
infection, and study nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. That
the Drunkard is like Julian, who never did a man a good turn, but it was to
damn his soul. That his proffers are like the Fowlers shrap, when he casts meat
to birds, which is not out of pity to relieve, but out of treachery to ens^are
them. Or like traps we set for vermin, seeming charitable, when they intend to
kill, Jer. 5.26. And thou may answer these cursed tempters, who delight in
the murder of souls, as the woman of Endor did Saul, 1 Samuel 28. Wherefore
seek thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to die? ver. 9.

That he is another Absalom, who made a feast for Amnon, whom he meant to kill.
And there is no subtilty like that which deceives a man, and has thanks for
the labor. For as our Savior says, Blessed is the man that is not offended
at their scoffs, Mat. 11.6. So blessed is the man that is not taken with their
wiles. For herein alone consists the difference, He whom the Lord loves, shall
be delivered from their meretricious allurements, Eccles. 7.26. And he whom the
Lord abhors, shall fall into their snares, Pro. 22.14.

9. Br. That Taverns and Tap-houses are the drinking-schools where they learn
this their skill, and are trained up in this trade of tempting. For Satan does
not work them to this height of impiety all at once, but by degrees: When
custom of sin has deaded all remorse for sin; as it is admirable how the soul
that takes delight in lewdness, is gained upon by custom. They grow up in sin,
as worldlings grow in wealth and honor. They wax worse and worse, says the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.13. they go first over shoes, then over boots, then over
shoulders; and at length over head and ears in sin, as some do in debt. Now
these Tap-houses are their meeting places, where they hear the Devils lectures
read; the shops and markets where Satan drives his trade; the schools where
they take their degrees: these are the Guild-hals where all sorts of sinners
gather together, as the humors do in the stomach before an Ague sit; and where
is projected all the wickedness that breaks forth in the Nation, as our
reverend Judges do find in their several Circuits.

That these Taverns and Alehouses (or rather hell-houses) are the fountains
and well-heads from whence spring all our miseries and mischiefs: these are the
Nurs^ries of all riot, excess and idleness, making our Land another Sodom, and
furnishing yearly our Jayls and Gallowses. Here they sit all day in troops,
doing that in (...) which we have seen boys do in sport; stand on their head,
and shake their heels against heaven; where, even to hear how the Name of the
Lord Jesus is pierced, and God's Name blasphemed, would make a dumb man speak,
a dead man almost to quake.

10. Br. That it were endless to repeat their vain babbling, scurrilous jesting,
wicked talking, impious swearing and cursing: that when the drink has once bit
them, and set their tongues at liberty, their hearts come up as easily as some
of their drink; yea, their limitless tongues do then clatter like so many
windows loose in the wind, and you may as soon persuade a stone to speak, as
them to be silent: it faring with their clappers as with a sick man's pulse,
which always beats, but ever out of order. That one Drunkard has tongue enough
for twenty men; for let but three of them be in a room, they will make a noise,
as if all the thirty Bells in Antwerp steeple were rung at once: or do but pass
by the door, you would think your self in the Land of Parrats. That it is the
property of a drunkard to disgorge his bosom with his stomach, to empty his
mind with his maw: His tongue resembles Bacchus his Liber pater, and goes like
the sail of a Windmill: For as a great gale of wind whirleth the sayls about,
so abundance of drink whirleth his tongue about, and keeps it in continual
motion. Now he rayls, now he scoffs, now he lies, now he slanders, now he
seduces; talks bawdy, swears, bans, foams, and cannot be quiet, till his tongue
be wormed. So that from the beginning to the end, he belcheth forth nothing,
but what is as far from truth, piety, reason, modesty; as that the Moon came
down from heaven to visit Mahomet: As oh! the beastliness which burns in their
unchaste and impure minds, that smoaks out at their polluted mouths! A man
would think, that even the Devil himself should blush, to hear his child so
talk. How does his mouth run over with falsehoods against both Magistrates,
Ministers, and Christians: what speaks he less then whoredoms, adulteries,
incests at every word; yea, hear two or three of them talk, you would change
the Lycaotians language, and say. Devils are come up in the likeness of Men.

11. Br. That at these places men learn to contemn Authority, as Boys grown
tall and stubborn, contemn the rod; here it is that they utter swelling and
proud words against such as are in dignity, as St. Peter, and St. Jude have it.
They set their mouths against Heaven, and their tongues walk through the Earth,
Psalm 73.9. So that many a good Minister and Christian may say with holy
David, I became a song of the drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. And in case any of them
have wit, here they will show it in scoffing at Religion, and flouting at
holiness. From whence it is that we have so many Atheists, and so few
Christians amongst us (notwithstanding our so much means of grace) and that the
Magistracy and Ministry are so woefully contemned by all sorts of people.

That these tippling Tap-houses are the common Quagmires of all filthiness,
where too many drawing their patrimonies through their throats, exhaus^ and
lavish out their substance, and lay plots and devices how to get more. For
hence they fall, either to open courses of violence, or secret mischief, till
at last the Jayl prepares them for the Gibbet; for likely they sing through a
Red Lattice, before they cry through a Grate.

12. Br. I speak not of all, I know the calling to be good, and that there are
good of that calling; (and these will thank me, because what I have said,
makes for their honor and profit too:) but sure I am too many of these
drinking houses are the very dens and shops, yea, the thrones of Satan; very
sinks of sin, which like so many Common-shores, refuse not to welcome and
encourage any, in the most loathsome polutions they are able to invent, and put
in practice: as did you but hear, and see, and smell, and know what is done in
these Taverns and Alehouses, you would wonder that the earth should bear the
houses, or the Sun endure to look upon them. That lest they should not in all
this, do homage enough to Satan, they not seldom drink their healths upon their
knees, as the Heathen-witches and Sorcerers (of whom these have learned it)
used to do, when they offered drink offerings to Beelzeoub the Prince of
Devils, and other their Devil-gods.

That these godless Ale-drapers, and other sellers of drink, in entertaining
into their houses, and complying with those Traitors against God, and in
suffering so much impiety to rest within their walls, do make themselves guilty
of all, by suffering the same, and that a fearful curse hangs over their heads,
so long as they remain such. For if one sin of theft, or perjury, is enough to
rot the rafters, to grind the stones, to level the walls and roof of any house
with the ground; as it is Zech. 5.4. What are the oaths, the lies, the thefts,
the whoredoms, the murders, the damnable drunkenness, the numberless, and
nameless abominations that are committed there. For these Ale-house-keepers are
accessory to the drunkards sin, and have a fearful account to give for their
tolerating such, since they might, and ought to redress it: so that their gain
is most unjust, and all they have is by the sins of the people; as Diogenes
said of the st^umpe^ P^rine.

13. Br. That of all seducing drunkards, these drink-sellers are the chief:
their ^hole life being naught else but a vicissitude of devouring and venting,
and their whole study, how to tole in customers, and then egg them on to drink:
For as if drinking and tempting were their trade; they are always guzling
within doors, or else tempting at the door, where they spend their vacant
hours, watching for a companion, as a spider would watch for a poor fly; or as
the whorish woman in the Proverbs, laid wait for the young novice, until with
her great craft, and flattering lips, she had caused him to yield, Prove. 7.6,
to 24. Though when he sees a Drunkard, if he but hold up his finger, the other
follows him into his Borough, just like a fool to the stocks, and as an Ox to
the slaughterhouse, having no power to withstand the temptation. So in he
goes, and there continues as one bewitched, or conjured with a spell; out of
which he returns not, until he has emptied his purse of money, and his head of
reason: while, in the mean time, his poor wife, children and servants want
bread.

That did Sellers of drink aim at the glory of God, and good of others, as they
ought, 1 Cor. 10.31. there would not be an hundredth part of the drunkards,
beggars, brawls, and famished-families there are: whereas now thousands do in
sheer drink, spend all the clothes on their beds and backs. As be they poor
laboring men, that must dearly earn it before they have it, these
Ale-house-keepers, these vice-breeders, these so^l-murtherers, will make them
drink away as much in a day, as they can get in a week; spend twelve pence,
sooner then earn twopence, as St. Ambrose observes.

That thousands of these Laboring men may be found in the very Suburbs of this
City, that drink the very blood of their wives and children, who are near
famished, to satisfy the Drunkards throat, or gut, wherein they are worse then
Infidel^, or Cannibals, 1 Timothy 5.8. who again are justly met withal: For as if
God would pay them in their own coin, how often shall you see vermin sucking
the Drunkards blood, as fast as he the others.

14. Br. That these Drunkards and Al^-drapers are always laying their heads
together, plotting and consulting how to charm and tame their poor wives, (for
the Drunkard and his wife agree like the harp and the harrow) which if maids
did but hear, they would rather make choice of an Ape-carrier, or a
Jakes-farmers servant, than of one that will be drawn to the Alehouse. For let
them take this for a Rule, He that is a tame devil abroad, will be a roaring
devil at home; and he that has begun to be a Drunkard, will ever be a
Drunkard. True, they will promise a maid fair, and bind themselves by an
hundred oaths and pro^^stations; and she (when love has blinded and besotted
her) will believe them; yea, promise her self the victory, not doubting but she
shall reclaim him from his evil company; but not one of a thousand, scarce one
of ten thousand that ever finds it so, but the contrary. For let Drunkards
promise, yea, and purpose what they will; Experience shows, that they mend as
sour Ale does in Summer; or as a dead hedge, which the longer it stands is the
rottener. And how should it be other, when they cannot go the length of a
street, but they must pass by perhaps an hundred Alehouses, where they shall
be called in. And all the while they are in the drinking-school, they are bound
by their law of good fellowship to be pouring in at their mouths, or whiffing
out at their noses: one serving as a shooing-horn to the other; which makes
them like rats-ban'd Rats, drink and vent, vent and drink, S^llengers round,
and the same again. Oh that a maids fore-wit were but so good as her after-wi^!
then the Drunkard should never have wife more to make a slave of, nor wives
such cause to curse Ale-house-keepers, as now they have. And indeed, if I may
speak my thoughts, or what reason propounds to me, Drunkards are such children
and fools (to what Governors of families ought to be) that a rod is fitter for
them than a wife. But of this by the way only, that maids may not so miserably
cast away themselves; for they had better be buried alive, than so married, as
most poor men's wives can inform them.

15. Br. That to speak to these Demetriuses, that get their wealth by drinking;
yea, by helping to consume their drink, and that live only by sin, and the sins
of the people, were to speed as Paul did at Ephesus, after some one of them had
told the rest of their occupation. Yea, to expect amendment from such, in a
manner were to expect amendment from a Witch, who has already given her soul
to the devil. That to what has been spoken of Drunkards and Drinksellers in
the particular cases of drinking and tempting, might be added seventy times
seven more of the like abominations. For the Drunkard is like some putrid
grave, the deeper you dig, the fuller you shall find him both of stench and
horror: Or like Hercules's monster, wherein were fresh heads still arising one
after the cutting off of another. But there needs no more then this taste, to
make any wise man (or any that love their own souls) to detest and beware these
Bawds and panders of vice, that breathe nothing but infection, and study
nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. These Brokers of villainy,
whose very acquaintance is destruction: As how can they be other then
dangerously infectious, and desperately wicked, whose very mercies are cruelty?

16. Br. That I have unmasked their faces, is to infa^uate their purpose: that
I have inveighed and declaimed against Drunkenness, is to keep men sober; For
vices true picture, makes us vice detest.

O that I had Dehortation answerable to my detestation of it! Only here is a
discovery how Drunkards tempt; if you will see directions how to avoid their
temptations, read my Sovereign Antidote against the contagion of evil company.
Only take notice for the present, that the best way to avoid evil, is to shun
the occasions: Do not only shun Drunkenness, but the means to come to it; and
to avoid hurt, keep thy self out of shot; come not in drunken company, nor to
drinking places: As for their love and friendship, consider but whose Factors
they are, and thou will surely hate them. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

That (by the blessing of God) our children, and childrens children may loath
drunkenness, and love sobriety; let this be fixed to some place convenient in
every house, for all to read. The Persians, Parthians, Spartans, and
Lacedaemonians did the like, and found it exceeding efficacious: And Anacharsis
holds it the most effectual means to that end.

A Hopeful way to Cure that horrid Sin of SWEARING, Or an help to save
SWEARERS, if willing to be saved: Being an Offer or Message from Him, whom they
so Daringly and Audaciously provoke.
Also a Curb against CURSING.
Member 1.
1. Sect. Messenger. SIr, Me thinks you Swear and Curse as if he that made the
ear could not hear, or as if he were neither to be feared, nor cared for: who
for sin cast the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, drowned the old
world, rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded the earth to open
her mouth, and swallow down quick Korah and his company, he who smote Egypt
with so many plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea, destroyed
great and mighty Kings, giving their land for an inheritance to his people: and
can as easily with a word of his mouth strike you dead while you are
blaspheming him, and cast you body and soul into hell for your odious
unthankfulness: yea, it is a mercy beyond expression, that he has spared you
so long.

When a Dog flies in his masters face that keeps him, we conclude he is mad:
are you then rational men, that (being never so little crossed) will fly in your
Makers face, and tear your Saviors name in pieces, with oaths and execrations,
which is worse than Frenzy? yea, this is to send challenges into Heaven, and
make love to destruction! And certainly it is Gods unspeakable mercy, that
every such oath and blasphemy, proves not a Benoni, the death of the mother,
Genesis 35.18.

Sect. 2. Think me not too bold, or over-harsh; for I speak to you both for and
from my Maker and Redeemer. Yea, be persuaded to hearken a while unto me, as
you would have God another day hearken unto you: Are you Christians, as you
call your selves? If you be, call to mind what God and Christ has done for us.
How when we were in a sad condition, when by sin we had forfeited our s^lves
and all we had, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments: when neither heaven, earth, nor hell, could have yielded any
satisfactory thing besides Christ, that could have satisfied Gods justice, and
merited heaven for us: then, oh then! The eternal God would die, viz. so far as
was possible or necessary, that we might not die eternally, John 3.16. A mercy
bestowed, and a way found out, that may astonish all the sons of men on earth,
and Angels in heaven. And all this even against our wills, when we were his
enemies, mortally hating him, and to our utmost fighting against him, and
taking part with his only enemies ( Sin and Satan) as now you do, not having
the least thought or desire of reconcilement; but a perverse and obstinate
will, to resist all means tending thereunto.

Sect. 3. O my brethren! bethink your selves; It is his maintenance we take,
and live on. The air we breath, the earth we tread on, the fire that warms us,
the water that cools and cleanses us, the clothes that cover us, the food that
does nourish us, the delights that cheer us, the beasts that serve us, the
Angels that attend us, even all are his. That we are not at this present in
hell, there to fry in flames, never to be freed: That we have the free offer of
grace here, and everlasting glory in heaven hereafter, we are only beholding to
him. And shall we deny this Lord that has bought us? shall we most spitefully
and maliciously fight on Satan's side against him with all our might, and that
against knowledge and conscience? I wish you would a little think of it.

Sect. 4. For favors bestowed, and deliverances from danger, bind to
gratitude: or else the more bonds of duty, the more plagues for neglect. The
contribution of blessings requires retribution of thanks, or will bring
distribution of judgments: and certainly, if a friend had given us but a
thousandth part of what God has, we should heartily love him all our lives,
and think no thanks sufficient. And in reason, Has God done so much for us,
and shall we deny him any thing he requires of us? though it were our lives,
yea, our souls; much more our sins; most of all this sottish and damnable sin,
in which there is neither profit, nor pleasure, nor credit, nor any thing else
to provoke or entice us unto it, as in other sins: for all you can expect by it
is the suspicion of common Liars, by being common Swearers; or that you shall
vex others, and they shall hate you. Whereas if we could give Christ our bodies
and souls, they should be saved by it, but he were never the better for them.
Yea, swearing and cursing are sins from which of all other sins we have the
most power to abstain. For were you forced to pay for every oath and curse you
utter, as the Law enjoins; or if you were sure to have your tongue cut out,
which is too light a punishment for this sin, damnation being the due penalty
thereof, as the Apostle sets it down, James 5.12. you both could and would
leave it, which alone makes it altogether inexcusable. And this know, that the
easier the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the breach of it; and the
lighter the injunction, the heavier the transgression, as Austin speaks, and
Adams eating the forbidden fruit, sufficiently proves: so that it is evident
you love this sin, merely because it is a great sin, and blaspheme out of mere
malice to, and contempt of God, which it most fearful, and (as a man would
think) should make it unpardonable: I am sure the Psalmist has a terrible word
for all such, if they would take notice of it, Let them be confounded that
transgress without a cause, Psalm 25.3.

And no marvel that this fearful imprecation should fall from the Prophets
mouth; for that man is bottomlesly ill, who loves vice merely because it is a
vice, and because God most strictly forbids it. He is a desperate prodigious,
damnable wretch, who (rather then not die) will anger God on set purpose.
Wherefore look to it, and think of it, you cursing and cursed swearers; You
swear away your salvation, curse away your blessing; Howling and cursing shall
be your chief ease in Hell, to whom blasphemy was an especial recreation on
Earth.

Sect. 5. Argue with all the world, and they will conclude, there is no vice
like ingratitude: and mere ingratitude returns nothing for good, but you return
evil; yea, the greatest and most malicious evil, for the greatest and most
admired love. It was horrible ingratitude for the Jews to scourge and crucify
Christ, who did them good every way; for he healed their diseases, fed their
bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became Man, and lived miserably among
them many years, that he might save their souls, (though in killing him they
did their utmost to sink the only ship that could save them:) but you are more
ungrateful to God and Christ then they were, or can be expressed by the best
Orator alive. For which read more in a Treatise entitled, Gods goodness, and
Englands unthankefulness, from chap. 4. to chap. 7.

Sect. 6. O that you would but consider, that the Lord Jehovah, who is a God
great and terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and infinite purity, hears and
beholds you in all places, and in every thing you think, speak, or do; who is a
just Judge, and will not let this cursed sin go unpunished: then would you keep
a narrower watch over your thoughts, then any other can do over your actions;
yea, you would as soon stab a Dagger to your Hearts, as let such oaths and
execrations drop from your mouths. Consider of it I beseech you, lest you swear
away your part in that blood which must save you, if ever you be saved; yea,
take heed lest you be plagued with a witness, and that both here and hereafter;
for God (who cannot lie) has threatened that his curse shall never depart from
the house of the Swearer, as it is, Zech. 5.1, to 5. And I doubt not but you
are already cursed, though you know it not; that either he has cursed you in
your body, by sending some foul disease, or in your estate, by suddenly
consuming it, or in your name, by blemishing and blasting it, or in your seed,
by not prospering it, or in your mind, by darkning it, or in your heart, by
hardening it, or in your conscience, by terrifying it, or will in your soul, by
everlastingly damning it, if you repent not. Wherefore take heed what you do
before it prove too late.

Sect. 7. Or if you regard not your self, or your own souls good, yet for the
Nations good, leave your swearing: for the Lord (as now we find to our smart)
has a great controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because of
swearing, Hos. 4.1, 2. Yea, because of oaths the whole land (even the three
Nations) now mourns, as you may see, Jer. 23.10. Neither object that ye are
so accustomed to swearing that you cannot leave it, for this defense is worse
then the offense; as take an instance, Shall a Thief or Murderer at the Bar
allege for his defense, That it has been his use and custom of a long time
to rob and kill, and therefore he must continue it? Or if he do, will not the
Judge so much the rather send him to the Gallows?

Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies of God (who has removed so many evils,
and conferred so many good things upon you, that they are beyond thought or
imagination) to leave it: especially after this warning, which in case you do
not, will be a sore witness, and rise up in judgment against you another day.

Memb. 2.
Swearer. Did I swear or curse?

Sect. 1. Messenger. Very often, as all here present can witness, and Satan
also, who stands by to take notice, reckon up, and set on your score every Oath
you utter, keeping them upon Record against the great day of Assizes, at which
time every Oath will prove as a daggers point stabbing your soul to the heart,
or as so many weights pressing you down to Hell, Rev. 20.13. and 22.12. As also
the searcher of hearts, who himself will one day be a swift witness against
Swearers, Mal. 3.5. For of all other sinners the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain, as the third Commandment tells you,
Exodus 20.7.

Sect. 2. But woe is me, it fares with common Swearers as with persons
desperately diseased, whose excrements and filth comes from them at unawares,
for as by much labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor,
so their much swearing causes such a brawny skin of senslesness to overspread
the heart, memory, and conscience, that the swearer swears unwittingly; and
having sworn, has no remembrance of his Oath, much less repentance for his sin.

Swearer. Alas, though I did swear, yet I thought no harm.

Sect. 3 Messeng^r. O fool! What Prince hearing himself abused to his face, by
the reproachful words of his base and impotent Subject, would admit of such an
excuse, That whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And shall God take this for a good answer, having told us beforehand,
Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. That if we do not fear and dread his glorious and fearful
Name, the Lord our God, he will make our plagues wonderful and of long
continuance, and the plagues of our posterity. Besides, how frequently do
thou pollute and profane Gods Name, and thy Saviors? The Jews grievously
sinned in crucifying the Lord of Life but once, and that of Ignorance: but the
times are innumerable that thou do it, every day in the year, every hour in
the day, although thy conscience and the holy Spirit of grace has checked thee
for it a thousand and a thousand times. Do thou expect to have Christ thy
Redeemer and Ad^ocate, when thy conscience tells thee that thou have seldom
remembered him, but to blaspheme him? and more often named him in thy Oaths and
Curses, than in thy Prayers.

Swearer. Surely, If I d^d swear, it was but by Faith and Troth, by our Lady,
the Mass, the Light, this Bread, by the Cross of this Silver, or the like;
which is no great matter I hope, so long as I swore not by God, nor by my
Savior.

Sect. 4. M^ssenger. That is your gross ignorance of the Scriptures; for God
expressly forbids it, and that upon pain of damnation, Jam. 5.12. First, our
Savior Christ in his own person forbids it, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. I say unto
you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is Gods Throne; nor by the
earth, for it is his foo^stool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
great King; neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black: but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; for
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. And then by his Apostle, Above
all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay Nay, lest you fall into
condemnation, Jam. 5.12. Where mark the Emphasis in the first words, Above all
things swear not; and the great danger of it in the last word, condemnation.

Sect. 5. If the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all; if so
weighty that we may lawfully swear, as before a Magistrate, being called to it;
then we must only use the glorious Name of our God in a holy and religious
manner, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Josh. 23.7. Jer.
5.7. Exodus 23.13. And the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them; for
in swearing by any creature whatsoever, we do invocate that creature, and
ascribe to it divine worship; a lawful oath being a kind of Invocation, and a
part of Gods worship: Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate, both as
our Witness, Surety, and Judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consequence, deifie it, by
ascribing and communicating unto it Gods incommunicable Attributes, as his
Omnipresence, and Omniscience, of being every where present, and knowing the
secret thoughts and intentions of the heart; and likewise an Omnipotency, as
being Almighty in patronizing, protecting, defending, and rewarding us for
speaking the truth, or punishing us if we speak falsely: all which are so
peculiar to God, as that they can no way be communicated or ascribed to
another. So that in swearing by any of those things, thou committest an high
degree of gross Idolatry, thou spoilest and robbest God of his Glory, (the most
impious kind of theft) and in a manner dethronest him, and placest an Idol in
his room.

Sect. 6. And as to swear by the creature makes the sin far more heinous, so
the more mean and vile the thing is which you swear by (be it by my fay, by
cock and p^e, hares foot, by this ch^ese, and such like childish oaths, which
are so much in use with the ignorant and superstitious swarm) the greater is
your sin in swearing such an Oath: because you ascribe that unto these basest
of creatures, which is only proper to God, namely, to know your heart, and to
be a discerner of secret things; why else should you call that creature as a
witness unto your conscience, that you speak the truth, and lie not, which only
belongs to God? And therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him; as mark
well what he says, Jer. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. And do you make it a
small matter to forsake God, and make a God of the Creature? Will you believe
the Prophet Amos? if you will, he says (speaking of them that swore by the sin
of Samaria) that they shall fall, and never rise again, Amos 8.14. A terrible
place to vain swearers.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our oaths; for, in so doing we
make base Idols, and filthy creatures Co^^^vals in honor, and Competitors in
the Throne of Justice with the Lord, who is Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
the supreme Judge and sole Monarch of all the World. Or, in case we do, our
doom shall be remediless; for the Lord threatens by the Prophet Zephany, That
he will cut off them that swear by the Lord and by Malcham. Which Malcham was
their King, or as some think, their Idol, Zeph. 1.4, 5.

But admit the sin were small, as you would have it to be, yet the
circumstances make it most heinous; for even the least sin in its own nature is
not only mortal, but rests unpardonable, so long as it is willingly committed,
and excused or defended.

Swearer. But all do swear, except some few singular ones, and they also will
lie, which is as bad.

Sect. 7. Messenger* You must not measure all others by your own bushel: for
although ill Dispositions cause ill Suspicions, even as the eye that is
bloud^hot sees all things red, or as they that have the Jau^dies see all things
yellow; yet know, that there be thousands who can say truly, through Gods
mercy, that they had rather choose to have their souls pass from their bodies,
than a w^lful premeditated Lie, or a wicked Oath, from their mouths: Wherefore
when you want experience, think the best, as Charity bids you, and leave what
you know not to the searcher of hearts.

Sect. 8. As for the number of Swearers, it cannot be denied, but the sin is
almost universal, and this is it which has incensed Gods wrath, and almost
brought an universal destruction upon our whole Nation: But is not this excuse
[ That others do so] a most reasonless plea, and only becoming a fool? when our
Savior Christ has plainly told us, that the greatest number go the broad way
to destruction, and but a few the narrow way which leade^h unto life, Mat.
7.13, 14. And S. John, that the whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19.
And that the number of those whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the
sea. Rev. 20.8. and 13.16. Isa. 10.22. Romans 9.27. And tell me, Were it a good
plea, to commit a Fel^ny, and say that others do so? Or will thou leap into
Hell, and cast away thy soul, because others do so? A sorry comfort it will be,
to have a numerous multitude accompany us into that lake of fire that never
shall be quenched.

Besides, this is Gods express charge, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil. And S. Paul's everlasting Rule, Romans 12.2. Fashion not
your selve^ like unto this world.

Swearer. But I may lawfully swear, so I affirm nothing but the truth.

Sect. 9. Messenger. If you be lawfully called to it, as before a Magistrate,
or when some urgent matter constrains, for the confirming of a necessary
truth (which can by no other lawful means be cleared) and for the ending of all
contentions and controversies, and clear^ng our own or our neighbors good
name, person, or estate, and to put an end to all strife, aiming at Gods glory,
and our own or our neighbors good; which is the only use and end of an oath;
in which case a man is rather a patient than a voluntary agent; you may swear:
otherwise not. Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if
we will obey Gods Word, as you may see, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. Jam. 5.12.

Swearer. Except I swear, men will not believe me.

Sect. 10. Messenger. Thou had as good say, I have so often made shipwreck of
my credit by accustomary lying, that I can gain no belief unto my words without
an oath; for it argues a guilty conscience of the want of credit, and that our
word alone is worth no respect, when it will not be taken without a pawn or
surety. Neither will any but base Bankrupts pawn so precious a Jewel as their
Faith, or offer better security for every small trifle. Besides, he that often
swears, not seldom forsweareth. And so I have informed you from Gods Word,
what the danger is of vain and wicked swearing.

Memb. 3.
Sect. 1. But as if Swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into Hell,
thou addest Cursing to it; a sin of a higher nature, which none use frequently,
but such as like Goliath and Shimei are desperately wicked, it being their
peculiar brand in Scripture: As how does the Holy Ghost stigmatize such a one?
His mouth is full of cursing, Psalm. 10.7. Romans 3.14. or He loves cursing,
Psalm. 109.17. And indeed, whom can you observe to love this sin, or to have
their mouths full of cursing, but Ruffian* and sons of Belial? such as have
shaken out of their hearts the fear of God, the shame of men, the love of
heaven, the dread of hell, not once caring what is thought or spoken of them
here, or what becomes of them hereafter: yea, observe them well, and you will
find, that they are mockers of all that march not under the pay of the Devil.

Sect. 2. And whence do these Monsters of the earth, these hellish miscreants,
these bodily and visible devils learn this their damnable cursing and swearing?
Are not their tongues fired and edged from Hell? as S. James has it, Jam. 3.6.
Yea, it is the very language of the damned, as you may see Rev. 16.1, 21. Only
they learn it here before they come thither, and are such proficients therein,
that the Devil counts them his best Scholars, and sets them in his highest
form, Psalm. 1.1. And well they deserve it, with whom the language of hell is so
familiar, that blasphemy is become their mother tongue. Besides, it is the very
depth of sin: roaring and drinking is the horse-way to Hell; whoring and
cheating the foot-way; but Swearing and Cursi^g follows Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram. And certainly, if the infernal Tophet be not for these men, it can
challenge no guests. But see how witless, graceless, and shameless even the
best are that use to curse; for I pass over such as call for a curse on
themselves, saying, God damn me, Sink me, Co found me, The Devil take me, and
the like; which would make a rational man tremble to name; because I were as
good knock at a deaf man's door, or a dead man's grave, as speak to them.

Sect. 3. Thou art crossed by some one, perhaps thy wife, child, or servant, or
else thy horse, the weather, the dice, ^owls, or some other of the creatures
displease thee; and thou fallest a cursing and blaspheming them, wishing the
plague of God, or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish speech
falls from thy foul mouth. And so upon every foolish trifle, or every time thou
art angry, God must be at thy beck, and come down from heaven in all haste and
become thy Officer to revenge thy quarrel, and serve thy malicious humor; (O
monstrous impiety! O shameless impudency! to be abhorred of all that hear it)
not once taking notice what he commands in his Word, as, Bless them that
persecute you; bless, I say, and curse not, Romans 12.14. And again, Bless them
that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6.28. which is the
practice of all true Christians, 1 Cor. 4.12.

Sect. 4. But this is not one half of thine offense, For whom do thou curse?
Alas, the Creatures that displease thee are but Instruments, thy sin is the
cause, and God the Author, 2 Samuel 16.11. Psalm. 39.9, 10. Genesis 45.8. Job 1.21.
from whom thou have deserved it, and ten thousand times a greater cross: but
instead of looking up from the stone, to the hand which threw it; or from the
effect to the cause, as Gods people do; thou like a mastiff dog, s^ttest upon
the stone or weapon that hurts thee. But in this case, Who are you angry
withal? Does your horse, the dice, the rain, or any other creature displease
you? Alas, they are but servants, and if their Master bid smite, they must not
forbear; they may say truly what Rabshakeh usurped, Isa. 36.10. Are we come
without the Lord? And all that hear thee may say, as the Prophet did to
Senacherib, 2 King. 19.22. Whom have thou blasphemed? and against whom have
thou exalted thy self? even against the Holy One of Israel.

Sect. 5. Besides, why do thou curse thine enemy? (if he be so) but because
thou can not be suffered to kill him. For in heart, and Gods account, thou
art a murderer, in wishing him the pox, plague, or that he were hanged or
damned. Nor will it be any rare thing at the day of judgment, for cursers to be
indicted of murder. For like Shimei and Goliath to David; thou would kill him
if thou durst; thou do kill him so far as thou can. I would be loath to
trust his hands that bans me with his tongue. Had David been at the mercy of
either Shimei or Goliath, and not too strong for them, he had then breathed his
last.

Nor is it commonly any sin committed, or just offense given thee, that thou
cursest. Who could have less deserved those curses and ston^s from Shimei, than
David? Yea, did not that head deserve to be tongueless, that body to be
headless, that so undeservedly cursed such an Innocent? as after it fell out.
For the curses and stones which Shimei threw at David, rebounded upon Shimei,
and split his heart; yea, and at last knocked out his brains; and the like of
Goliahs curses; which is also thy very case. For,

Sect. 6. What will be the issue? the causeless curse shall not come where the
Curser meant it, Pro. 26.2. yea, though thou cursest, yet God will bless, Psalm.
109.28. but thy curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine own breast,
Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. Pro^. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill made Pieces, which
while men discharge at others, recoil in splinters on their own faces. Their
words and wishes be but whirlwinds, which being breathen forth, return again
into the same place. As hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it, Psalm. 109. As he
loved cursing, so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not blessing, so
shall it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing like a garment,
so shall it came into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bo^es; let
it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith he shall
always be girded, Ver. 17.18, 19. Hear this all ye, whose tongues run so fast
on the Devils errand! you loved cursing, you shall have it, both upon you,
about you, and in you, and that everlastingly, if you persevere and go on; for
Christ himself at the last day, even he which came to save the world, shall say
unto all such, Depart from me y^ cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Where they shall do nothing but curse for
evermore; for they no further apprehending the goodness, mercy, and bounty of
God, than by the sense of their own torments, (the effects of his justice)
shall hate him, and hating him, they shall curse him, Rev. 16.11. They suffer,
and they blaspheme: there is in them a furious malice against him; being cursed
of him, they re-curse him; they curse him for making them, curse him for
condemning them, curse him, because being adjudged to death, they can never
find death; they curse his punishments, because they are so unsufferable; curse
his mercies, because they may never taste them; curse the blood of Christ shed
on the Cross, because it has satisfied for millions, and done their
unbelieving souls no good; curse the Angels and Saints in heaven, because they
see them in joy, and themselves in torment: Cursings shall be their sins, and
their chief ease; Blasphemies their prayers; Lachrymae their notes; Lamentation
all their harmony: these shall be their evening songs, their morning songs,
their mourning songs for ever and ever. And indeed, who shall go to Hell, if
Cursers should be left out? Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that look
to be heirs of the blessing.

Sect. 7. But to be in Hell, and there to continue everlastingly in a bed of
quenchless flames, is not all. For this is the portion, even of Negative and
viceless Christians, if they be not virtuous. Of such as do not swear, except
they fear an Oath. That abound in good duties, if they do them not out of
faith, and because God commands them; that he may be glorified, and others
edified thereby. Whereas thou do supererogate of Satan, in damning many souls
besides thine own. Thou have had a double portion of sin, to other men here;
and therefore must have a double portion of torment to them hereafter. The
number and measure of thy torments, shall be according to the multitude and
magnitude of thine offenses, Rev. 20.12, 13. and 22.12. Luke 12.47. Mat. 10.15.
Romans 2.5, 6. And those offenses, if I could stand to aggravate them by their
several circumstances, would appear to be out of measure great and numerous.
I Will mention but one of ten.

With thy swearing and cursing, thou do not only wound thine own soul, worse
than the Baalites wounded their own bodies, (for thou wilfully murtherest thine
own soul, and that without any inducement, as has been proved.) But thou art
so pernicious, that this is the least part of thy m^schief; for thou drawest
vengeance upon thousands, by thy infectious and damnable example; as how can it
be otherwise? Thou do not only infect thy companions, but almost all that
hear, or come near thee. Yea, little children in the streets, have learnt of
thee to rap out oaths, and belch out curses and scoffs almost as frequently as
thy self; and through thy accustomary swearing, learned to speak English and
Oaths together; and so to blaspheme God almost so soon as he has made them.
And not only so, but thy example infects others, and they spread it abroad to
more; like a malicious man sick of the plague, that runs into the throng, to
disperse his infection, whose mischief out-weighs all penalty. It is like the
setting a man's own house on fire; it burns many of his neighbors houses, and
he shall answer for all the spoil. So that the infection of sin is much worse
than the act.

Sect. 8. Nor will thou cease to sin when thou shall cease to live; but thy
wickedness will continue longer than thy life. For as if we sow good works,
succession shall reap them, and we shall be happy in making them so; so on the
contrary, wicked men leave their evil practices to posterity, and though dead,
are still tempting unto sin, and still they sin in that temptation; they sin so
long as they cause sin. This was Jeroboams case, in making Israel to sin: for
let him be dead, yet so long as any worshipped his Calves, Jeroboam sinned.
Neither was his sin soon forgotten; Nadab his son, and Baasha his successor,
Zimri, and Omri, and Ahab, and Ahaziah, and Jehoram, all these walked in the
ways of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin; and not they alone, but millions
of the people with them. So that it is easy for a man's sin to live, when
himself is dead, and to lead that exemplary way to Hell, which by the number of
his followers, shall continually aggravate his torments. As, O what infinite
torments does Mahomet endure! when every Turk that perishes by his juggling,
does daily add to the pile of his unspeakable horrors, And so each sinner,
according to his proportion, and the number of souls which miscarry through the
contagion of his evil example. And look to it, for the blood of so many souls
as thou have seduced, will be required at thy hands, and thou must give an
account for the sins perhaps of a thousand. Thou do not more increase other
men's wickedness on earth, than their wickedness shall increase thy damnation in
hell, Luke 16.

Sect. 9. It were easy to go on in aggravating thy sin and wretchedness, and
making it out of measure great, and the souls that miscarry through the
contagion of thy evil example numerous. For is not the Gospel and the Name of
God blasphemed among the very Turks, Jews, and Infidels; and an evil scandal
raised upon the whole Church; through thy superlative wickedness, and other thy
fellows? Yea, does not this keep them off from embracing the Christian
Religion, and cause them to protest against their own conversion? Which makes
me vvonder that Swearers, Drunkards, and such wicked and profane wretches,
are not (like dirt in the house of God) thrown out into the street, by
excommunication: Or as excrements and bad humors in man's body, which is never
at ease till it be thereof disburthened; as Austin well notes. That they are
not marked with a black coal of infamy, and their company avoided, as by the
Apostles order they ought, Romans 16.17. 2 These. 3.6, 14. Ephesians. 5.5, 7. 1 Cor.
5.5, 11. 1 Timothy 1.20. That they are not to us as Lepers were among the Jews;
or as men full of plague sores are amongst us. We well know the good
husbandman weeds his field of hurtful plants, that they may not spoil the good
corn. And when fire has taken an house, we use to pull it down, lest it should
fire also the neighbors houses. Yea, the good Surgeon cuts off a rotten
member betimes, that the sound may not be endangered. Nor will the Church of
England ever flourish or be happy in her Reformation, until such a course is
taken.

Memb. 4.
Swearer. Sir, I unfeignedly bless God, for what I have heard from you; for
formerly, I had not the least thought that swearing by faith, troth, or any
other creature was so grievous a sin, as you have made it appear from the Word.
And I hope it shall be a sufficient warning to me for time to come.

Sect. 1. Mestenger. If so, you have cause to bless God indeed. For all of you
have heard the self-same Word; but one goes away bettered, others exasperated
and enraged, wherein Will only makes the difference. And who makes the
difference of Wills, but God that made them? He that creates the new heart,
leaves a stone in one bosom, puts flesh into another.

Sect. 2. Of Hearers there are usually four sorts, Mat. 13. 19, to 24. as
first, an honest and good heart, will not return from hearing the Word
unbettered. Yea, he will so note what is spoken to his own sin, that it shall
increase his knowledge, and lessen his vices. As who by looking in a Glass
shall spy spots in his face, and will not forth with wipe them out? A wise man
will not have one sin twice repeated unto him. And these may be resembled to
wax, which yields sooner to the seal, than steel to the stamp. But

Sect. 3. Secondly, others are like Tullies strange soil, much rain leaves them
still as dry as dust. Or the Wolf in the emblem, which though she sucked the
Goat, kept notwithstanding her wolvish nature still. For speak what can be
spoken to them, it presently passes away like the sound of a Bell that is rung.
Let testimonies and examples never so much concern them, they prove no other
than as so many characters writ in the water, which leave no impression behind
them. Who may be resembled to an Hourglass or Conduit, that which in one hour
runs in, the same in another hour runs out again. Or the Smiths Iron, put
it into the fire, it is much softened; again put it into the water, it is harder
than before. Yea, let them never so much smart for their sins; they will return
to them again until they perish. Resembling some silly fly, which being beat
from the candle an hundred times, and often singed therein, yet will return to it
again until she be consumed, Prove. 23.35. All those Beasts which went into the
Ark unclean, came likewise out unclean.

Sect. 4. Thirdly, another sort will very orderly hear the Word, and delight in
it; so long as the Minister shall rove in generalities, preach little or
nothing to the purpose: But if once he touch them to the quick, drive an
application home to their consciences touching some one sin of theirs, as John
Baptist served Herod; then they will turn their backs upon him, and hear him no
further, as those Jews served our Savior, Joh. 6.66. The Athenians Paul, Acts
17.16, to 34. and Ahab Micaiah, 1 Kings 22.8.

Sect. 5. Sore eyes you know are much grieved to look upon the Sun. Bankrupts
cannot abide the sight of their counting books, nor do deformed faces love to
look themselves in a true glass. For which read, John 3.19, 20, 21.

But let such men know, that to fly from the light, and reject the means, puts
them out of all hope. That sin is past cure, which turns from, and refuses the
cure, Deuteronomy. 17.12. Prove. 29.1. As what is light to them that will shut their
eyes against it? or reason to them that will stop their ears from hearing it?
If those murderers of the Lord of life, Act. 2.23. had refused to hear Peter's
searching Sermon, in all probability they had never been pricked in their
hearts, never been saved, ver. 37, 38. And take this for a Rule, if ever you
see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a wilful murderer.

Sect. 6. Fourthly and lastly, (for I pass by those blocks that go to Church as
dogs do, only for company; and can hear a powerful Minister for twenty or
thirty years together, and mind no more what they hear than the seats they sit
on, or the stones they tread on.) There are a generation of hearers who when a
Minister does plainly reprove them for their sins, and declare the judgments of
God due unto the same, to the end they may repent and believe, that so they may
be saved; will carp, and fre^ and spurn against the very Word of God for being
so sharp and searching, and thereupon persecute the Messenger, as the Princes
and false Prophets did Jeremiah, Herodias John Baptist, and the Pharisees
Christ.

Sect. 7. And this God takes as done to himself; What says Paul? 1 Cor. 7.10.
I have not spoken, but the Lord: and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Act.
9.4. that he persecuted him, (though in heaven;) so they which resist any truth
delivered out of the Word, do resist God himself, and not his Messenger, as
evidently appears by these Scriptures, Psalm. 44.22. and 74.4.10.18.22.23. and
83.2, 5, 6. and 89.50, 51. and 139.20. Prove. 19.3. Romans 1.30. and 9.20. Mat.
10.22. and 25.45. 1 Samuel 17.45. Isa. 37.4.22, 23, 28. Act. 5.39. and 9.4, 5.
Joh. 9.4. 1 These. 4.8. Joh. 15.20, to 26. Number. 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7. Mar. 9.42.
Psalm. 79.12. 2 Kin. 2.24. O that the Gospels enemies would but seriously
consider these Scriptures, and be warned by them. For certainly it is neither
wise, good, nor safe, either resisting or angring him, that can anger every
vein of their hearts. Yea, God has Messengers of wrath for them that despise
the Messengers of his love.

Sect. 8. But hear why they so mortally hate the naked truth. Because it is the
word by which they are condemned: they loath as much to hear it, as a prisoner
does abhor to hear his sentence from the just Judge. And indeed, if many (as we
know by experience) love not to hear the worst of their temporal causes and
cases; nor yet of their bodily distempers, with which their lives or estates be
endangered. How much more will wicked men decline from seeing their heinous
abominations, and themselves guilty of Hell, and eternal damnation? though
thereof there be an absolute necessity, if ever they be saved.

Sect. 9. Guilty sinners love application as dearly as a dog does a cudgel. And
no marvel, for what Leper will take pleasure in the searching of his sores? Nor
were Satan his Crafts-master, if he did permit them: For if they could clearly
see the loathsomness of their impieties, it were impossible not to abhor them,
not to abhor themselves for them; but their blindness makes them love their own
filthiness, as Ethiopians do their own swarthiness. Besides, they love not to
have their consciences awakened, but would sleep quietly in their sins: And he
that desires to sleep will have the curtains drawn, the light shut out, and no
noise made. Whence as good meats are unwelcome to sick persons; so is good
counsel to obstinate and resolved sinners. Tell them of their swearing,
drinking, whoring, cheating; they will fret, and chafe, and fume, and swell,
and storm, and be ready to burst again to hear it. But let envy sweat, swell,
and burst; truth must be spoken. And indeed, why should not Gods servants take
as free liberty in reproving, as the Devils servants take liberty in offending?
Shall not the one be as loud for God, as the other are for Baal and Beelzebub?

Sect. 10. Yea, admonish them never so mildly, they will say we take too much
upon us: as Korah and his accomplices twitted Moses, Number. 16.3. not knowing how
strictly God commands and requires it, Lev. 19.17. 2 T^m. 2.25. Ezekiel. 3.18, to
22. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Whence as the Chief Priests answered Judas, What is that to
us? so they will blaspheme God, tear Christ in pieces, and more than betray,
even shed his innocent blood, digging into his side with oaths, and say, when
told of it, What is that to us? when they might as well say, What is Christ to
us? what is heaven to us? or what is salvation to us? For to us the one cannot
be without the other: we shall never inherit part of his glory in heaven, if we
do not take his glories part upon earth. And with God it is much about one,
whether we be doers of evil, or no binderers. For if we must not see our
neighbors ox, nor his sheep go astray, or fall into a pit, but we must reduce
him, and help him out of it, Deuteronomy. 22.1. we are much more bound to help our
neighbor himself from dropping into the bottomless pit of Hell. And what know
we but we may win our brother, and so save his soul, Mat. 18.15.

Sect. 11. They will hiss like Serpents, if we trouble their nests never so
little. And it is a sure sign the horse is galled, that stirs too much when he
is touched. But what are these men like, and how are they like to speed in the
end? They are like the Thracian flint that burns with water, and is quenched
with oil: their souls are the worse for Gods endeavor to better them. His holy
precepts and prohibitions, do either harden them, as the Sun hardens clay, and
cold water hot iron; or else they enrage them, as a furious mastiffe Dog is the
madder for his chain.

Sect. 12. But to be exasperated with good counsel, and in stead of penitency,
to break into choler; when fury sparkles in those eyes which should gush out
with water; it is an evident sign of one that shall perish, Prove. 29.1. Read
the words and tremble; A man that hardneth his neck, being often reproved,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: see more Prove. 1.24, 25,
26, to 33. Whence it is the Prophet tells Amaziah, I know that God has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my
counsel, 2 Chro* 25.16, 20. and that the Holy Ghost, speaking of Ely's sons,
says that they would not hearken unto, nor obey the voice of their father,
because the Lord was determined to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2.25. Yea, it is an
observation of Livy, that when the destruction of a Person or Nation is
destined; then the wholesome warnings both of God and Man, are set at naught.
And in reason that sin is past all cure which strives against the cure. Herbs
that are worse for watering. Trees that are less fruitful for dunging and
pruning, are to be rooted out, or hewn down. Even salvation it self will not
save those that spill the potion, and fling away the plaster. When God would
have cured Babylon, and she would not be cured; then she is given up to
destruction without further warning.

Sect. 13. Ignorant Worldlings (who will believe nothing which comes not within
the compass of their five senses) think that because God strikes not, he minds
not, Psalm. 50.21. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of me^ is fully set in them to do
evil, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 8.11. They are like the Israelites, 1 Samuel
12.15, to 20. they will not believe without a miracle; and it will be a miracle
if ever they be saved. For should they see miracle upon miracle; should God
forthwith strike one dead with a thunderbolt, and rain down fire and brimsto^e
upon anoth^r, and cause the earth to swallow down a third quick while they are
blaspheming him, they would be as far from believing as they were before, as
the examples of the old world, the Sodomites, Pharaoh, Baalam, Ahab,
Belshazzer, M^lch^us, and those great Clerks, the Scribes, and Pharisees,
together with thousands of the Jews, sufficiently manifest.

Yea, it is easier for a man possessed with ma^y Devils to be disposs^st; to
ra^se one from the dead, or to turn a stone into flesh, (in which God should
meet with no opposition) than persuade an habituated Swearer to believe these
ensuing precept, prediction, testimonies of the Gospel, or any other saving
truth, M^t. 5.20. and 12.36. and 25.30* to 46. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. and 2.12.
Heb. 12.14.29. Rev. 20.12, to the end, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 30. Prove. 1.24, to 33.

Sect. 14. Well may they believe what the World, the Flesh, and the Devil
suggests unto them: As Satan (that he may make smooth their way to perdition)
will persuade the most impudent and insolent sinners, Drunkards, Adult^^ers,
Blasphemers, Sabbath Breakers, Blo^d-thirsty murderers, Persecuters of the
godly, and ^o^^emners of Religion, that they may take liberty to continue their
sensual lusts, by a testimony of Scripture, and apply Christ's passion as a
warrant for their licentiousness, his Death as a license to sin, his Cross as a
Lette^s patent to do mischief. And hereupon, as if a Malefactor should head his
d^um of rebellion with his pardon, they live as if the gospel were quite
contrary to the rule of the law, or as if God were neither to be feared nor
cared for. Hence they exercise their saucy wits in profane scoffs at religion,
and disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter they would give a thousand worlds
for o^e drop. Hence they tear heaven with their blasphemies, and bandy the
dreadful Name of God, in their impure and polluted mouths, by their bloody
oaths and execrations; hence they are so witless, graceless, and shameless, as
to swear and curse even as dogs bark. Yea, they have so sworn away all grace,
that they count it a grace to swear, and are so far from believing what God
threatens in his Word against sin, and what is affirmed of his justice, and
severity in punishing all wilful and impenitent sinners with eternal
destruction of body and soul; that they presume to have part in that merit,
which in every part they have so abused; to be purged by that blood, which now
they take all occasions to disgrace; to be saved by the same wounds and blood,
which they swear by, and so often swear away; to have Christ an Advocate for
them in the next life, when they are Advocates against Christ in this: That
heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life long, they have
galloped in the beaten road toward hell. And that though they live like swine
all their life long, yet one cry for mercy at the last gasp, shall ^ransfo^m
them into Saints. And this is the strong faith they are so apt to boast of,
viz. presumption, not confidence: Or rather, Hope frighted out of its wits. For
notwithstanding all this, in believing the Scriptures they fall ^hort of the
Devils themselves. For the Devils do really believe that God is no less true
and just then he is merciful; as his Word declares him to be: and thereu^^n
they tremble, as St. James has it, Jam. 2.19. whereas these men (...) not a
word that God speaks, so as to be bettered by it.

Sect. 15. And no marvel, for their wont has been to believe Satan rather than
God; as did our first Parents, Genesis 3. Therefore now after they have rejected
all means of grace, when they are so crusted in their v^llany, that custom is
become a second or new nature: God (that he may punish their hardness and
excess in sin, with further obduration) not only delivers them up ^o Satan, the
God of this world; who so blinds their minds, and deludes their understanding^,
that the light of the glorious Gosp^l of Christ shall not shine unto them, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 These. 2.9. But he gives them up, even to a reprobate
judgment, to the hardness of their hearts, and to walk in their own counsels,
Psalm. ^1.11, 12. Romans 1.21, to 32. And better be given up to Satan, as the
incestuous Corinthian was, than thus to be given up. For he was thereby
converted and saved, as God used the matter; making the Scorpion a medicine
against the sting of the Scorpion: the Horseleech a means to abate the vicious
and superfluous blood; so ordering Satan's craft and malice, to ends which
himself intended not.

Whereas these are given over; as a desperate Patient is given over by his
Physician when there is no hope of his recovery. As thus, Because they will not
receive the truth in love, that they might be saved: for this cause God gives
them up to strong delusions, that they should believe lies; that all they might
be damned who believe not the truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness: they
are the very words of the Holy Ghost, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. If any would see
more touching the woeful condition of a deluded worldling; and how Satan gulls
wicked men with a world of misprisions, that he may the better cheat them of
their souls; Let them read The Drunkards Character, and The Cure of Misprision:
for in this I study all possible brevity, being loath either to surfeit or cloy
the Swearer; who is commonly short-breathed in well-doing; and lest adding more
should hinder him from hearing this: for Satan and his corrupt heart will not
condescend he shall hold out to hear his beloved sin so spoken against.

Memb. 5.
Sect. 1. Only I will insert a few notions, aphorisms, or conclusions, touching
the former point of Gods forbearing to punish the most flagitious sinners when
they so horribly provoke him: together with some pregnant examples of some that
he has executed Martial Law upon, even in this life.

Cornelius Gallus (not to mention many, nor any that every Author sets down)
died in the very act of his filthiness, as Plutarch well notes. Nitingal,
Parson of Crondall in Kent, was struck dead in the Pulpit, as he was belching
out his spleen against Religion and zealous Professors of the Gospel. It was
the usual imprecation of Henry Earl of Schuartzbourg, Let me be drowned in a
Jakes, if it be not so; and such was his end. You may remember one Lieutenant
of the Tower was hanged; it had wont to be his usual imprecation, as he
confessed at his death. Earl Godwin wishing at the Kings Table that the bread
he eat might choke him if he were guilty of Alphreds death, whom he had before
slain; was presently choked, and fell down dead: Yea, his lands also sunk into
the Sea, and are called Godwins sands: where thousands since have made
shipwreck. It was usual with John Peter mentioned in the Book of Martyrs, (...)
say, If it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I die: and God saying
Ame(...)t, he rotted away indeed. A Serving-man in Lincolnshire for every
trifle used to swear Gods precious blood, and would not be warned by his
friends to leave it: insomuch, that hearing the bell tole in the very anguish
of death, he started up in his bed and swore by the former oath that bell toled
for him: whereupon immediately the blood most fearfully issued, as it were, in
streams from all parts of his body, not one place left free, and so died.
Popiel King of Poland had ever this wish in his mouth, If it be not true, I
would the Rats might eat me: and so it came to pass; for he was so assailed by
them at a banquet, that neither his guards nor fire, nor water could defend him
from them; as Munster mentions. The Jews said, Let his blood be upon us, and
upon our children; and what followed? Sixteen hundred years are now past, since
they wished themselves thus wretched: and have they not ever since been the
hate and scorn of the world? Did they not (many of them) live to see their City
buried in ashes, and drowned in blood? to see themselves no Nation? Was there
ever any people under heaven, that was made so famous a spectacle of misery and
desolation? They have had what they called for to the full; and it is just that
they who long for a curse, should have it: Yet how many among us do familiarly
curse their wives, children, etc, Nor is it seldom that God pay them in their
own coin: men profane Gods Name, and he makes their names to stink. When the
pestilence rages in our streets, blasphemy and execration must confess that
they have their due wages. Blasphemers live swearing, and die raving; it is but
their wages.

Sect. 2. He punishes some in the Suburbs of Hell, that they might never come
into the City it self. The evil he now suffers uncorrected, he refers to be
condemned. Sin knows the doom, it must smart here, or hereafter. Outward
plagues are but favor in comparison of spiritual judgments; and spiritual
judgments but light, to eternal torments. God does not punish all flagitious
sinners here, that he may allow some space to repent, and that none may doubt
his promise of a General Judgment: nor does he forbear all here, lest the World
should deny his providence, and question his justice.

Memb. 6.
Sect. 1. But what do I urge reason to men of a reprobate judgment? to admonish
them, is to no more purpose, than if one should speak to life-less stones, or
sence-less plants, or wit-less beasts; for they will never fear any thing till
they be in Hellfire; wherefore God leaves them to be confuted with fire and
brimstone, since nothing else will do it. If there be any here that believe a
Resurrection (as I hope better things of some of you) all such I would beseech,
by the mercies of God before mentioned, that they would not be so desperately
wicked, as to mock their admonisher, scoff at the means to be saved, and make
themselves merry with their own damnations; but that they would entertain this
message as if it were an Epistle sent from God himself, to invite and call them
to repentance. Yea, consider seriously what I have said, and do not, oh do not
mock at Gods Word, nor sport away your souls into those pains which are
easeless, endless, and remediless. Shall we give an account at the day of
judgment for every idle word we speak, Mat. 12.36. and never give a reckoning
for our wicked swearing and cursing? We shall be judged by our words, v. 37.

Are you willing to be saved? if you are, Break off your sins by repentance,
Dan. 4.27. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. Seriously grieve
and bewail for the millions of times that you have blasphemed God and pierced
your Savior, and never more commit the like impiety. Yea, do not only leave
your swearing, but fear an Oath, and make conscience of it; resolve not to take
the glorious Name of God in vain, nor place any other creature in his room:
though the Devil should say unto you, as once he did to Christ, All this will I
give thee. For it is not enough that we abstain from evil, unless we hate it
also, and do the contrary good; Sanctify the Lord God in your heart, 1 Pet.
3.15. Make a Covenant with your mouth, as Job did with his eyes, and set a
watch before the door of your lips, that you thus offend not with your tongue,
Ps. 141.3.

Sect. 2. Which if you do rightly, the like care to avoid all other sins will
necessarily follow: because he that fears to commit one sin out of conscience,
and because God forbids it, will upon the same ground fear all that his law
forbids; and as heartily and unfeignedly desire that he may never commit it, as
that God should never impute it, 2 Timothy 2.19. Neither can a regenerate mind
consist with a determination to continue in any one sin; as when Christ cast
out one Devil, we read that he cast out all, even the whole Legion, Mar. 5.2,
etc. And he that makes not some conscience of all sin, makes no true conscience
of any sin.

And the same is to be understood also of duties commanded; for the same law
which in joins us to hate and forsake all sin, commands us also to strive after
universal obedience to every precept. And it is a true Rule, He that has not
in him all Christian graces in their measure, has none; and he that has any
one truly, has all. He that is not sanctified in every part, is truly
sanctified in no part, 1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Pet. 3.11. Mat. 5.48. 2 Timothy 3.17. 2 Cor.
7.1. And the least sin allowed of, be it but a vain thought, or one duty
omitted, is enough to cast thee into hell; for the wages of sin (any sin, be it
never so little) is death, Romans 6.23. Jam. 1.15. Yea, admit thou had never
acted any the least evil in all thy life, it were not enough to save thee from
hell, much less to bring thee to heaven; for we need no more to condemn us,
then what we brought into the World with us, Genesis 2.17. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12.
Whence the newborn child in the law was commanded to offer a sin offering,
Lev. 12.6.

Sect. 3. Wherefore as you tender the good of your own soul, set upon the work
presently, before the Drawbridge be taken up: provide with Joseph for the
dearth to come; With Noah, in the days of thy health, build the Ark of a good
conscience, against the floods of sickness. Imitate the Ant, who provides her
meat in Summer for the Winter following. Yea, do it whilst the yearning bowels,
the bleeding wounds, and compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive
you. Whiles you have health, and life, and means, and time to repent, and make
your peace with God in Christ, as you tender I say the everlasting happiness
and welfare of your almost lost and ^^owned soul, as you expect or hope for
grace or mercy, for joy and comfort, for heaven and salvation, for endless*
bliss and glory at the last; as you would escape the direful wrath of God, the
bitter sentence and doom of Christ, the never dying sting and worm of
conscience, the tormenting and soul-scorching flames of hell, and everlasting
separation from Go^s blissful presence, abjure and utterly renounce all wilful
and affected evil; and in the first place this abominable sin of swearing and
cursing.

Sect. 4. The which Grace if you would obtain, omit not to pray for the
assistance of Gods spirit, otherwise thy strength is small: yea, except God
give thee repentance, and removes all impediments that may hinder, thou can
no more turn thy self, then thou could at first make thy self. We are not
sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of all to do ought
that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Joh. 15.4, 5. We are swift to all evil, but to any
good immovable. Wherefore beg of God that he will give you a new heart, and
when the heart is changed, all the members will follow after it, as the rest of
the creatures after the Sun when it arises. Importune him for grace, that thou
may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere in doing and
suffering his holy will. Desire him to regenerate thy heart, change and purify
thy nature, subdue thy reason, rectify thy judgment, reform and strengthen
thy will, renew thy affections, and beat down in thee whatsoever stands in
opposition to the scepter of Jesus Christ. Only this let me add; Be sure you
wholly and only rest on your Savior Jesus Christ for salvation, abhorring to
attribute or ascribe ought to doing: for our very righteousnesses are as filthy
rags, Isa. 64.6. And the sole perfection of a Christian, is the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, and the not imputation of his own unrighteousness, a
rule which we are very apt to swerve from, either on the right or left hand:
wherefore if you would not err, observe this golden mean, endeavor to live as
if there were no Gospel, and to die as if there were no Law. And now for
conclusion, If thou receivest any power against this great evil, forget not to
be thankful, and when God has the fruit of his mercies, he will not spare to
sow much where he reaps much: and so having set before you l^fe and death, I
leave you to choose which of them you like best. Only think what account you
shall give of that you have read; for if this warning prevail not, it is much
to be feared the next will be that of the Son of man, Mat. 25.41. Depart from
me, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
YOu that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward the precious souls
of those poor ignorant men, women, and children, whom you hear to swear and
curse as Dogs bark; (that is not more of curstness then out of custom,) wish
them to read these few pages, neither count it as a thing indifferent, which
may either be done or dispensed withal; for besides that God has commanded the
duty of admonition, Heb. 3.13. 2 Timothy 2.25. and commended the practice of it,
Rev. 1.2.6. and condemned the contrary verse 20. If you do not it, or the like,
you hate your brother, Lev. 19.17. and make your self guilty both of his sin
and ruin, Ezekiel. 3.18, to 22. For as none but a Cain will say, Am I my brothers
keeper? so these could never continue their cursing and swearing as they do, if
they were but so happy as to meet with timely and faithful admonition. Nor can
you love God, and patiently hear these miscreants blaspheme his holy Name as
they do, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Or manifest your self his by adoption and regeneration,
for well-born children are touched to the quick with the injuries of their
Parents, and not to be moved in this case, is to confess our selves bastards.
Yea, it is a base, vile, and unjust ingratitude in those men, that can endure
the disgrace of them under whose shelter they live. Which being so, make it a
part of your charity, to give of them as you meet with occasion; as that you
shall hourly do, even as you pass the streets, if you but mind it.

FINIS.

