man displaying casks of spirits M* Vander Gucht scul:


a distillery The Art of Distillation here behold
More perfect than before taught by tenfold


Introitus Apertus ad Artem Distillationis;

OR THE Whole ART OF DISTILLATION Practically Stated, And Adorned with all the
New Modes of WORKING now in Use.

In which is Contained, The Way of making Spirits, Aquavitae, Artificial
Brandy, and their Application to Simple and Compound Waters in the exact Pondus
of the Greater and Lesser Composition; as also many Curious and Profitable
Truths for the exalting of Liquors, being the Epitomy and Marrow of the whole
Art; supplying all that is omitted in the London Distiller, French and Baker
etc. Experience being the true Polisher hereof.

To which is Added, The True and Genuin Way of preparing Powers by three noble
Menstruums, sc. A Purified Sal Armoniack, the Volatile Salt of Tartar, and Sal
Panaristos, through which they are exalted to an higher degree of Perfection
than any hitherto Extant, together with their Virtues and Dose.

Illustrated with Copper Sculptures.

By W. Y-worth, Medicinae Professor in Doctrinis Spagyricis and per Ignem
Philosophus.

London, Printed for Joh. Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCII.

THE Epistle to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE End and Intention of our Writing and Compiling these Sheets, is to bring
the Art of Distillation into one complete and entire Volume, containing all the
necessaries thereunto belonging: For hitherto this has been but short and
defectively performed, for it has had the mishap, as many other Excellent Arts
have had, sc. To be Treated of by such, as have not practically known the same;
or else by those, who have on purpose concealed that, which in reality ought to
have been discovered; so that the Authors hitherto extant are either filled
wiih needless Prescription, confused Workings, long and tedious Prolixity of
Words and Circumlocutions, as we may say going about the Wood, or else have
concealed the Ariadnean thread, which should lead directly to the Practick, and
so are only useful to those, who have served seven Years Apprentiship to the
employ, then knowing what to choose and what to refuse, and being able to pick
the Rose from among Thorns without pricking themselves; for what a chargable
and confused piece of work should we have, were we to provide our selves with
all those Vessels and Instruments described by Baker, for the making Waters,
Aqua vitae, and Burning Spirits, and to separate them from their Phlegm; which,
when done, would neither answer the end nor countervail the charge; for it is
well known to all ingenious men, how difficult a thing it was to prepare a
Spirit, which would fire Gunpowder, or be so purely Aetherial as to vanish in
the Sun, 'till the use of Salt was known, by whose help we are able to perform
it in large quantities, even in our common Stills with their Refrigeratory; And
the most exact way that we ever saw is to work with Salts in a large Copper
body with its Alembick and Refrigeratory in Baln. For with a lent heat you will
have your Spirit perfectly deflegm'd, which for curiosity sake, you may repeat
a second time, and then will it far excel any of those made by the difficult
Inventions before mentioned; and therefore why should we go to so much charge
and trouble, when it may be performed with so much facility and ease: And
again, he is filled with abundance of Chemical Preparations, which have not the
least adherence to the making of Spirits; and so the mind of the Reader is
diverted from that, which only should be of Service to him; nay this is so apt
to fill their heads with fancies, that they rest unsatisfied 'till brought to
Trials, which either considerably exhaust their Substance, or else take them
from their business, nay sometimes wholly incapacitates them for the same;
therefore shall we pass by him; and come to consider that of French.

Dr. French indeed was a man of Ingenuity as his Works plainly show, seeing many
curious things are therein contained, yet can we not wholly clear him from some
of these defects.

And as for the London Distiller, tho his Prescriptions, there laid down are
proper, yet, is he defective, both in the exact Modus of working, the ordering
of the Wash and Backs for a quick Fermentation, and upon a defect in their
Working to bring them kindly forward again; as also in the great business of
Rectification, concerning which there is so great a noise about the Town; and
indeed not without good reason, seeing too too many are deficient in so
advantageous a Secret as this is; yet is both he and French so scarce, that one
of them is hardly to be gotten; and then again on the other hand, what we have
formerly written in order to have supplied these defects was in such general
Terms and so short, as that of it self it was not sufficient to m^ke any one
prompt-perficient in the Art.

Therefore we being desired by several Ingenious Persons to communicate our
Experience to the World, and so to supply the defects before mentioned, as much
as in us lay, have upon a mature Consideration thereunto condiscended, with
this Resolution, that we would do it so as to capacitate any one, tho of a mean
Genius and never brought up to the Art, in a little time by Study and Practice
to be a complete Master in the same, without having recourse to any other
Author; for which end we have comprised it into a Pocket-Volume, that so it
might be the more portable, and by consequence ready for their Perusal.

Now that you may the better conceive what is therein contained, we shall in
brief proceed, as follows; In the First place, we have described the manner of
Working in general, with all the necessary Vtensils thereunto belonging, and
then in a more particular way have showed various and profitable ways of making
Low-wines from any of the six Materials; some by Decoction, and others without,
giving you our Opinion which we best Approve of; we have indeed here laid down
such Rules in the ways of Brewing and Ordering the Wash, as also in the
bringing it into Low-wines, as that there is ^o Material in Nature that will
yield a Vinor Spirit, but what may be wrought by some or other of them; and
being thus far brought, the time of their lying for their bettering is
signified, together with the way of bringing them into Proof-goods; And then,

In the Second we have shown the exact way of Rectification, by and through
such Mediums, as that they are brought into most excellent Stuff, and if the
use of Tartar, Sulphur whether common or that of Mars and Venus, joined with
the sweet Salt were known, certainly sweet and pleasant Spirits might be
brought forth; but more especially by the help of our Sal Panaristos might
English goods be so ordered as that in Taste and Smell they might be little
Inferior to those of Gallia, and equal in Virtue to the English Constitutions;
because of their Climatary Affinity, Concerning which, we have not only given
you our own Experience, but also the Authority of the famous Radolphus Glauber;
which being so prepared we have likewise shown their various uses in making
Cordial-Waters and Spirits.

In the Third, we have shown all the Necessary and Useful Compositions in the
Art, according to the greater and lesser Pondus; to which we have added many
rare ones of our own, together with an Usque-bagh-Royal never Published before,
and also the way of Dulcifying and Perfuming these Wares or Liquors, so that
they may be the most Commodious for Sail.

And in the Fourth, we have moreover shown the True and Genuine way of making
Powers by three noble Menstruums, sc. a Purified Sal Armoniack the Volatile
Salt of Tartar, and Sal Panaristos, together with their Virtues, Use and Dose,
for the Benefit of such, as languish under the burden of Refractory Diseases,
and can find no Relief from the common Prescriptions; for we have through much
Expense and Labor by the Providence of God thereunto attained, and by more than
Ten Years Experience knowing their admirable Virtues to be such, as to relieve,
when past the hopes of other means; we thought we could no better befriend the
World, especially the Ingenious Lovers of Art, than freely to communicate their
Composition that so they might the better Judge of their Nature and Property;
and although we have not attributed so many Virtues thereunto, as others have done
to more Inferior Powers, yet this has been on purpose omitted for two
Reasons: The First, because we hate fruitless repetitions, or to speak more of
the Virtue and Use of things, than we know they will really perform; for we
would rather that a Medicine should Cure Ten Diseases, when we speak but of
Five, than to speak of Forty, when 'twill very rarely Cure One; and especially
in these seeing their Administration is general and safe without the least
difficulty: The other is, because we have looked upon it as a grand Error too
often Committed by our New Compiler, to attribute that to one slight or common
Preparation, which can but in due right be ascribed to the highest Specific or
Arcanum, nay even to the Universal it self; therefore, tho we know that ours
are far superior, yet were we resolved therein to be very cautious, least
others should suppose us guilty of the like default.

Now, what we have further to say, is, that we have great reas^n to bless the
Lord our God, who of his infinite mercy has given us Wisdom and Knowledge of
the things of Nature, not only in their Original Form and Texture, but also in
their true Preparation and Virtue, whereby we are enabled to demonstrate that,
which we doubt not will uphold our Writings in a greater splendour than now set
forth to the dishonor of such, as are ambitious of that which really does
belong to others; but seeing ours is no Foster-child, but a true birth brought
forth by difficult Travel, we are bound to defend it from the Karps of such
Momus's, and the more especially seeing we have daily Confirmations from most
parts of the Kingdom of its kind acceptance, by, and among, the Ingenious,
Laborious and Honest-hearted, which lays a further Obligation on us to be yet
as serviceable to such as in us lies, in the resolution of which we subscribe
our selves their sincere Friend in all things agreeable to the entire Law of
Innocence,

From the Academia Spagyrica nova in St. Paul's Shadwel. Land. W. Y-worth,
Geboor tigh tot Shipham, and Burger van Rotterdam.

The CONTENTS or Chief Heads of the Matters Contained in this Book.
THE Original of Distillation and its Use. P. 1 Of a Fit Workhouse,
Conveniences and proper Utensils belonging to the Art. P. 2 Of the Basis and
Grounds of Distillation, and under how many Heads they may properly be
Comprehended. P. 8 The various Ways of Brewing, and of those most profitable
for Distillation. P. 9 How to order Corn so that it shall not burn in the
Still. P. 13 The Way to Order a Back of Molasses, and upon Defect of
Fermentation, how to restore it into a generous one. P. 14 Of Honey, how
Ordered. P. 17 Cider, tho never so generous, ought to be opened again in order
to yield the greater quantity of Spirit. P. 18 The Office of Calx-vive and
Argall in promoting Raisons and other Fruits into Fermentation. P. 19 Of what
Wines Brandy is generally made. P. 20 The Dutch way of exalting Small Wines.
Ibid. How the Lees of Wine are to be Ordered for Distillation. P. 21 The way of
Ordering and Fermenting Herbs, in order to make them give the greater quantity
of Spirit in Distillation. ibid. Important Considerations concerning the
Doctrine of Fermentation and Distillation in general. P. 22 The Way of Charging
the Still with liquid things. P. 24 How to Lute, and of what the Past must be
made, together with the way of bringing the Still to Work. ibid. How those
things wherein the Corporality must be Distilled, are to be Ordered. P. 25 The
Author's new Invention to Distill all manner of Corporal Things, so that the
Still shall not be burnt, nor the Low-Wines receive an ill Tangue. ibid. How
long it is convenient for Low-Wines to lie to Enrich and better themselves. P.
26 The Author's new Invention of a Balneum within the great Still, wonderfully
advantageous to sweeten the Spirits in the second and third Extraction. P. 27
The true way of proceeding in the second Extraction. ib. A new Invention to
take the Oyliness out of Spirits. P. 28 What Quantity of Low-Wines and
Proof-Spirits may be Extracted from every Quarter of Malt. ib. The Dutch way of
Receiving Low-Wines and Proof-Spirits. P. 29. Of Rectification in General. P.
30 The Nature and Difference of Corn in the making of Spirits, from whence
their goodness or badness proceeds, as also of the possibility of bettering the
same. ibid. The Office of purified Tartar in exalting of Corn-Spirits. P. 31
The variety of Tastes proceeding from the several Specificated Sulphurs or Ideal
Forms, which being truly prepared, carry with them a Medicinal, yet no evil
Savours. P. 32 Adustion and evil Savours proceed from the violence of the Fire.
ibid. How to take off the Adustion from Spirits, even from Rum and Rack. P. 33
That one But of Wines will yield different Spirits. ib. The practical Way of
exalting Malt Spirits, and how to indue them with flavours measurably like
those of Wine. P. 34 The excellent efficacy of sulphurated Salts in sweetening
of Spirits. P. 35 From whence the curious flavors proceed to Brandies. P. 37
The possibility of the alteration and melioration of Spirits, stated from that
of the Transmutation of Form. P. 38 Philosophical Considerations in the Art of
Rectification. P. 41 The way of preparing such Waters as are simply endued with
the virtue of one herb only. P. 44 Aqua Anisi simplex, simple Aniseed Water.
ibid. Aqua Cardamomi simplex. simple Gardamum Water. P. 45 Aqua Nasturtii
simplex, simple Garden-cress Water. P. 46 Aqua Menthae simplex, simple Mint
Water. P. 47 Aqua Violae tricoloris simplex, simple Hearts-ease Water. P. 48
Aqua Raphani simplex, Radish Water simple. P. 49 Aqua Sabinae corticis simplex,
Savine Water simple. P. 50 The Way to perfume and dulcifie any of these Waters.
ibid. Concerning Medicinal Spirits. P. 51 Spiritus Salviae, Spirit of Sage.
ibid. Spiritus Cochleariae, the Spirit of Scurvey-Grass. P. 52 Spiritus
Lavendulae, Spirit of Lavender. P. 53 Spiritus Angelicae, Spirit of Angelica.
P. 54 Spiritus Croci, Spirit of Saffron. P. 55 Spiritus Dauci, Spirit of
Daucus. P. 56 Concerning the Art of Distillation, and how it may be obtained by
this Book; if not the Author advises you to have recourse to an Artist. P. 57
Of the secundum artem in Distillation, which is the very Marrow of
Distillation, and that by which the Artist is crowned, and of it is difficulty
to be delivered in Writing. ibid. Of such Waters as are compounded, and are
really necessary for the Master Distiller to be furnished withal. P. 58 Of the
Measures made use of in this Book. P. 59 That a Tun of Proof Spirits make a Tun
and half of Common Waters. ibid. Aqua vitae, Prescription the first. P. 60 Aqua
vitae, a second Prescription. ibid. Aqua vitae aurea Glauberis, Glaub. Golden
Aqua vitae. P. 62 Aqua Anisi, Aniseed Water. P. 63 Aqua Angelicae, Angelica
Water. P. 64 Aqua absynthii, Wormwood Water. P. 65 Aqua Melissae, Bawm Water.
P. 66 Aqua Menthae, Mint Water. P. 68 Aqua Rosmarini, Rosemary Water. P. 69
Aqua Limoniarum aut Aurantiorum; Limon and Orange Water. P. 70 Aqua Majoranae,
Marjoram Water. P. 71 Aqua Melliphylli, Balsamint Water. P. 72 Aqua
Caryophyllorum, Clove Water. P. 73 Aqua Cinamomi communis, Cinnamon Water
common. P. 74 Aqua Cinamomi propria, Cinnamon Water proper. ib. Aqua Cinamomi
nostra, Our Cinnamon Water. P. 75 Aqua Sem. Faen. dull. Sweet Fennel seed-Water.
P. 77 Aqua Calendularum, Marigold-water. P. 78 Aqua Seminum Carui, or
Caraway-water. P. 79 Aqua Nucum Moschatarum, Nutmeg-water. P. 80 Aqua
Lavendulae, Lavender-water. P. 81 Aqua Lavendulae Composita, Lavender-water
Compound. P. 82 Aqua Salviae, Sage-water. P. 83 Aqua Salviae Composita,
Sage-water Compound. P. 84 Aqua Caryophillatorum, Avens-water. ibid. Rosa
Solis. P. 86 Ros Solis proprius. P. 88 Aqua Stomachica min. Stomack-water the
lesser. P. 90 Aqua Stomachica major, Stomack-water the greater. P. 91 Aqua
Stomachica nostra, Our Stomack-water. P. 92 Vsquebaugh. P. 93 Irish Vsquebaugh.
P. 94 Vsquebaugh Royal. P. 95 Aqua Bezoartica, Bezoar-water. P. 96 Aqua
Matthiae, Dr. Matthias's Water. P. 98 Aqua Contra Scorbutum, Dr. French's
Scorbutick-water. P. 101 Aqua Apertiva, A Carminative Opening Water. P. 102
Aqua Vulucraria, a Wound-water. P. 103 Aqua Mariae, The Ladies water. P. 105
Aqua Anticholica, Our Water against the Cholick. P. 106 Aqua in Vermes, Our
Worm-water, P. 108 Aqua Convulsiva nostra, Our Water against Convulsions. P.
109 Aqua Preciosa, the Precious Water. P. 111 Aqua Carminativa, Wind-water. P.
113 Aqua Sudorifica, Water to procure Sweat. P. 114 Aqua contra Crapulam,
Surfeit-water. P. 115 Aqua Antiscorbutica, Scorbutical-water. P. 117 Aqua
Contra Pestilentiam, Plague-water, P. 118 Aqua nostra contra Pestilentiam, Our
Plague-water. P. 120 Aqua florum, Water of Flowers. P. 121 Aqua frugum, Water
of Fruits. P. 123 Aqua Rubra Londinensis, the London Red. water. P. 125 Aqua
Mirabilis. P. 127 Aqua Mirabilis Nostra. ibid. Dr. Stephen's Water. P. 128 Aqua
Imperialis. ibid. Aqua Caelestis. P. 129 Aqua nestra multifera Virtutum, Our
Water of many Virtues. P. 130 Crollii Aqua Theriacalis Camphorat. Crollius's
Treacle-water Camphorated. P. 131 Aqua Composita Antiscorbutica, A
Scorbutical-Water Compound. P. 132. Spiritus prophelacticus Imperialis,
Antipileptick Powers. P. 133 Cordialis nostra generalis, Our general Cordial.
P. 135 The Doctrine of Vegetable Powers, Oleosums, and Essential Salts. P. 138
The difference between Oleosums and Powers. ibid. The Theory of the Preparation
of Oils, so as to unite with Water or Spirit of Wine. P. 139 The exact Modus
and Praxis thereof. P. 140 The Author's Observation concerning such as pretend
to Essential Powers and Spirits, and yet are defective in Volatilizing the
fixed Alkalie, of that Concreat whence prepared. P. 141 Potestates per
Hermaphroditicum Salem Ammoniacum, or Powers prepared by the help of an
Hermaphroditical Sal Armoniack. P. 142 The way to prepare the said Sal
Armoniack. ibid. The Modus of Distilling it into a Spirit. P. 143 Potestates
Cinnamomi, Powers of Cinnamon. P. 144 Potestates Menthae, The Powers of Mint. P.
146 Potestates Melissae, The Powers of Bawm. P. 148 Potestates Sambuci
Succinatae, The Powerful united Spirit of Elder Essentificated with Amber. P.
149 Potestates Rosmarini, The Powers of Rosemary. P. 154 Potestates
Cochleariae, The Powers of Scurvey-grass. P. 156 Potestates Emundantes, Our
general cleansing Powers. P. 160 Potest. Ne^enthae, Our Annodyne Pain-easing
Powers. P. 163 Potestates Baccharum Juniperi, The Powers of Juniper Berries. P.
165 Potestates Cosmeticae, Our Beautifying Powers. P. 168 Potestates Mercurii,
The Powers of Mercury. ibid. Potestates Nobilissimae Succedaneae and Specificae
per Sal. Tartari Volatilem, or noble Succedaneous Specific Powers. P. 170
Potestates Absinthii, or the Powers of Wormwood. P. 172 How to make Essential
Salts, and to know their goodness when prepared, P. 174 Potestates verae and
arcanae, per Salem nostrum Panaristos, or the true Essential and Genuine Powers
of Bodies P. 178 Helmont's Commendation of the first Ens of Cedar for long
life, P. 179 The Author's Observation: concerning this Sal-panaristos, and its
universal Tendency in preparing Powers from the Vegetable, Animal and Mineral
Kingdom. P. 180 Concerning the most principal Subjects, sc. Tartar, Sulphur and
Venus, usefully in the meliorating Wines and Spirits, when prepared by the said
medium. P. 183 The prevalency of the Element of fire of Venus and Common
Sulphur, being Philosophically prepared, not only in exalting small Wines, but
olso in restoring such as are defective, ropy and decayed. P. 184 The manner of
using the said Sal-panaristos for the bereaving Malt and Molasses-Spirits etc.
of their adustion and ill tangue, whereby they are advanced to the desired
perfection. P. 185 The Authors Answer to the request of a worthy Friend in
which is Contained the names of those his Books that are or shall be Printed by
Divine Permission. etc. P. 187
Advertisement.
WHereas the Author has formerly in his Writings made mention of a noble
Spirit sc. Spiritus Odontugiasus or Mouth-wash, so highly approved of by the
most Learned and Ingenious Persons, for it is prevalency in demonstrating its
unparalled Virtues in whitening Black, Yellow and Corrupted Teeth, fastening
such as are loose, Curing the Cancer and Scurvey in the Mouth after so safe and
effectual a manner as to bring up new flesh upon the Gums, and prevent the
Teeth from future Corruption, so that finding it greatly enquired after, and
several complaining of the difficulty of obtaining it by reason of my house
being distant from the City, earnestly requesting that it might be placed more
convenient for the ready acquirement of the same, I thought fit here to signify
that it may for the future be had at Mr. Jo. Taylor's at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at Mr. Jo. Baker's at the Wool-pack in the Strand between
Dutchylane and the Savoy-gate, at either of which places you may be furnished
therewith, at 1 s. the single Bottle, and 2s 6d the double, Sealed with our
Coat of Arms, which is in the first Sculpture of this Book, as also on the Bill
of Directions: That you may not be mistaken, and buy slops instead thereof: For
note, what really answers, is only prepared by me the Original Author.

Now if you desire to have this Wholesale, or to be Furnished with any other
Medicines specified in our Writings, you may apply your selves to me at the
Blew-Ball and Star in St. Paul's Shadw^l, Land. or to our Disciple and Operator
Tho. Newton Philo-Chymico-Medicus and Studens in Doctrinis Spagyricis, at the
place precited.

THE Practical Distiller.
CHAP. I.
In which we Treat of the Art of Distillation in general, together with the
Vtensils thereunto belonging.

FIRST, We think it convenient to define the word Distillation, and then to
show the use thereof; the word Distillation imports no more than a dropping
down by little and little; but the use and end thereof, is in the first place
to Extract the Spirituality from bodies, when macerated or opened by
Fermentation; so that we may truly say this Art is for changing of gross and
thick bodies into a thin and Spiritual Nature, by which Action the pure
Effluvia are separated from the more terrene, Faetid, and impure Faeces; and
that only by the help of heat; they being thereby resolved into a Vapor, are
elevated to the Helm, where they are in part condensed by the cold, which is
fully accomplished, as they run out of the Beck into the Worm, through the
Refrigerating Tub, and so become clear and lucid: This is the end of
Distillation in general; but in Particular, it is to be considered in a
threefold respect, sc. Distillation, Rectification, and Extraction;
Distillation is a converting of bodies (as before defined) into Water, Oil and
Spirit; Rectification is a reiterated Elevoriation, by which the before
mentioned are separated from their more hidden and internal Impurities; and the
Spiritual, Essential humidity, from the more Phlegmatic and Aqueous: And
Extraction is by the help of some pure Spirit to draw forth that virtue out of
bodies, which otherwise would not so easily admit of Maceration, or of being so
overcome, as to be brought into Spirituallity: Now in bodies very compact, this
is best performed by Cohobation, which is a returning the Liquor upon the body
whence Extracted, and Distilling it off again; which must so often be repeated
as till you have obtained the desired Virtues; these being sufficient to
accomplish all that is to be expected from a Distiller, and indeed to make the
Art complete, and the Discourse thereof full, seeing we intend not to speak of
any thing but what is pertinent thereunto, we shall referr those who desire to
know the Nature of other Operations, to our Chymicus Rationalis, where they are
fully and amply handled, and so passing by the use and Definition of this Art,
we shall now come to the Practick.

In which we find that it requires a great many Conveniences, as a fit
Workhouse, proper Stills, Coppers, Backs, Instruments and Materials, all
which, to be rightly managed, require several hands, if any considerable
draught of Goods is intended to be made, so from hence we may conclude that
this Art is not rightly to be carried on without a considerable large Fund, but
when so managed 'twill repay the Owner, or Master with considerable Interest;
which is the reason that many of them get such plentiful Estates, at which none
ought to grudge, seeing it is got with such just gain, and that the Golden Cap
is obtained by hard Labor: And besides, there is a Proverb in England, win Gold
and wear it; and why therefore may not these enjoy the same, seeing nothing is
more laborious than this Art, when rightly followed; and what they thereby
obtain, we may, as it were, say, is got out of the Fire: but before we proceed
particularly to give every one the Knowledge of these Profits, we shall speak
of the necessaries whereby we are enabled to go to work, otherwise without them
we may be sure there'll be none at all.

First, As to the Workhouse, we best esteem it when something spacious, at
least 16, 18, or 20 Foot in breadth; and 24, 26, 28, or 30, in length;
especially, where you design to work considerable quantities. The manner of
Erecting the Carcass, with the proportionable height, and way of covering it,
we shall leave to the Ingenuity of the Workman, to whom it belongs, and give
you our opinion of the accomplishment of what is required in it: Thus, at the
utmost end we advise that a Copper be set up, after the manner of the Brewers;
except you design to prepare your Liquor in your large Still, which will be
somewhat troublesome, and indeed a great hinderance to business, if you intend
to work it off twice a day, as usually is done: Now by your Copper you must
have your Mashing Tub, to mash in; and under that large Receivers, and over
upon the Rafters you may have a Cooler; and again under the Coolers large
Backs, one for the stronger Wort, the other for the smaller; and so ordered, as
that it may run into either; now from these large Backs, you must convey Leaden
Pipes unto Receiving Backs for Stores, and from your store ones to the
Wash-backs, which ought always to be placed opposite to your great Stills, for
the more ready filling of them; now this conveyance is very convenient, from
Back to Back; for by this means you may always be supplied with Wash; and
especially if you command it by the turning of a Cock, otherwise you must make
use of a strong Cork with a string above it, that so you may pluck it out when
you please. Now these Backs, as they are set into the Earth, must be well
daubed about with tempered Clay, or put in a thin Bed thereof; for this is said
to preserve them tight and warm: these must have Cove^^ above with a Leaf to
fold up upon occasion; an^ upon a defect of Backs, you may make use o^ large
Oil Fatts, so ordered; you must have a Bra^^ or Wooden Pump to put into the
Backs, and so wit^ a Spout fastened with a Broom therein, to keep the Wash from
running over, and the other end a^ the Still you would fill, you may at any
tim^ easily perform it; your Spout being movable from Still to Still.

In hanging your Stills you must observe, to place them on the same side that
your Copper is on, that so your Backs may be the better ranged together without
Confusion; let them be as near the end as they will possibly stand; and let two
stand together, that so one Flew may serve for the Conveyance of both their
smoaks; and in the first place you must observe to place them so, as that the
lower end of the Worm may be 14 Inches from the ground, that so a Can may
freely be placed under, and taken away when full: it is better an Inch too high
than a quarter of one too low; and for proportioning your Still to any height,
you must let in your Ash-hole into the ground; which in length and breadth must
be proportionable to that of the Still; for one of six Barrels ten or twelve
Inches in breadth is sufficient; and for one of Eight or ten Barrels, it must
be Twelve or Fourteen at the least; the which are two very good Sizes; the
length must be proportioned according to the Grate and Door, somewhat sloping
for the more easy commanding the Ashes. And having proceeded thus far, you
must observe not to make the Fire place too broad; your Grate must be made of
thick heavy Bars, exactly out, of an even length, the ends somewhat flatted
upon flat bars, and broad, flat bars must lie even with their upper edges, that
so the Shovel, Slice or Rake may not jam in them, although they lie loose, to
be taken in or out upon occasion as any of them melt off: the broad flat Bars
must be continued right one to another, even to the mouth of the door; and the
door must be of Iron, as the Brewers Coopers are; let your mouth and fire place
be built all of broad Tiles, for these better bear the fury of the Fire than
Bricks: And when your Fire place is of its proper height, and at one end a
convenient sloping hole left for the Fire to play up in, let your Still be
placed upon the Brickwork, in such a way as that it may have a Current for the
Liquor to run out of the Cock; and upon trial let it be closely worked upon to
the bottom, that so the Fire may only play at the Flew; and observe to place
your Cocks through the Wall, that so the Liquor or Wash may run out into the
proper receiving Backs, without annoying the Still-house. Let there be a
Wheel-vent made to receive the smoke and flame, at least five, six, seven, or
eight Inches, as your still is in bigness which taking the Fire throws it round
the Still and brings it into the great Flew or Chimney it is generally ordered,
that the Wheel-vent should go with the Sun; but if you hang two Stills
to^gether, which is the right way, then let the on Vent go to the right and the
other to the lef^ that so both may the easier meet in the gre^ Flew; or you may
continue their divisio^ to what height you please by a Brick on the ed^ between
them. The Wall of your Stills must g^^ with an exact round, and be carried up
only t^^ thickness of a Brick. Between the Angle of t^^ two rounds, let flat
Bars be fastened two or th^^ like a Ladder, that so you may go up to s^^ when
the Still is full; as also to cleanse it upon occasion. When your Work is
carried up (...) high as the upper Nails in the Still, then co^^ your Vent, by
carrying on your Work sloping 'till you come to the narrow place of the Still;
let the edge of your Work be round, that so, if any Liquor fall on the slope,
it may the easier drop away; your work above being well secured all round with
plain Tiles and a good bed of Mortar, then you must cover your Still all round
with a course Canvass, or Hop-Sack, in order to keep the Walls from cracking,
and the Fire tighter or more closely in; which must also be exactly Plastered
and White-limed over: Your Still being thus hung and finished, we shall now
come to consider the placing of the Worm-Tub.

Now in this you must observe to set it on a Wall made of Brick with some
Timber in it, which must be covered with a round board like the Curb of a Well,
the better to keep it from sinking, the board must be the exact compass of the
bottom of the Tub, but the Wall something less, that so a Can may the better
stand before it: And here you must observe these Rules, First, That the upper
end of your worm stand so that the Beck or Nose of the Head may easily go into
the same without the least Obstruction, and shut in so close, as easily to be
luted; Secondly, that your Worm-Tub must stand upright, leaning neither one way
nor another; otherwise the Liquor will hang in the Worm; Thirdly, to try
whether the Worm be upright, that you may put a Pint or a Quart of Water in
the same, and if it comes all out of the lower end, then may you assure your
self it is true; which being regarded you cannot miss of setting your Tub aright.

Moreover, we approve best of those Helms, which have a large Pewter Crane
Neck, proceeding from the upper Center of the Head into the Worm, for two
Reasons; the one is because the Spirits come sweeter through this sort than
that of the Copper; the other is, that if the Wash should rise into the Head,
yet will it not so readily come over to foul the Worm. Lastly, you must have
two or three loops or ears in the upper part of your Head to tie a Rope, that
so by the help of a Pully you may the easier lift off the same: This Still
Head, and Worm-Tub are exactly described in Fig.

Thus having shown you the manner of hanging the Still, setting the Worm-Tub,
etc. And also given demonstration thereof to your Eye, in the Figure; we shall
now come to show the way of preparing things fit to be therein Distilled; as
also the manner of working the same.

Now the Basis or Grounds for Distillation may be comprehended under these six
heads: First, Ale, and Liquors Brewed and prepared from Malt, by any way of
Extraction or drawing forth whatsoever: Secondly, All things, that are to be
Brewed and Distilled from Molasses, Sugar and Honey, either with or without
Tilis: Thirdly, All those, which are or may be made from Fruits, Berries and
Flowers of the English growth, as, Cider, Perry, and Artificial VVines:
Fourthly, Those of Foreign Fruits, as, Raisins, Figs, Primes, Tamarinds, or
others, that either may by Art be Brewed, or will give a Spirit by
Fermentation: Fifthly, All kind of Foreign VVines, and their Lees: Sixthly, all
kind of Herbs whatsoever, either with or without Addition.

These being sufficient to demonstrate all that can be said in the Art, are
laid down, to the end, that you may the better conceive of, and comprehend what
is to be spoken thereof, in the particular ways of Working: We shall now begin
with the First Head, that of Malt.

In which there are various ways of Working, one Brewing it into sound Ale and
Beer, which is the best, and letting it come to Age and Strength before
Distilled; others Brewing it without any Boiling or Hops, bringing the three
Liquors together into their Wash-Backs, and so Ferment and Distill; others
Ferment Malted Wheat and Malt, and so Distill; and others are for Protuberating
and bursting Corn by boiling of it, and then Fermenting and Distilling it; all
which shall be treated of apart: And first of Brewing sound Beer, because from
thence the best and truest Aqua Vitae's are made.

As to Brewing we have given you our opinion in our Cerevisiar^i Comes, which
in short is, that by Decoction the destructive Gass must be taken out of the
Water, and then to be cooled in, which is, that some of it must be cold, and as
much put on the Malt as will serve for mixtion and commixtion; and then pouring
on as much warm Liquor as you intend to make use of in that Mashing; then
rowing up well, and letting it stand its due time, to draw it into the
Receivers, and so to proceed, as directed in the before-cited Book; only you
are to observe, that if it should not be fully rich of the Malt, to Distill it
as soon as it is well wrought, for fear it should flat, and so great part of the
Spirit should be lost; but if it be very Strong and well Brewed, you may keep
it to what Age you please, before you Distill it. The way to Distill it will be
shown hereafter.

The second is the general way made use of by all the Distillers; the way
whereof, though laid down in the precited Book, shall be here again repeated,
because this may come into the hand of those, which that may not, and because
we design in this to make the Art complete and entire. First, you are to heat
your Water a little above Blood warm, i.e. between Blood-warm and scalding hot,
they say, that if you boil your Liquor you make it hard, and so 'twill not take
out the virtue of your Malt, but we know to the contrary, for if the Liquor is
so boiled, as that only the Gass may evaporate; little or no Consumption being
made, it is by that means made more mellow, and will extract more virtue out of
the Malt, if in a good temper put thereto, and then the Malt being in a
Mash-Tub, add so much Liquor to it as is just sufficient to wet it, and this is
called Mashing; then row or stir it up very well with two or three pair of
hands, stiffly for half an hour together, till it is all mixed in every part;
then add in what quantity of Liquor you think fit; but the stiffer you Mash,
the better it is; then strew it all over with a little fresh Malt, and let it
stand an hour and a quarter, or distilling equipment The greal Still for Low
Wines.

The Worm out of the Tubb.

Let this Worm baing set into the Wormtubb be so upright not inclining to the
right or left hand, but so yt water being put in it may run out to a drop.

AA the Ash hole; B The Fire place; C The body of the Still; D the Head; E the
entry of the Crane neck; F the Joining of ye nose thereof to the Worm; G the
Worm tubb; H the Can;


Place this Figure before Chap: I in page. 11.

thereabouts; then let it off into its Receivers, and Mash again with fresh
Liquor, and let it stand about an hour, rowing it up, as before said; so a
third time: And some will Mash a fourth time, which then must not stand above
half an hour: but we say that three times are sufficient; the fourth being so
poor and very small indeed, that it is fitter for Small-beer for very poor
People, than for a Distillation; unless it is used instead of Liquor for other
Mashings on fresh Malt. Now some very Ingenious Persons Boil their Liquor and
Cool in, the which we well approve of.

Now every Wort that comes is pumped up out of the under Back into the Cooler,
there to Cool; and then from the Cooler into the Wash-Backs, there to remain
'till all the three Worts come together. By the way observe, that you neither
Hop nor Boil, as for Beer; now when they are down in the Backs, and in a proper
coolness and fit to be set; then add good Yeast enough to work it very well, as
for Ale; and as the Yeast rises up beat it down again, and keep the same all
in; and let it work three, four, or five days, according to the season of the
Year, Temperament of your Back, when set, and Judgment of the Distiller.

If a Back be set either too cold or too hot, it is thus helped, by adding
either hot or cold Liquors, to bring it unto a good temperature; in the Winter
time, in extreme cold weather when it flats and goes backward, and will come to
no good Head; you may again promore it is Fermentation by adding some of those
things prescribed in that of Molasses: Now if you can exactly know the time of
the Wash's being come, then you may take off your thick Yeast, to set other
Backs with: But if not, then must you take with you these signs, sc.: the
working it self down flat, and then the thick Yeast sinking to the bottom, that
so what lies on the top will be but a kind of an hoary or Yeasty Head: You must
observe that your Wash be neither sour nor sweet, but in a Medium between
both; for it will then be most profitable for Distillation; but some say, that
being taken in its highest Curle, before it begin to flat, and the Yeast and
all Stilled, it gives the most Spirit; the way whereof will be also hereafter
shown.

The third we call the Dutch way, because mostly used in Holland and Germany,
which is, the Fermenting of the Corn; which to do, you must proceed thus; Take
fresh ground Malt, made of Wheat, Barley, or Buck Wheat, etc. and put it into
the Oil Tubs before described, pouring thereon as much cold Water, as will
serve for mixtion and commixtion, and then also pouring as much warm Water, as
will suffice for making the mixture moist and thin, also warm; for it must be
neither hot nor cold, but in the Medium between both; which being done, and
well rowed up, mix therewith some new Barm, and cover it with its Cover and
Cloth very warm; which being exposed to the Heat will in a short space begin to
Ferment; therefore you are not to fill your Vessels, above three quarters full;
this you must leave until Fermented, and the mixture descends, which for the
most part will be on the third or fourth day; and then is it ready for
Distillation; but it is generally experienced by those which are not used to
this way, that the Malt being put into the Still Cakes and burns to the bottom,
to the destruction both of the same, and Low-wines, which come off with a burnt
taste; which to prevent, there are two ways; the one is to press forth the
Liquor from the Grains, and to Distill the same; the other is by our new
Invention, which will be shown hereafter; for we saw that all our Experiments
made in a boiling Bath did not in the least burn; but that all the Low-wines
came off very sweet and luscious in taste, and pleasant in smell.

The Fourth and Last, is the Glauberian way, which is thus; First you must
after this manner prepare your Corn, whether Barley, Rye, Oats, or Wheat; sc.
steep it in sweet Water for some days, then place it, that it may sprout after
the same manner as Corn is Malted for the making of Beer; turn it well for a
certain time, lest it be corrupted by too much heat; then when it is well
sprouted, spread it abroad, that it may presently cool, and 'twill never sour.

But if you would use it presently, then take as much of it as your
Destillation will require, and in a Kettle full of Water, boil it so long, till
the Grains are broken, then pour it into a Wooden Vessel, and when it is
lukewarm, add to it the fresh Dregs or Grounds of Beer, and let it Ferment;
when it has fermented enough, which is usually at the end of two or three days,
then Brandywine is made in a common Still, by Destillation from that Corn; what
remains in the Still will serve to feed Oxen, Cows, Hogs, or other Cattle.

But the Brandy-wine which proceeds from thence must be Rectified, as the way
is; and by this means it is rendered more sweet and grateful to the relish, than
any other Brandy made of Corn: the Reason is this, That all Bread Corn, of
which Brandy-wine ought to be prepared, if it be put to Ferment presently after
softening, is necessarily in the Still, by boiling, reduced into a Pap, and so
being corrupted by adustion produces a stinking Brandy-wine.

But this protuberating and burst Corn cannot be burnt, and therefore makes
good Brandy.

Now it is observable that that Brandy made from Wheat-Corn, is the most near of
any other from any Grain whatsoever to that of Gallia.

Let thus much at present suffice concerning Corn, because the distinct rules
of bringing it into Low-wines, Proof Spirits, and rectified goods, will be laid
down in their proper places; we shall therefore now proceed to the second,
Head; sc. Molasses, Sugar, and Honey.

As to Molasses, you need to do no more, than down with it into the Backs
(seeing for promise-sake we must open so many truths) and add thereto three or
four times its weight of Liquor, prepared as in the second Head; i. e. to every
Hundred of Molasses thirty six, forty, or forty six Gallons of Liquor;
according as you will have it small or rich of the Molasses; for you must
observe, that the stronger it is, the longer 'twill be before it comes to
Fermentation; and this, if it be not well Fermented, will yield but poorly, i.
e. very little quantity of Spirits; therefore is it abundantly nicer to be
wrought than that of Malt; and especially in these cold Climates; for you must
observe to set your Back at once in a good temper; being not so well to be
helped by hot or cold Liquors, as that of Corn; and you must have good store of
Yeast, or Ferment to Head it well at once, or else it will not come on; but if
you use Wash instead of Water and Tilts, the Grounds of very Strong Beer, will
help its Fermentation on so, that abundantly less Yeast will serve; and you
must observe, that it stands, especially in the Winter time, in a very warm
place; and if in the second day it should not begin to come well on, the which
it will not, if set either too hot or too cold; then you must have ready by you
a Pot of very strong Mustard, with a Horse-Raddish and good Onion, and the
value of an Egg, or two of these must be cast in; you may dip the Onion and
Horse-Raddish in the Mustard; and this will highly prom^te its Fermentation;
especially if you add a Ball of Whiting; Tartar or Argill is not to be despised
in the Doctrine of Fermentation; for 'twill give a secret and sure internal
one, yet when a Back is in too high a Foam, 'twill kindly flat it: In all this
you must observe, that Experience must be your chief guide; for though we
discover true things, yet several accidents may occur, wherein this Mistress
may and will be your best help: For you must know that when it is truly
Fermented, you must take it in the right nick, neither too high nor too flat,
neither too sweet nor too sour; for by any extreme, you may lose of your
quantity of Spirit, as well as by the want of due Fermentation; therefore if a
Back of Molasse^ have not yielded you Spirit enough, let it cool sit to set
again, and then add in a few Gallon^ of fresh Treacle, stir them well together,
and Ferment with Ale Yeast and a ball of Whiting, as before, and so draw a
second time. Ingeniou^ Reader! make not strange of this working over of
Molasses a second time, seeing it has been often done; and we are credibly
informed by a Person of Ingenuity, that in Barbados and those Islands where the
Sugar Canes are in large quantity, they take the Molasses, foul Sugars, and
their Canes, and Ferment them together with remains of the former Distillation,
and upon a defect of Fermentation they cast in some Wood-Ashes newly made;
together with some live Coals. He farther said, that when it is almost brought
to its height in Fermentation, they add five Gallons more of Molasses, and then
stir and Ferment, as before, and then again five Gallons, always keeping it in
Fermentation, and with other reiterate additions, proceed until it is very rich
of the Molasses: But if so, than are they in this Case beholding to their
Climate for the heat, which helps on their Fermentation for here that would not
be performed under a long and tedious time, therefore we shall omit it but as
for the using their remains we much because it carries with it so strong an
Hogo; the way of bringing it into Low-wines, Proof Goods, and Rectified Spirits
will be shown in its proper place.

Honey must be mixed with four, five, six, seven, or eight parts of warm water,
and dissolved; and then to the Solution you must add Ferment, as was spoken
concerning Malt, which afterward must be left covered in some heat for to be
Fermented; being fit for Distillation when it comes to wax hot. Now know that
too great a quantity of Honey makes a very slow Fermentation, viz. Of some
Weeks or Months; wherefore for acceleration sake we advise, that a greater
quantity of Water be added; although otherwise it yields plenty of Spirits, but
ungrateful; which therefore we would have no body to Distill, as being
unprofitable, unless any one know how to take away the ungratefulness thereof;
which will be more largely shown in the Chapter of Rectification: Low-wines,
Proof goods, and Rectified Spirits, may be made from those Meads described in
our Britannean Magazine of Wines; and most excellent and flavorous Spirits they
are indeed: Moreover as to what concerns Sugar, it may be performed by what is
laid down of Molasses and Honey; and therefore being needless to repeat it, we
shall pass on to another Head.

Now as to Cider, Perry, and Artificial Wines, together with such Liquors as
may be made from English growths, according to the general way commonly known,
as also that already they being well Fermented, and by Age come to be ripe and
fine, there is no difficulty to obtain there from a generous Spirit. Note, that
Cyders yield but little quantity of Spirit, let them be made never so fine by
age; therefore it is requisite that you again open them, and bring them to a
fresh Ferment, and then they will yield plentifully; also when they are
declining, pricked, ropy or flat, it is requisite that they be again helped
into a Fermentative State, by such additions as will measurably revive them;
sometimes Whites of Eggs and Flour will do it; or some Alkalisated Calx; and if
not, then must you proceed to your common way, and Ferment, by which, and
warmth, new Cider may be so brought, as in five, six, or seven days it will be
fit to be Distilled; and so of the rest. Now among many fine Goods excellent
Stuff may be made from sound Fruits, especially Cider, that so with small
additions good Brandies may be made; therefore why should we contemn the
perfect knowledge of Molasses and Cyder-Spirits, seeing by a little Industry
great things may thereby be performed: But what is here said being sufficient
for all kind of Fruits, seeing the Doctrine of Fermentation is elsewhere more
largely laid down; passing this by we shall come to the fourth Head.

Raisins, Figs and other Foreign Fruits, may either be stamped in a great Stone
Mortar, or put down whole into your Backs, adding warm Liquor to them, as in
the second Head of Corn, and as the Back is fit to be set, add thereunto your
common Ferment, and with a due heat they will kindly come forward, and as the
Fruit arises at the top, you may beat them down again; but if they work not
kindly in the second or third day, then you may add in a Ball of Whiting, or a
small portion of Calx Vive or Argell, not forgeting the helps before mentioned.
We also have seen excellent effects from Chrystals of Tartar: For thus we have
made most excellent Wines, according as is touched at in our Britannean
Magazine. Now as soon as they are fully Fermented, which will sometimes be a
day sooner than at other times, you may Distill them, their Juice being either
pressed out, or the Fruit put into the Still, as we in our Trials have sometimes
done; but then we have observed often to take off the Head, and stir them, till
ready to Boil, for fear they should Cake: But if you make use of our new
Invention mentioned in the Distilling of Corn, you save all this trouble: The
manner of bringing these into Low wines, Proof goods, and Rectified Spirits,
will be described in its proper place.

Now as to Foreign Wines and their Lees, it is by us observable, that the former
being well Fermented and become fine and generous, will give so noble a Spirit
in Distillation, that we highly doubt whether a pint thereof may be got amongst
all the Brandy Merchants in England; and because their Basis may be sold in
Foreign Parts at a greater price, than when Distilled; their usual way
therefore is to Distill such Wines, as will not keep the year about without
roping or turning sour, or such as are small and defective, in comparison to
what they are at other Vintages, wherefore we conceive that most Brandies are
made such Years, as are wet and cold, so that the Fruit of the Vine, or Grapes
are not for want of the bounteous or friendly rays of the Sun brought to their
true maturity; from whence only proceed the richness and fragrancy to the Wine;
for thereby only is the Specificated Sulphur brought forth apparently in its
Genuine Nature: Now what Nature does not perform, they endeavor to supply by
Art, sc. by stumming of them, bringing them by an Artificial heat into a strong
Fermentation; and to give savours, they often use the Tincture or Essence of
appropriated Herbs; and being fine or fined by Glass, they rack them off for
Sail; concerning which Brewing of Wines, there is no Nation that uses it more
than the Dutch; for although in France they generally buy the smallest prised
Wines, new and rough, yet by their sweets, and Perfumes do they bring and
advance them to a considerable price: And these also thus managed give a very
good and pleasant Spirit or Brandy; being at all times fit for Distillation;
but that Spirit drawn from the Lees will not by far be so pleasant, as this
from the Wines, although both out of one and the same Cask, as will be shown
hereafter; therefore passing this by here, we shall come to show the way of
ordering Lowwines and Lees, which is thus:

You must add to your Lees as much warm Liquor as will dissolve them, and then
with Stum and warmth, or the common Ferment, bring them into Fermentation, and
if thick, you may press out the moisture, and Distill it: But in the
Viniferious Countries they mix small, new, and other decayed Wines therewith,
and so bring them into Fermentation with some other small addition of Liquor,
and then Distill them. So that it is from these mixtures that the Violet,
Rasberry, and other pleasant tastes proceed: For as the Ingenious Glauber
says, the Juice of Grapes is nothing else but a sweet Salt, which by
Fermontation becomes more Tart; nay indeed more sour, as its Invisible, Vital,
and Internal Spirituality has its more volatile particles exhausted; but
seeing we have more largely treated of Savours in the Chapter of Rectification,
we shall omit it here, and proceed to the last Head.

The Fermentation of Herbs is to be considered in a twofold respect, sc. either
as they are worked per se by a common Ferment; or by Sugar and Honey; per se is
when the Herb, Flower or Berry, is bruised in a large Wooden, or Alabaster
Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, and then warm Liquor, or Water poured thereon,
and the Ferment or Yeast added sufficient to stir it up or quicken it so as to
bring it into a true and perfect Fermentation: By Sugar or Honey is, as you
Distill from the Herb its Juice in a cold Still, to which, being put in a
convenient Vessel, you add Herbs, Fruits or Flowers, well bruised, and to every
Gallon of Liquor a Pound, two, three, or four of Sugar or Honey, as you will
have it in strength; then being stirred well together, let them be covered
close and warm; and let them stand till they Ferment, work, froth and flower,
and smell very fragrant, and become fit to Distill; and if occasion requires
this Fermentation may be promoted by some of the precited Fermentatives.
Observe that if you work roots either of these ways you must slice them thin
before you put them in.

Thus have we run through these six Heads, in which is comprehended all that is
needful to be treated of concerning Fermentation, only we think it requisite to
add these following rules, First, That in all things that are to be wrought by
Fermentation, the whole mixture must be well united; Secondly, That the Back
must be temperately set; Thirdly, That you must add a convenient quantity of
Yeast or Ferment, and keep them warm: All these must be diligently weighed, and
accurately observed, if ever you intend to exalt your materials to the desired
end; concerning which you shall hear what the famous Radolphus Glauber says,
Where he speaks of the defects in Fermentation; the which be says sometimes
proceed from too much cold, or hot Water put in, or the Vessels not being well
covered, by which means the cold Air is let in, whence the Fermentation is
hindered, and consequently the Distillation of the Spirit; for by the help of
Fermentation the burning Spirit of the Vegetables is set at liberty, without
which it cannot be done: Also the Distillation is hindered by too much haste, as
well as by too much delay; for if you begin to Distill before the time, viz.
Fermentation not being yet perfected, you shall have but few Spirits; wherefore
also the better part is, by many that are unskilful, cast to the Swine, but
without any great loss, if the matter were Malt; because that Swine are fed
therewith: but not so if other Vegetables were the matter of the Distillation:
Also too much slowness where the Matter begins to be sour before it be
Distilled, yields very few Spirits, that which often happens whilst Herbs and
Flowers, etc. are out of Ignorance left in Fermentation three, four, five, or
more Weeks, before they be Distilled; for the greatest part of the Spirit is
then turned to Vinegar, which would not be so very ill done, if so be these men
knew how to Clarify the remainders, and turn it into Vinegar, that nothing
thereof might be lost; for the Vinegars of Herbs, Flowers, Seeds and Roots are
not to be contemned. And so often times (a thing to be lamented) the better
parts, if they be Spices, and Precious things, is lost.

The matter of the Distillation, and other choice things, as Seeds and Herbs
are cast away with loss; wherefore for Admonition sake, I was willing to add
such things that the Operators may have an opportunity to consider the matter a
little more profoundly with themselves, or at least of learning the Art of
Distilling from Country Men, who do not suffer their Malt to Putrefie, grow
Sour or Moldy, before they fall upon their Distillations; but presently
Fermentation being made (the third or fourth day) begin their Distillation.
Which we shall now come to treat of, and first of bringing them into Low-wines.

For the making of which you must observe two things; the first is, that in all
things, which are Liquid, as Beer, Cider, etc. you must put your before
described Pump into the Back in which it is, directing your Spout to that Still
which you design to charge; and let one hand Pump and another pair of hands row
up, that so the bottom may come into the Still, and when filled so high as the
upper Nails, let down your Head on the Still; but put not the Beck or Nose as
yet into the Worm; for Reasons hereafter expressed; then, the Still being
charged, proceed to the making of your Fire, which is best of Coals or dry
Cleft-Wood, and very strong, until it begins to boil, as a pot going over; then
must you set the Pipe of the Head into the Worm, and as it begins to drop and
run a small stream into the Can, then immediately must you throw damping under
the Still, which is, the Ashes that fall under your Grate and kept wet for that
end, for if you should not do so, it would boil over into the Worm, and so stop
and foul the same; and having proceeded thus far, your Still being in a good
temper, you must begin to lute all fast with a Paste made of Whiting and
Rie-flower: you must exactly lute round the Neck of your Still, and by so doing
you will keep in that Breath, in which is the Spirit; and as you have pasted
the Neck, so must you also paste the Pipe and Worm, wherein it goes; that is to
say, exactly to close the Joint: You must also observe so to govern your Fire,
that you bring your Still to work so, as that the Stream may run the bigness of
a large Goose or Turkey Quill; and being thus brought to work, it must be
continued till all the strength is off, and what runs is a stinking Phlegm; thus
are you to proceed in your first Extraction, the second shall be shown
hereafter.

As to the other thing which is to be observed, it is in the Distilling of
those things, which are not pressed forth from their Corporiety; but thick and
thin must all go into the Still together; and this generally will Cake,
although you take all the care you can to stir it before it works; by which
means we have known the bottom of a New Still burnt out; which to prevent, as
we have done in our trials, you must observe, that in making your Still, two
Inches above the turning, and just even with the closure of the Brick-work, you
must have your Still turned with a very large Verge, and exactly hammered for
the upper part to shut in, which must be proportioned round up, as in other
Stills, with a Neck exactly fit for the Head, on which you must place two
Rings, just opposite one to another, that so at any time upon occasion it may
be easily lifted off, to which Verge you must fit a very strong Iron Hoop, the
upper part of which must have three strong Rings in it, that so upon occasion a
Rope may be fastened to it; to the under part you must lace or brace on your
container, which must come within two or three Inches of the bottom, as also
within two Inches of every side; then place your hoop on the Verge, and charge
your Still, the Corporiety will be therein received, and the Liquor will pass
to fill up the vacancy; then shut down the Shoulders of your Still, and lute
fast with a Paste made of Calx Vive and Whites of Eggs, or fine Flower and
Sand, or thick well boiled Starch and Sand: Let down your Head, but you must
not yet put the Nose into the Worm, but make a good Fire, as you were before
directed, and so cause your Liquor to boil and before it works great part of
the Wild Gass or unruly Spirit will go off invisibly, as much indeed as can be
expected, except your Liquor had been decocted and cooled in: Now as the Beck,
Nose, or end of the Pipe begins to drop, you must put it into the Worm and lute
fast, as before directed, as also the Neck of the Stills and your Still being
brought to work, you must in all things proceed in the Extracting your
Low-wines, as before laid down in the first Observation: and this also is to be
Noted, that some Malt, Grain, and Fruits will in the beginning run off a Can,
two, or three of Proof Spirit, and then it generally runs long: Others
sometimes runs not at the beginning so fully Proof, and yet will yield
indifferently well. Thus your Low wines being Distilled, you let them lie ten
or fourteen days, to enrich themselves; for in that time they get by lying, and
some think that if they lie longer they lose, as also Proof Spirits, except
they lie very warm: But however they may, as we have found by experience, be so
ordered, as that they may be the more mellowed, and better themselves thereby.
These rules being sufficient for the Extracting all kind of Low-wines, and the
more especially, if you make Use of our curious Invention, before described,
for that by it these benefits will accrue; First you are not troubled; with the
moving, stiring or rowing your matter in the Still; Secondly you need not fear
your Still's being burnt, or your Wines getting any adustion or Evil Tang, for
they will come over sweet, pleasant, and fragrant; Thirdly and Lastly, you have
this advantage, that you may remove the shoulders of your Still, and fasten a
Rope in the Iron Hoop, and by means of a Pully lift your matter at once out,
which may be received into a Coule and bore away; and the Wash let out the
common way; and if your matter be either Wheat or Barley, the Grains, though
they have been in the Still, will be very good Food for Cattle or Swine. Note
that after this method, only using a Tin-pan made fit for the Verge, and an
Inch or two of vacancy between, whereby to put in the Water, may you have an
Artificial Balneum for rectifying your Spirits. We shall now proceed to the
second Extraction, which is thus;

Take two or three Cans of Water, put them into your Still, and a small handful
of Salt; and charge your still with Low-wines to a convenient height; let down
your Head, and give Fire; then put your Beck into the Worm, and gradually
proceed till all is over; the which you may know by the weakness of that which
comes.

Observe. You may also use a small portion of some Herb, which has a proper
Signature with the Vine: And it is a general custom among the Distillers, in
order to make their Spirits hot, strong, and fiery in the mouth, to use Spanish
Grains, which are sold by the Druggists, which do accomplish their end; but
with little other advantage to the Spirit: Therefore do we reject it, though a
thing so much practiced, seeing more agreeable and pleasant ways are easily to
be found. Now we shall reveal one thing more, which will be helpful to the
Distiller, which is, in taking away part of the gross Sulphur, from whence much
of the Evil Tang proceeds; and it is thus: Take a pound of Wool, wash it
exceeding clean, and dry it, and with a loop hang it in the Head of the Still,
in which the oleous parts, ascending, will be insorbed; and when the Operation
is over, wash clean, dry, and keep it for the like service: Having thus
finished the second Extraction, we think it not amiss to show what quantity of
Low-wines, Proof goods, and fine Spirits may be Extracted from a Quarter of
Malt.

You must know, that in the first place, 'twill make about Fifty Gallons, or
something more than three Barrels of Wash, which in the first Extraction will
make thirty two, thirty four, or thirty six Gallons of Low-wines; and these if
you let them lie, will in the second Extraction yield eleven or twelve Gallons
of Proof Spirit nay sometimes (through the goodness and richness of the Malt)
thirteen; especially if in the second Extraction you add some Water into the
Still; which in the third Extraction we count i^ truly Proof lose not many
Gallons in a Tun.

Note also, the English receive their Low-wines, Proof, and Fine Goods in Cans;
but the Dutch object against this way, saying that it is disadvantageous;
because the Spirit is exhausted through the Magnetic or Attractive, property
of the Air; therefore they place large receiving Vessels their full height or
more in the Ground, so as to place thick boards over them, in which they have
two holes; the one for a Funnel to receive the Low-Wines or Proof Goods; the
other to put in an Hand-Pump, to Pump them out when they please; which indeed
is very commodious, not only for the Reasons mentioned, but also because the
Still may be set lower, (a Funnel requiring not so large a space or height, as
a Can) whereby it may be the better and easier commanded.

Thus having run through what was promised in this Chapter, we shall here
conclude the same, and pass on to Rectification.

CHAP. II.
Wherein we shall Treat of Rectification in general, as also of those Mediums,
by which it is best performed, so as to make excellent Stuff, and Artificial
Brandies.

IN the former Chapter we treated concerning the way of erecting a Workhouse,
as also of proper Utensils thereunto belonging, together with the way of making
Low-wines, and Proof Spirits, so that we shall here come to that of
Rectification, showing how far we can advance in making excellent Stuff, and
Artificial Brandies; concerning the possibility of which we shall first give
you the Opinion of that famous Radolph Glauber, P. 1. page 57. Where he
mentions the difference of Malting: The difference of Malt, by reason whereof
it yields better or worse Beer, and Spirit consists for the most part in the
preparation thereof; for being made after the Vulgar way it retains its taste;
wherefore it cannot yield good Spirit, nor good Beer, which is observed by very
few; wherefore they could not draw forth good Spirit out of Corn, but such as
savours of the taste and smell of the Malt; which is not the fault of the Corn,
but of the Artificer, not operating a-right in the Preparation of his Malt in
Distillation and Rectification: For if it were prepared a-right in all things
Corn yields a very distiller with equipment A smaler Still for Rectification

I the Ash hole ^ the Fire place ^ the body of the Still ^ the Head ^ the
entering of the Crane neck ^ the joining of the nose thereof to tho Worm ^ the
Worm Tubb. ^ the Can


The Common Alimbeck wherein small quantityes of Waters are drawn

AA the Ash hole B the Fire place C the body of the Still D the joint whereat
the Head shuts into the Body E the Cooler containing water to refrigerate the
Spirits F the joining of the Receiver to the beck of the Alimbeck G the
Receiver.




good Spirit, not unlike to that which is made out of the Lees of Wine, in
taste, odor, and other virtues. Which Art although it be not known to all, yet
it does not follow, that it is impossible. To which Opinion we can the more
freely assent, seeing that we, by our former experienced trials, which were
about five years ago, at which time we had a good quantity of our Percipiolum
of Tartar by us, have made most excellent Wines and Artificial Brandies from
the chief Heads before mentioned: Concerning which Tartar, we have many
Mysteries to write; but for obligation sake must reserve some of them; as being
assisted therein by a Glauberian; but however we shall lay the thing before
your view by repeating the words of the Famous Author. P. 2. page 139. Take
white or red Tartar (for both of them being well mundified, are as good one as
the other) dissolve it in Water, and separate all its gross Sulphur, by a
certain precipitating matter. This impurity abiding in the Water, is to be
separated from the precipitated Tartar; by pouring out the Water, the which
(Tartar) remains in the bottom like a Snowy Sand, and is to be well purged by
reiterated washings with Water, so long until (all the impurities being well
separated) the Powder it self becomes like to the white Snow. He also adds that
this may be so highly exalted as to be associable to Gold; but the knowledge of
a matter Precipitating Tartar is not easy to be attained to, without which it
will never suffer it self to be precipitated and purged; it is an hard thing to
find, but he that knows it, it renders him all his labor facile and easy. Any
impure Tartar, whether it be white or red, may be so washed in one or two hours
space and so Purged, that (losing nothing save its Faeces) it will become most
white, and much more apt for many Operations. These make such fine Spirits of
Wine without any violent Distillation, that those Spirits added to Water will
make good Wines, if you again add in the depurated Tartar. You may also see,
what he further says in P. 2. page 59. and P. 1. page 292.

Now if you cannot attain to this Tartar, you must endeavor so to prepare your
Spirits, as that they may be sweet and pleasant, though something different in
taste from those of the Vine, which taste proceeds from the signature of that
specificated Sulphur, from whence the Spirits are prepared, which geneous
Nature will preserve what in her lies to the utmost Iliad; but strong Savours
come from the violence of Fire and Adustion; so that the fault is not to be
ascribed to Nature, but to the Ignorance of the Artificer; seeing such the same
will happen, even from the Products of the Vine; therefore the skillful one
must first bereave them of this taste and smell; and then he may easily
introduce such others, as have a measurable Homogeniety and Affinity to the
Vine; this, and this only, is the great business of Art, and the Artificial
Preparation we would point forth; for (as we 've elsewhere said) if Spirits
were thus Stilled, so as to get an ill Tang, they must again be bereaved
thereof, which is not accomplished till your Spirits are brought in a manner as
free from taste as Water, only Fiery and Spiritual; whereby much of the gross
Sulphur, from whence the adustion, and consequently ill Tang, proceeds, is cast
off, and separated; we mean as to its domineering qualities. The like may be
done to great content even on Rum, which is the strongest in smell and taste of
all the Vinor Spirits, drawn from Vegitable Concretes: Which taste, we are well
satisfied comes not so much from the Internal Natute of the Concrete, as from
their rough Preparation of the same; sc. their so often using the remains and
relics of Sugar and Canes; seeing that by pure Salts and great Quantities of
fresh water, they are cleansed therefrom, as a Leper is, when cleansed from his
defilements, and brought to a sweet and pleasant Spirit; which said sweetness
cannot by all the Art imaginable, be equally produced from some other Spirits;
seeing those that proceed from the Vinor Root it self are not equally endued
with Fragrant, Rich, and Sweet Effluviums.

For one Simple is naturally sweeter than another; ex. gr. All sweet Wines will
naturally yield sweet Spirits, and clear Wines yield abundantly sweeter Spirit
than those made from the Lees, although proceeding from one and the same
vessel; for Claret Wine gives by much a sweeter Spirit than the Faeces or
sediment thereof, there being therein a more gross and feculent Sulphur, the
which corrupts their simple sweetness, which chiefly is to be preferred;
wherefore do we esteem the Glauberian way of Distilling, laid down in the
fourth Head; because the Low-wines and Proof Spirits come off from thence
abundantly sweeter than those from Wash: And, as the Author says, P. 1. page
159. may in all things be made to taste like natural Brandy.

N. B. But if any man will give this Brandy a relish, like that made of the
Lees of Wine, then he must rectify it upon the Lees of Wine; for this way by
the Oil of Wine, which is plentiful among the Lees, he acquires his ends, and
in all things he may use this instead of that. Objection But some may say how
can this possibly be so sweet as that drawn from pure Wines, seeing that you
but even now said that those gave a sweeter Spirit than that drawn from the
Lees?

But in Answer to these; We will not compare them with those drawn from pure
Wines but with such as are drawn from Vinor Roots of a more inferior Nature,
and especially from the Lees; because these having their adustion on them, are
apt to get a stronger smatch, being exposed to the Fire, than such Spirits
will, which are already worked so pure, that in the Rectification they will
only suck out the Volatile, Sulphurous and pleasant parts, as is evident in
this. If those Lees, from whence you have drawn your Spirits, be afterward
Fermented, and then again Distilled, they will yield but little quantity of
Spirit, and that deficient in its flavor; so that it is evident, that there is
a difference of Magnetical attraction and violent Distillation, the one
bringing up only the Homogeneous parts, and the other sending off the more
gross with the Volatile ones; and yet more if the Spirit you use is already
sweet and pleasant, and the Argel by Art separated from all its impure and
terrene Faeces, as before mentioned: and again we see a considerable difference
in such Spirits, as are purified by such Salts, as will Magnetically attract
their impurities and Aquacities; so that their Spirituality is separated, and
then Distilled; from such Spirits, as are worked and rectified through the body
of Salt in the Still; for although these may in some measure rob them of
something, yet again they also add something of the Nature of that Salt, whence
rectified, and therefore cannot be so pure as the former; seeing they are worked
by a simple intention, their impurities being gone before they come into the
Still.

You have a clear example in this, that whereas Bay Salt is used in the common
Method of Rectification, Bay leaves, Orrice, Ginger, Mugwort, Prunes,
Pellitory, all Spice, Tamarinds, Clary, etc. Yet are not these Spirits by far
so pleasant, as those, which are thus prepared.

Take of pure Indian Peter; and white Tartar, of each a Pound, the best Yellow
Sulphur half a Pound, and being finely powdered and mixed together, you may
with a red hot Iron fire them, and when they will burn no more, melt them well
in the fire, and when cold, pour them out into a Mortar, and pulverize them
very fine immediately, or else they will Magnetically attract the Air, and so
not easily admit of pulverizating; these forthwith put into a Glass, and pour
thereon two quarts of high proof Spirits, such as you would bereave of their
smell; and put them into a cold place for four or five days, remembering to
shake them twice or thrice a day, then Filter them through a Cap-paper or
Filtre, and draw off two third parts by Distillation in Bal. Mariae; and so
have you your Spirit again, but of a wonderful pleasant taste and smell, far
above the former; although no Herbs are as yet added; and though this at the
first appearance may not seem to you a thing of profit; yet it carries with it
in its demonstration such great truths as will confirm not only the Nature and
Difference of these being so wrought, but also the possibility of meliorating
and bettering such things as are not drawn from the Products of the Vine; and
its profits may also hereafter be considerably discerned; but in all this here
is hitherto our mishap; that we are forced to be beholding to the Products of
Foreign Lands, whenas the thing, which must answer the grounded intention of
this business, must proceed from something, which is a proper Product of this
Land; or else how should we supply our selves with good wares in time of
difficulty; and therefore leaving all Foreign things, as Tartar, Wine-Lees,
Chrystals, Verdigreese, or any Vitriol of Venus, etc. although we know that
something from these, if rightly prepared, may be performed, as well as from
common Sulphur or Sea Salt, and such others as are aptly made, for the great
business of Rectification; nay, we say from the Stone Parietes, or natural
Vitriol of Mars, being opened by the fixed Salts contained in Hermaphroditical
ones, from whence proceeds a pleasant Earth which to our knowledge is very
homogeneous to Viner Spirits; for by it we are able before men of understanding
to prepare better Stuff than has hitherto been usually done; although
Concentrated Vinegar is not to be despised, if so imbodied, as to preserve its
Tartness in its Vitality; especially if the Spirits are so Distilled as to
retain their sweet flavours; for as we have elsewhere said, from the tart and
sweet, together with the predominance of the Specificated Sulphurs, come the
different flavours unto Viner Spirits; for if the sweet has the predominance,
with the flavours of the Rhinal soil, then the violet taste is evidently
discernable: but from the red mold of France, the tart gives the Rasbery taste;
and these again mixing give neutral and other pleasant flavours, whose
difference is easily discernable by curious palates, although it cannot be so
exactly compared to what it is most like in flavor, seeing so many curious ones
are intermixed; many things of this Nature might be said, seeing Nature is so
bounteous and large in her gifts; even to the filling of many Sheets, and that
with profit too to the Reader; but we must be forced to omit many things, least
the Treatise should swell too big, wherein we design to be as concise and
compact as may be; yet we think it needful to stir up the minds of the
Ingenious to the search of that, which by Trials may to their great content be
measurably attained; for we know that Spirits prepared from the Products of
this Land may be much bettered; for as we see it is no difficult matter to take
the Garments off a poor man, and to give him richer; so is it the same in this
Case, if we have a true knowledge of the Fountain of Nature; and if it is
really so, as the Ancient Philosophers testify, sc. that in the Mineral
Kingdom by help of the first Ens or Seed of Metals they can transmute all the
impure ones into vendible Sol and Luna; why then may not the true Spagyrist by
help of the Universal Vegetable Seed take off the drowsy Nature of Saturn or
Spirit of Barley, or the Airy Nature of Jupiter, or Spirit of Fruits, and bring
them into that friendly one of Venus, and the Sun, to which the Vine belongs;
seeing the possibility of Transmutation is by the most Pregnant Wits of this
Age believed? And there is hardly any one, that pretends to any thing of Art,
but will argue for the same; and there have been given such undeniable
demonstrations of its verity, that we think it an impossibility that any
reasonable man should at this time of day doubt thereof; neither indeed have
they the least cause concerning this of meliorating and bettering Spirits, for
if the Ingenious and Lovers of Art, and others that are unskilful in the ways
of working, will but take the Method we prescribe, they may in time therein
become prompt perficients, because we labor what in us lies, to encourage them
to supply their own defects, etc. which to do, let them thus proceed.

Your Proof Spirits being well prepared, or measurably bereaved of their
Maltish taste, then charge therewith your Rectifying Still with a Can or two of
Water according to their quantity, and take any sort of Herb you best like with
your prepared Salt, and tie them up in a bag (called a Rectifying bag) and
throw it into the Still, lute all fast, and gently and warily draw off your
Fine Goods. You must be very cautious of Fire and Candles, especially where
there is any breaking out of fume; least they should Fire, and so do a great
deal of mischief, for this Reason Rectification is abundantly more dangerous
than drawing Low-wines; therefore be not too hasty, but proceed warily and
moderately, and govern it so that the stream may not run above the bigness of a
large Crow Quill, or at most a small Goose one; and you must observe not to let
it run off too long; for the latter part of your Spirit will be apt to carry
some of the ill savor with it to the great detriment of the former; therefore
let them be saved apart; the first for Brandies, the latter to be again
Rectified so as to Fire Gunpowder, and then it may be used in Varnishes, or
else it may well serve for some Compound Waters. Now to know when all the
Spirituality is come over, you must proceed thus. Take a Taster of that which
runs in the left hand, and a lighted Candle in the right, throw it upon the
Neck or Head of the Still at work, immediately putting the Candle thereunto,
and if it fires and burns you may proceed, otherwise your Operation is at an
end. Now your first fine Spirits must be allayed into Proof or the strength of
Brandy with Liquor, for the which some make use of this following Water; They
take Calx vive, and mix a small proportion of Sassafras with it, and being put
in a Tub they pour Spring Water thereon, and so letting it settle till very
clear, then make use of it; but we are for making our Liquor by Distilling it
through some Azural Salt; for then it freely mixes without the least bubble, or
white speck, and seeming Precipitation, and being brought to Proof, it may be a
little tinged with the Tincture of Saunders; and 'twill not be a miss, if you
add a small portion of Spices in a bag, as Cinnamon, Broad-Mace, and Nutmegs;
and then have you good Saleable Wares, especially if your Proof Spirits were
truly prepared, and from a good Basis.

Now if this trial, although Good Wares, does not in all things answer your
expectation, then proceed to a second or third, sometimes with one sort, and
sometimes with another, and in greater or lesser quantity; nay you may mix two
Species together, and so proceed in your Trial till your end is answered; for
your experiments will be little loss or cost to you, seeing if you proceed not
irregularly, your Goods will be nevertheless vendible; especially if you
observe but the rules laid down.

But least some should object and say that those high Preparations mentioned,
as Spagyrical, which Art we understand not, are not easy to be obtained, and
so the Art of Rectification must remain wholly hidden unto us: In Answer to
this, we must be forced to say that it proceeds not from any deficiency in the
Rules contained in this writing, but from a sluggish neglect of their heedful
observation, and of putting them into use: for have we not named besides the
Lees of Wine, and what proceeds from that root with the Viner Heiggs, etc. and
others which you count Spagyrical, things of such a degree as any one may
conceive, as Bay Salt, Bay Leaves, Orrice, etc. And to those already named, we
will add Cherries without the Stones, Arsmart, Pepperwort, the Herb Scarleae,
the Blackberry, first made into Wine, as directed, as also Wheat Corn; for from
thence proceed most excellent flavours, as we know by large Experience;
therefore accept of our plain and kind Communication, and by a few trials you
may hit the profitable truth; especially if you over Dose not the Spirit with
the Herb; for do we not see how a few drops of the Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves and
Mace, being dropped into Sugar and cast into Wines, alter their taste, especially
if some Essence of Ambergreese is added, as may be hereafter more largely shown
in the next Impression of our Britannean Magazine of Liquors; we also see that
the Elder-flower cast into well decocted Mead, makes it just like Wine made of
the Apian or Muskadine Grape: All which presidents make clear the Art of
Rectification, so that enough and more than enough is said of this Nature;
seeing the diligent hand must by trials obtain that, which may greatly redound
to the satisfaction of the searcher; for does not Solomon say, the diligent
hand makes rich, which may be understood in Knowledge as well as Substance,
since that he preferrs Wisdom and Understanding before all the Riches and Glory
of this World: saying, that Kings and Princes must come and throw down their
Crowns and Scepters before it: And how can any man be said to excel another, if
he have not some gifts above him, and a Practical knowledge in that, of which
the other understands nothing? but into this part must every man enter by his
own self-labour, and uncessant seeking and knocking, until Divine Providence
through his perseverance opens it unto him: For we can neither lay, nor yet
think of any Limitations in this Case; but as to what we have written we think
it sufficient for any rational Genius to make enlargements on; and the more
especially seeing we have shown the Preparation of Powers and Essential Salts
in the second Head, in the fourth Chapter, sc. of noble specificated Powers; as
also in the third Head touched at the Office of our Sal Panaristos, which will
perform on Wines and Spirits all that the Artist can desire; nay, even to the
Superlative degree; and yet the radical Product of England; therefore did we in
our first Part Metaphorically describe the Actions of the Planets, in order to
set forth this thing, and to show that the Universal Spirit may have its pure
Effluviums so concentrated, as to be brought into a Corporeal or Bodily Form;
this is that, when so prepared, which has power to transmute one Nature into
another; and as Vulgar Venus will Cloth Pale-Faced Sol with a deeper and more
beautiful Garment, so will our Chaos of Mars and Venus mentioned in the Preface
of our Chymicus Rationalis, or rather our Vitriol of Venus and Mars
Philosophical, be a Medium for the exalting of Spirits into a purer Nature; and
how can it be otherwise, seeing the Vine is under the Signature of Venus, and
the Juice thereof, has only from thence its sweet Salt; but this has the
Virtue of all the Planets Concatinated into a pure sweet and Chrystaline Salt,
the very Key to the Golden and Lunar Magnet, and other such perfect ones, which
by their internal purities will magnetically attract and separate Impurities
from other beings; and so does this the Phlegm and gross Sulphur in Spirits,
(which being stirred up by the Fire, cause their Nauseous smell and taste, and
sometimes faetid, especially if burnt,) and so brings them to a more perfect
state; but this cannot be so properly called a Transmutation of form, for that
is a changing out of one kind into another; as an Alteration or Melioration,
from a more inferior to a more superior degree; but seeing the Original of
this Salt together with its Office is shown in the fourth Chapter, sc. that of
Powers, we shall thither referr you for it, and come to show what remains, as
pertinent to be treated of in this following part of the Chapter, sc. The true
way of preparing Simple Waters and Spirits; such we mean as have no more than
the Spirit and one single entire Herb in them; because in many cases it is
convenient to have their single Virtues perse, especially where they are
expected to operate according to their Simple Virtue, all laid down in the
lesser or least Composition, sc. three Gallons or one.

Of Waters.
Aqua Anisi Simplex, or, Simple Aniseed Water.
Composition the least.
TAKE of Artificial Brandy, one Gallon, Aniseeds bruised twelve ounces, put
them into the like Alimbe^k des^ried in Fig. 3 and in Balmeo Distill off the
fine Spirit, S. A. then take two quarts of the Water cleansed by Calx vive,
Aniseeds bruised four ounces, and in a cold Still, Distill off something more
than a quart, in which Water gently dissolve on the Embers, twelve ounces of
fine white Sugar, and when cold, therewith allay and dulcifie the Spirits,
already refined, and so is the Water prepared.

This Water is an excellent Carminative, expelling Wind in the Bowels, and all
parts of the Body; in brief it answers all that can be attributed to the
Spirit, Tincture, Infusion or Decoction of the Seeds. The Dose from one
Spoonful to three. Aqua Cardamomi Simplex, or, Simple Cardamom Water.
Composition the least.
Take of Brandified Spirits one Gallon, Cardamom seeds one pound, Operate in
all things as in the former; likewise prepare a Syrup, as there directed, with
which dulcifie and allay.

This Water is very prevalent in warming and strengthening the Stomach,
comforting the Vital Spirits, and expelling Wind, carrying with it all the
Virtues, that may be attributed to any other preparation of the Seed. The Dose
is the same as the former. After this way may be prepared the Water from most
Seeds, as Caraways, Daucus, Sweet-Foenil seeds, etc. The which we shall not
repeat, seeing their preparation is one with this, and their Virtues to be
understood after the same manner: Therefore I shall proceed no further therein,
but come to Herbs.

Aqua Cardami simplex, or, simple Garden Cress-water.
Composition the least.
Take of Brandified Spirit one Gallon, Garden Cresses fresh gathered, half a
peck, macerate them in your Alimbeck three days, and then Disti^ into fine
goods S. A. Also from the Herb per s^ in the cold Still Distill the cold Water,
to every three pound of which, you must add one poun^ of fine Sugar, the which
dissolve therein, and then therewith allay and dulcifie the Spirit let it
refine and so is it prepared.

This Water helps to expectorate and raise tough Phlegm, destroys Worms, and is
good against the Yellow Jaundice, and any Poiso^ whatsoever, but it is more
appropriated (...) Men than Women, because it is hurtful to the Faetus. Now
Nasturtium, or the Her^ Cresse common may be worked in all things like this,
whose Virtues, as it is said, were among the Persians esteemed so great, that
when from home they eat no other meat, to revive their Spirits.

Aqua Menthae simplex, or, simple Mint-Water.
Composition the lesser.
Take of Brandified Spirit, three Gallons, Mints gathered in their right
signature, and gently dried, eight Handful; macerate them three days, and then
Distill in Balneo, S. A. and with the Distilled Water of the Green Herb made in
a cold Still, with the same preparation, as before directed, dulcifie and allay.

This Water heats the Stomach, and prevents Vomiting, two or three spoonfuls
being taken as occasion requires. Observe, that by this Rule you may make many
other Waters; as Bawm, Angelica, Wormwood, etc. Being gathered in their prime,
and gently dried; and you may proportion them to your Brandified Spirit, more
or less in quantity, according as you will have your Waters weaker or stronger
of the Herb. And you must also observe the Nature of the Herbs, for one is
abundantly stronger than the other, for an handful of Wormwood will go farther
than two or three of some other Herbs: now in making your Wormwood-water we
advise you not to take the Water made from a cold Still, but that which comes
from the Distillation of the Oil, and to every quart thereof add two ounces of
Ginger and one of Orrice, and Distill again in a cold Still, and then with what
quantity of fine Sugar you please, gently dissolved upon the Embers, you may
allay and dulcifie. As to their virtues, they shall be here omitted, seeing
it is plainly to be conceived, that they contain the virtues of the simple Herb,
and all other that can be attributed to any other preparation of this kind: And
as to their more exalted preparations and Virtues, they are treated of more at
large in the Chapter of Powers.

Aqua Violae Tricoloris Simplex, or, simple Hearts-Ease-Water.
Composition the least.
Take of Artificial Brandy one Gallon, Hearts. Ease, in the prime, sc. when
seeded, being gently dried, one pound and a half, put them into your Still, and
let them macerate three days, then Distill in Baln. into fine Goods, S. A. You
may allay and Dulcifie as before directed, either with their own Syrup, or
Syrup of Violets.

Its Virtues. It Is an excellent Cordial, far above any other, for such as are
faint and weak in the French Pox, also for Fevers, Measles, or Smallpox; and
for Agues, Convulsions and Falling Sickness; the Egyptians highly esteemed of
this for Epilepsies; but we know that this Water is good for those, that have
weak and inflamed Lungs, Consumptions, etc.

Aqua Raphani Simplex, or, Radish Water Simple.
Composition the lesser.
Take of Brandified Spirits, three Gallons, of Garden Radish fresh gathered,
clean washed and sliced, six pound; macerate three days with Mustard and an
Onion, and then Distill in Balneo. S. A. You may allay with the cold distilled
water of Arsmart, and dulcifie with Syrup of Marshmallows, and then let it
become fine, and so is it prepared.

Its Virtues. It Is an excellent Lithontriptick bringing off Gravel, and
provoking Urine, it dissolves Cluterated Blood and expels it; it is good in old
Coughs, attenuating gross humors in the Chest; it kills Worms, and expels
them, it provokes the Terms, and gives ease in the Cholick, it is good for Women
after Delivery, to help to expel the Secundine, and also to prevent from
Feverish Symptoms; in brief its Virtue is such, as that it may be safely
Administered in Melancholic, Splenetick and Scorbutic Diseases: Its Dose is
one, two, three or four Spoonfuls according to the Age and strength of the
Patient.

Aqua Sabinae Corticis simplex, or, Savine Water simple.
Composition the least.
Take of Brandified Spirit, one Gallon; of the Bark of Savine six ounces,
macerate three days and Distill S. A. You need not dulcifie it, nor allay it:
For it is mostly designed for washing of Ulcers, either Scrophulous or
Cancerous, for abating Inflammations and dissipating Nodes and Tumors; it is
seldom or never given inwardly, without it be to provoke the Menses, or to
expel the dead Foetus; then the Dose is half a Spoonful, or Spoonful in White
or Rhenish-Wine, sweetened with Sugar.

Having laid down these Examples, we shall not insist upon any more of this
kind, seeing they are sufficient to show you the Preparation, not only of
Seeds, Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and Barks; but also of Berries and Spices, and
others of the Vegetable Kingdom: We shall in the next place show you the way of
Perfuming them, and then proceed to those of an higher order, sc. Spirits.

The way to perfume them.
Take of the Sulphurated Spirit of Wine mentioned in the Chapter of
Rectification three pound, Jessamine Flowers half a pound, Honey Suckle Flowers
four ounces, Orange Flowers, or the fresh Pill two ounces, macerate twenty four
hours, and Distill in Balneo, S. A. And to the Spirit that comes over add
Ambergreese four scruples, Musk two scruples, which being cut small, put them
into a Bolthead, Seal them Hermetcally, and digest with a very gentle heat
'till dissolved; the which put in Bottles, with stone stoppers for use.

The manner how, is to add such a quantity to the Waters, as you will have them
in strength of the Perfume.

Of Spirits.
Spiritus Salviae, or, Spirit of Sage.
TAKE of Artificial Brandy three Gallons, Sage in its blossom, prime, and chief
signature, twelve pound, macerate them for three days, and then Distill as long
as goodness comes; Then take six or eight pound of fresh Sage, and Distill as
before: and with fresh Sage six pound repeat a third time, carefully preserving
the first Gallon that comes; and what comes more you may reserve for another
Operation, to use instead of Brandy.

Its Virtues. It Is one of the greatest friends that the Female Sex have,
amongst all the single Concretes in the Vegetable Kingdom; for it is prevalent
in opening of all Obstructions, it cleanses the Blood, provokes the Menses,
closes the Matrix, and makes them Fruitful; and very excellent, when with
Child, to keep them from miscarriage: Its general Virtues are for quickening the
Senses and memory, strengthening the Sinews and Nerves: and therefore good in
Apoplexies, Palsies, and Convulsions; nay, should we be particular in every
point of its Virtues, we might fill a whole sheet therewith: This Spirit makes
Excellent Sage Beer or Wine, an ounce thereof being put into a quart of either.
But when you take the Spirit alone in drops, the dose is from twenty to sixty,
according to the Age and Strength of the Patient, in a Glass of either.

Spiritus Cochleariae, or, the Spirit of Scurvey-Grass.
Take of Scurvey-Grass, in June or July, Herbs, Flowers, and all; bruise it
well in a large Marble Mortar, and put to every Peck one Pound of Honey, and a
little Bay Salt, and let them Ferment two or three days in a cold Cellar; for
in a warm place much of their Crasis will be lost; which consists in a Volatile
Salt, then cram these into your Still as close as ever you can, and pour upon
them of the best Ethereal Spirit of Wine, enough only to moisten them; clap on
your Still, and Distill all with a very slow fire; it cannot be too gentle,
therefore in this be very careful; and what comes over first will be the true
Spirit of Scurvey-Grass, you may proceed by a second Repetition, and then to
every Gallon of this Spirit add a pound of its own Seeds or Flowers, and
Distill again: And be sure in these Operations you observe to take no more than
the high Spirit. Now for the remaining Spirit in the Still, you must put to it
a quantity of decripitated Bay Salt, and Distill as long as it comes Proof;
with which you may begin your next Distillation with fresh Scurvey-Grass,
proceeding as before. This is the true and best way, to prepare the right
Spirit of Scurvey-Grass. To make it Golden and Purging, we referr you to our
Clymicus Rationalis.

Its Virties. It Is proper in the Scurvey, Dropsy or Jaundice, etc. which we
shall not here repeat, seeing we have spoken thereof in its proper and genuine
Preparation, so that of Powers. The Dose is from thirty to Fifty Drops
according to the Age and strength of the Patient.

Spiritus Lavandulae, or, Spirit of Lavander.
Take of Brandified Spirit three Gallons, of Lavander Flowers twelve pound; Oil
of Salt per deliquium two pound, macerate in a gentle warmth ten or twelve
days, then Distill in Bal. as long as goodness comes, in which macerate one
pound of the Oil of Salt per del. and eight pound of fresh Flowers, and
Distill, as before: Lastly Rectify from six pound of Flowers per se, and so it
is prepared.

Its Virtues. It Is excellent for all Diseases of the Head, as, Megrims,
Epilepsies, Convulsions and Calentures, as also for violent and inveterated
Head-Achs, here it is a Specific; it is prevalent in fortifying the Animal
Spirits, and good in the Cholick, Strangury, and Dysentery, the over much
Flowing of Women's Terms, and all other Fluxes of Blood. The Dose and manner of
Administration is as the former.

Observe, after this way is prepared the Spirit of Rosemary, but seeing we have
at large showed its right and genuine Preparation in Chapter the fourth,
together with its virtues and use, we shall omit it here.

Spiritus Angelicae, or, Spirit of Angelica.
Take of Angelica in its right signature, as much as you please, pound it in a
large Stone Mortar with a Wooden Pestil, and putting it into your Still, cover
it over a Fingers breadth with pure Brandified Spirit, and with a piece of
Leaven, let it macerate three or four days; then Distill as long as goodness
will come; repeat this a second time with fresh Herbs; then to every Gallon of
Spirit add of Spanish Angelica Roots sliced thin two pound, and rectify
therefrom; the fine Spirit you must reserve for use, and the other may serve
for a new beginning.

Its Virtues. It Is very prevalent against all Poison, and Infectious corrupted
Airs, the Pestilential Fever or Plague, it carries off the Venom by Sweat and
Urine, and insensible Transpiration; it comforts the Heart and Vital Spirits,
and therefore excellent to be used by such as are bitten with any Venomous or
Mad Beast whatsoever: it is powerful in opening the Obstructions of the Liver or
Spleen, bringing down the Terms, and expelling the Secundine. The Dose is from
one Scruple to three, in a Glass of Spanish or Rhenish Wine.

Spiritus Croci, or, Spirit of Saffron.
Take of the best English Saffron one pound, of Malaga Sack a Quart, Honey half
a pound, Chrystals of Tartar four ounces, let the Chrystals of Tartar be beat
very well with the Saffron in a Mortar; then put it into a Glass, and add in
your Honey and Wine; lute all fast, and in a gentle heat let them Ferment and
macerate ten, twelve, or fourteen days, the longer the better; then take off
the blind head, and add in three Quarts of the Sulphurated Spirit of Wine, put
on its Helm, with a proper recipient, being truly adapted, lute all fast, and
Distill in Balneo; the two first Quarts will be the true Spirit: Observe from
what remains with fresh Spirit of Wine, you may draw the Extract, which though
small in quantity, yet virtuous.

The Spirits Virtues. It Is an excellent Cordial, Fortifying the Vital, Natural,
and Animal Spirits; it is a great Preservative in time of Plague; it is beyond
all the cooling Cordials in England for Measles and Small Pox, for it
strengthens the Heart, it opens Obstructions and heals the Phthisick, it brings
breath when almost gone, and it is said to prolong Life; if you wash the Face
with it, mixed with Rose Water, in the time of Small Pox, and Measles, it
preserves the Face and Eyes from being hurt thereby: The Dose is from ten to
twenty, and from twenty to sixty Drops in some Cordial Julep, or Wine, as the
Patient best likes.

Spiritus Dauci, or, Spirit of Daucus.
Take of Wild Carrotseed twelve pound, beat them small, put them into your
Still, and add thereunto of the Sulphurated Spirit of Wine three Gallons, of
Mevis Sugar three pound, macerate them for ten or twelve days; and then Distill
off one half, the which preserve for Spirit; the other half may be run off for
fresh beginnings. You may if you please put it all together on fresh Seeds, and
make another Reiteration.

Its Virtues. It is a Carminative, breaking and consuming Windiness, good in
the Gripes and Cholick, Fits of the Mother, provoking the Terms: in fine, it is
good in the Strangury, Dysury, Gravel and Stone, and provokes Urine. The Dose
is from thirty to sixty Drops, proper at all times for such as are subject to
the forementioned Diseases, but principally when mostly therewith assaulted.

Thus (Reader) have we laid you down examples sufficient for the making of
simple Waters and Spirits, so that if you have but an ordinary Genius, you may
arrive to what you desire therein; and if you cannot attain to the Art of
Distillation by these plain rules and precepts contained in this Book, then do
we highly doubt, whether you will ever be able to attain it, but by Ocular
Demonstration; therefore our advice is that you should apply your self to some
honest Distiller, for you may learn more of him in six Weeks time, than in
years by your own Study and chargeable operations, and therefore count it a
considerable favor, if such an one will be thy Friend; yet have we done here
to our utmost to serve you, and according to our twenty years experience have
left nothing deficient, not so much as a tittle: If you proceed therein
Secundum Artem Distillationis, which is impossible to be delivered in writing,
Experience must be the chief Mistress herein, and as you proceed so, we doubt
not of prizing our Labors, which are committed to the World for the benefit of
such as are groaping, as we may say at Noon day for satisfaction therein; but
here if you clear your sight, you will discern a small Lamp burning, by the
which you may open the Chest to the choicest Mysteries thereof.

I have described all the necessary Stills and Furnaces in their several
Figures, so that we shall now proceed to the next Chapter, in which will be
laid down all the necessary Waters, that will fully supply the Distiller with
what may be desired of him for public Sale.

CHAP. III.
In which we shall give you the Composition and way of preparing of Aqua Vitae,
and other rich Cordial Waters, in their greater and lesser Pondus, stated from
the greatest Authority of Art.

THE Receipts here prescribed derive their Foundation from the best Masters in
Europe, sc. German, Dutch and English, etc. that have Master-like treated
hereof; so that we have been at no small pains, to compare and then compute
their differences, thence taking such a M^dium, as that the subsequent
prescriptions may well serve for either; nay, indeed much beter than some
others extant; for in the first place the exact quantity of the Spirit is
ment^oned, and in the second the just Pondus an^ quantity of all the
Ingredients, even to a Grain Now as to the first it is very convenient and
helpful to the young Practitioners in this Art, seeing they may be mistaken in
that general term, Ta^^ Proof Spirit what suffices; and so take either to^
much or too little, and thereby destroy the ha^monious distilling equipment A
Philosophical Alimbeck invented by the Author wherein you may obtain Oil,
Spirit and Phlegm at one time and a Spirit so Etheriall as to Fire Gun powder.
A bolt head for a Receiver

AA the Ash hole B the Fire place C C the body of ye Alimbe^^ d d the Flews of
the Furnace e A pipe to fill ye still ff the joint G the Head for Fleg^ and
Oil, H the joining of the Rpe to the Receiver I the Receiver h h ii the Coolor
to Refrigerate ye Spirits K the pipe through which. ye Spirits Ascend NN the Helm
for their Condensation


Place this Figure before Chap III in page 59.

flavours of their Waters: so is also the second, for many Grains in a
Composition, where various things are named, will amount to Scruples and
Drachms, and so make a considerable alteration, especially in such as are
prescribed for Physical uses; in the which we ought to be very cautious, that
so their virtues may answer the Prescriber's end. Now having given you to
understand the reason, why we have stuck so close to this Method, sc. for its
exactness, from whence superiority proceeds; what remains, as convenient to be
treated of in this place, is only to mention the Measures, and then go on to
the Receipts themselves: As to the Measures, the Dutch use Cans, Stopes, Small
Cans, Pints, Half-pints and Muddikeys: The English Cans, Gallons, Quarts,
Pints, Half-pints, and Quarter-pints; the Dutch-Can is six Stopes, and three
Stopes are exactly two English Gallons, so that their Quarts, Pints,
Half-pints, and Quarters are abundantly bigger than the English; but finding
the English Can generally to be four Gallons, which exactly make six Stopes,
which is the same with the English Can, we shall divide our measure thus, into
Cans, Half Cans, and Quarter-Cans; which is to be understood four Gallons, two
Gallons, and one Gallon; this the English may compute by their Gallons, and the
Dutch by their Cans; so that neither need to be in any Labyrinth. Now by the
way you are to observe, that in the following common Waters, that a Tun of
Proof Spirits will make near a Tun and a half thereof. That is, by help of the
sweets and allays.

Aqua Vitae.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of Strong Proof Spirit four Cans or sixteen Gallons, Aniseeds
bruised one pound eight ounces, three drachms, twelve Grains, and adding a Can
of Water as advised in Rectification, Distill into fine goods, or as long as it
comes pleasant: If it should be above Proof you may allay it, the way how will
be shown hereafter.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three Gallons, or of a Can, Aniseeds bruised four
ounces, four drachms; and Distill into fine goods, as before directed, S. A.

Aqua Vitae. A second Prescription,
and Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen Gallons, Aniseeds two pound,
Caraway Seeds, Coriander seeds, ana. four ounces; distill into sine goods S. A.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit three Gallons, Aniseeds nine ounces, six drachms,
Caraway Seeds, Coriander Seeds, ana. one ounce, one dram; distill them into
fine goods, S. A.

Y-worth. It Is the manner of the Dutch to color these Aqua Vitae's with
Alkanet Root, or Turnsole, which is Linen Rags died Red; their manner is thus:
They take a quart of Aqua Vitae, and of either of these four ounces, Musk and
Ambergreese, ana. grains fourteen or sixteen, or more or less, as they will
have it in strength; they stop it close in a Bottle, setting it in a gentle.
Warmth, and then draw off the Tincture, the which, when cold, they add in such
quantity to their Aqua Vitae's, as they would have them in height of Color.
But the London Distiller uses Gilly-Flowers, Roses, Poppy, Sanders, or any of
them severally, what suffices, and infuses them in Aqua Vitae, or Proof
Spirit, till the Tincture be drawn out; then decants the Spirit, and reserves
it (close stopped) for use; which is to tinge or color your Aqua Vitae's upon
occasion; the proportion may be about eight ounces to one Gallon, or what more
or less you think sufficient to answer your expectation: If you add in a little
fine Sugar, 'twill not be amiss.

Its Virtues. It Is an excellent Carminative, for two or three spoonfuls being
drank will expel Wind in the Bowels or any other parts of the Body; a
spoonful thereof being taken in any Paroxism with as much Water, relieves or
helps the Patient; being also very proper for such as are weak and faint,
through obstructions to be taken Mornings.

Aqua Vitae aurea secundum Glauber: or, Glauber's Goulden Aqua Vitae.
Composition the least.
Take of high Proof Spirit, drawn from the aurified Salt, spoken of in the
Chapter of Rectification, one Gallon, to which add Flowers of the Lily of the
Valley twelve ounces, red Roses, Cinnamon, Mace, Cardamums, Burrage, Rosemary,
Sage, Lavender, ana. half a pound, Ambergreese and Musk, ana. two, three or
four scruples, let all these Flowers be fresh gathered, and being in the Vessel
with the dried Spices, let them macerate for ten or twelve days, then distill:
If you cannot get fresh Flowers, you must even content your self with dried
ones; but the fresh gathered would be better, if they can be had.

Y-worth. This is an incomparable Aqua Vitae, and may safely be used in all
sickness of the Body whatsoever, and most profitable where the vital Spirits,
Heart and Brain want to be strengthened. The Dose is from half a spoonful to
two spoonfuls at most, as occasion requires. And this being taken in case of
necessity, or as some illness presents, you may easily discern how far its
virtues surpass other Aqua Vitae's.

Aqua Anisi, or, Aniseed Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirit sixteen Gallons, Aniseeds bruised seven
pound, eight ounces, seven drachms, eight grains, distill into strong Proof
Spirit, and then dulcifie with white Sugar seven pound, eight ounces, seven
drachms, eight grains, S. A. [Addition] of Aniseeds and white Sugar, ana. seven
pound, eight ounces, seven drachms, eight grains, or what is sufficient to
answer your end, as you will have it stronger or weaker of the Seeds and Sugar.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three Gallons, Aniseeds bruised one pound, and a
half, then distill into strong Proof Spirit, and dulcifie it with white Sugar
one pound, and a half, [Addition] Aniseeds, white Sugar, ana. one pound, and a
half.

Y-worth. This is an excellent Water to strengthen the Stomach, Breaking,
Cutting and Expectorating tough Phlegm, helping the digestive Faculty, giving
ease and strengthening in the Phthisick or shortness of Breath; it abates wind
in the Stomach, Bowels and other parts of the Body; and therefore proper for
such as give suck, to be taken to the quantity of half an ounce, to prevent
Wind, which sucking Children are so subject to.

Aqua Angelicae, or, Angelica Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of high Proof Spirit sixteen Gallons, Angelica Roots two pound
six ounces, and a Qr. or Angelica Herb green, eleven pound and a half, Aniseeds
one pound, nine ounces, six drachms, slice the roots thin, or bruise them and
the Seeds; then distill into fine Goods, and dulcifie with white Sugar eight
pound. [Addition] Caraway Seeds, Coriander Seeds, ana. four ounces, six drachms
and a half, Calamus Aromaticus, Zedoary, ana. six ounces and a half, Aniseeds,
Cassi, Lignea, ana. half a pound, four ounces and a half, Angelica Root, twelve
ounces and a half, or Herb Angelica three pound three ounces, one dram and a
half, white Sugar four pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit three Gallons, Angelica Roots six ounces, six
drachms, or Angelica Herb Green two pound, four ounces, Aniseeds four ounces,
seven drachms, slice the Roots thin, or bruise them and the Seeds; then Distill
into fine goods, and dulcifie with white Sugar a pound and a half. [Addition]
Carawayseeds, Coriander Seeds, ana. seven drachms and a half, Calamus
Aromaticus, Zedoary, ana. eleven drachms, fifteen Grains, Aniseeds, Cassia
Lignea, ana. two ounces, three drachms, thirty Grains, Angelica Roots two
ounces, three drachms, Grains thirty, or Herb Angelica nine ounces, four
drachms, Grains thirty, white Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. This is an excellent Cardiack, wonderfully strengthening the Heart,
Stomach, and inward parts; it is a great Counter-poison and Preservative against
the Plague, Measles, Smallpox, and other Pestilential and Infectious Diseases.
The Dose is from half an ounce, to an ounce.

Aqua Absinthii, or, Wormwood-Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen Gallons, Aniseeds bruised one
pound, eight ounces, three drachms, Grains twelve, Wormwood common, leaves and
Seeds, stripped and dry, three pound, six drachms, Grains twenty four; Distill
them into fine goods, S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar eight pound.
[Addition] Cinnamon, Cubebs, ana. six ounces, two scruples, Grains eight; sweet
Foenil-seeds, Aniseeds, ana. twelve ounces, three drachms, Grains six; Cloves,
Caraway seeds, Nutmegs, ana. four ounces and a half, two drachms Grains six;
Wormwood dry one pound, white Sugar, three pounds, twelve ounces.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three Gallons, Aniseeds bruised four ounces, seven
drachms, Wormwood common, Leaves and seeds, stripped and dry, ten ounces and a
half; Distill them into fine Goods, and dulcifie with white Sugar one pound and
a half. [Addition] Cinnamon, Cubebs, ana. one ounce, one dram, grains forty
five, sweet Foenil seeds, Aniseeds, ana. two ounces, three drachms, grains
thirty, Cloves, Caraway seeds, Nutmegs, ana. seven drachms, grains thirty,
Wormwood dry three ounces, white Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. This Water stops Vomiting, and provokes a good Appetite; it consumes
and expells wind, and strengthens the Stomach; wonderfully fortifying such as
are of a cold and moist Nature, and Constitution; it diverts Melancholy, and
prevents many of those Vapors, which otherwise would ascend to the Head for
its disturbance; it eases Gripes, and destroys Worms. The Dose is the same
with Aniseed-Water.

Aqua Melissae, or, Bawm-Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirits sixteen Gallons, Bawm dry four pound,
twelve ounces, four drachms; Aniseeds one pound, nine ounces, five drachms;
Distill into fine Goods, and dulcifie with white Sugar eight pound. [Addition]
Garden Thyme, Pennyroyal, ana. five handfuls, Cardamums three ounces, grains
thirty; sweet Foenil seeds, Aniseeds, ana. twelve ounces, six drachms, grains
thirty; Bawm dry one pound, nine ounces, four drachms; Nutmeg, Ginger, Calamus
Aromaticus, Galingal, Cinnamon, ana. six ounces, three drachms, grains fifteen.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three Gallons, Bawm dry thirteen ounces and a
half, Aniseeds four ounces, seven drachms; Distill into fine Goods, and
dulcifie with white Sugar a pound and a half. [Addition] Garden Thyme,
Pennyroyal, ana. a small Pugil, Cardamums four ounces and a half; sweet
Foenil-seeds, Aniseeds, ana. two ounces, three drachms and a half; Bawm dry
four ounces and a half; Nutmeg, Ginger, Calamus Aromaticus, Galingal, Cinnamon,
ana. one ounce, one dram and a half, grains fifteen.

Y-worth. This is highly esteemed for Women's Diseases, especially in Hysteric
Passions, Vapors and Fits of the Mother; it shows its prevalency in comforting
Women in the difficulty of Travail, not only strengthening the Heart, whereby
they are enabled the better to bear their pain; but also promoring a more quick
and safe Delivery, in which Case the Dose may be one ounce or two.

Aqua Menthae, or, Mint Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of high Proof-Spirit sixteen gallons, Spearmint dry four
pound, twelve ounces, two drachms, grains five, Aniseeds best one pound, nine
ounces, five drachms; and Distill into strong Proof-Spirits, and then dulcifie
with white Sugar eight pound. [Addition] Spear-Mint dry, Aniseeds, ana. one
pound, twelve ounces, seven drachms, Calamus Aromaticus six ounces, three
drachms, grains fifteen, white Sugar four pound, four ounces.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof-Spirit three gallons Spear-Mint dry, four ounces, two
drachms, grains five, Aniseeds four ounces, seven drachms; Distill into fine
goods, and dulcifie with white Sugar one pound and a half. [Addition]
Spear-Mint dry, Aniseeds, ana. four ounces, seven drachms; Calamus Aromaticus,
one ounce, two drachms, one scruple, grains five, white Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. This Water is an excellent Cardiack, Lienick, Splenetick and
Stomachick, helping Concoction, and taking the Water off the Stomach; it
prevents sour belchings, and has a specific virtue against Vomitting; The
Dose is from three drachms to seven or eight.

Aqua Rosmarini, or, Rosemary Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Rosemary stripped and dry,
three pound, Aniseeds, one pound, nine ounces, five drachms; Distill into fine
goods, and then dulcifie with white Sugar, five pound. [Addition] Sweet Foenil
seeds, Cinnamon, ana. twelve ounces, six drachms and a half; Aniseeds, Rosemary
dry, ana. one pound, nine ounces, five drachms; Carawayseeds, three ounces, one
dram and a half, Spearmint dry, three handfuls, white Sugar four pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit, three gallons, Rosemary stripped and dry, nine
ounces, Aniseeds four ounces, seven drachms; Distill into fine goods, and then
dulcifie with white Sugar, half a pound. [Addition] Sweet Foenil seeds,
Cinnamon, ana. two ounces, three drachms and a half; Aniseeds, Rosemary dry,
ana. four ounces, seven drachms; Carawayseeds, four drachms and a half;
Spearmint dry, a competent quantity, white Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. Rosemary Water is an excellent Cephalic and Stomachick; for it
comforts the Brain, revives the Senses, easing violent pains of the head; it
strengthens the Stomach, and is good against the Diarrhoea, Dysentery or Irish
Flux, as also the Strangury, or difficulty of making Water: It may be safely
Administered these three ways, sc. one ounce and a half to be drunk, given in a
Clyster, or injected into the Yard.

Aqua Limoniarum aut Aurantiorum, Limon, or, Orange Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirits sixteen gallons, Limon or Orange Pills
dry, three pound, Aniseeds the best one pound, nine ounces, five drachms,
bruise the Pills and seeds, and then Distill into fine Spirit, and dulcifie
with white Sugar eight pound. [Addition] Caraway seeds six ounces, four
drachms, Aniseeds, Limon Pills dry, ana. one pound and a half, five drachms,
grains six, white Sugar four pound: In the like manner and quantity you may
make your Composition with Orange Pills dry.

Composition the lesser.
Take of good Proof Spirit three gallons, Limon or Orange Pills dry, nine
ounces, Aniseeds the best four ounces, eight drachms; bruise the Pills and
seeds, and then Distill into fine Spirit, Secundum Artem, dulcifie with white
Sugar one pound and a half. [Addition] Carawayseeds, one ounce, three drachms,
grains fifteen; Aniseeds, Limon Pills dry, ana. four ounces, seven drachms,
white Sugar twelve ounces: In the like manner, and quantity you may make your
Composition with Orange Pills dry.

Y-worth. This is a great strengthener of the Spirits, Natural, Vital and
Animal, and by its fragrancy is very refreshing to the Stomach, breaking away
wind; it is also a good Cordial restorative, opening Obstructions, and, being
endued with a Balsamic Virtue, heals inward defects. The Dose is from three
drachms, to six.

Aqua Majoranae, or, Marjoram Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons; sweet Marjoram dry,
four pound, thirteen ounces; Aniseeds, one pound, nine ounces, five drachms;
Carawayseeds, six ounces, three drachms, grains fifteen; Calamus Aromaticus
nine ounces, five drachms; bruise them, and Distill into fine goods, then
dulcifie with white Sugar what is sufficient, Secundum Artem. [Addition]
Cinnamon eight ounces, Cloves three ounces, one dram and a half; Limon Pills
dry four ounces, six drachms and a half; Sugar four pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, sweet Marjoram dry, fifteen ounces;
Aniseeds, four ounces, seven drachms; Carawayseeds, one ounce, three drachms,
grains five; Calamus Aromaticus, one ^^nce, seven drachms; bruise them and
Distill into fine goods, S. A. and then dulcifie with white Sugar, one pound
and a half. [Addition] Cinnamon one ounce and a half; Cloves, four drachms and a
half; Limon Pills dry, seven drachms and a half Sugar, twelve ounces.

Y-worth. It Is good against the Infirmities of the Liver and Spleen, and
shortness of Breath; it is a great Corroborater and strengthner of the inward
parts. The Dose is from three drachms to six.

Aqua Meliphylli, or, Balsamint Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Balsamint dry, three
pound, three ounces, one dram and a half, Aniseeds best one pound and a half,
one ounce, five drachms, Carawayseeds six ounces, three drachms; Limon Pills
dry, twelve ounces, six drachms and a half; bruise them that are to be bruised,
and then Distill into strong Proof Spirit, and dulcifie with white Sugar eight
pound, S. A. [Addition] Sweet Foenil, Cinnamon, ana. eight ounces, Nutmegs,
four ounces, six drachms and a half, Sugar four pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of good Proof Spirit three gallons, Balsamint dry, nine ounces, four
drachms and a half; Aniseeds best four ounces, seven drach^^, Carawayseeds one
ounce, one dram, Limon Pills dry, two ounces, three drachms and a half;
bruise them that are to be bruised, and then Distill into strong Proof Spirits,
and dulcifie with white Sugar, one pound and a half, S. A. [Addition] Sweet
Foenil, Cinnamon, ana. one ounce and a half, Nutmegs seven drachms and a half,
Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. This is a good Stomachick and Carminative. The Dose six or eight
drachms.

Aqua Caryophyllorum, or, Clove Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of high Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Cloves one pound,
Aniseeds one pound, nine ounces, five drachms, Distill into fine goods, and
then dulcifie with white Sugar, eight pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit three gallons, Cloves three ounces, Aniseeds four
ounces, seven drachms; Distill into fine goods, and then dulcifie with white
Sugar one pound and a half.

Y-worth. This Water is esteemed very good for helping Digestion, breaking
Wind, opening the Urinary passage and provoking Urine; for fortifying the Vital
Spirits, and the Heart, the fountain thereof. The Dose is from two, to four
drachms.

Aqua Cinnamomi Communis, or, Cinnamon Water Common.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Cinnamon the best,
eight pound, Aniseeds, one pound; Distill into fine goods, and then dulcifie
with white Sugar twelve pound, S. A.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Cinnamon the best one pound and a
half, Aniseeds three ounces; Distill into fine goods, and then dulcifie with
white Sugar, two pound, four ounces.

Aqua Cinnamomi Propria, or, Cinnamon Water Proper.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Cinnamon the best, and
large, sixteen pound; Distill into fine goods: Then take white Sugar twenty
pound, Rosewater six pound, six ounces, three drachms, make them into a Syrup,
and dulcifie therewith, S. A. [Addition] Musk and Ambergreese, ana. two
scruples, grains eight, white Sugar Candy instead of common white Sugar qu.
sat. e. S. A.

Composition the lesser.
Take of good Proof Spirit three gallons, Cinnamon the best and large, three
pound; Distill into fine goods: Then take white Sugar, three pound, thirteen
ounces, Rosewater one pound, three ounces, one dram, make them into a Syrup,
and dulcifie therewith, S. A. [Addition] Musk and Ambergreese, ana. grains
nine, white Sugar Candy instead of common white Sugar, qu. sat. S. A.

Observe, In respect that Musk for some causes may give offense to the
receiver; it is requisite to omit the use thereof in some of your Water of this
kind, to serve for such particular uses.

Aqua Cinnamomi Nostra, or, Our Cinnamon Water.
Y-worth. Take of our Spiritus Vini Sulphurat. one gallon, (for when you make
such rich Cordial Waters, it is best to make use of such Brandified Spirits, as
the Spirit of Malt, or any other, bereaved of their ill Tang and Hogo, and then
impregnated with an Azural Salt and Sulphur of a Vinor Nature) of the best
Cinnamon in small powder, one pound, four ounces, Sugar half a pound, Chrystals
of Tartar, four ounces; let them infuse therein ten days, or the longer the
better, and then Distill into High Proof Spirits; and thus have you the true
Spirit of Cinnamon, most proper for any Physical use whatever: But to allay it
into a Cordial Water, you must proceed thus.

Take of fresh Cinnamon half a pound, Spring Water three Quarts, put them into
your Alembick with its Refrigeratory, and Distill over; and what Oil comes will
sink to the bottom, the which you may separate; and then to every Quart of this
water add of Loaf Sugar one pound, and over a gentle warmth dissolve it; and so
with this you may allay your Spirit to Proof, or what height you please.

Its Virtues are excellent against Vomittings, weakness of the Stomach, and
stinking Breath; it is a good Cardiack, Pectoral, Lienick, and Splenetick;
comforting the Vital and Animal Spirits, giving strength even to the Brain and
Sinews. The Dose is according as dilated, the weaker, one ounce, the stronger
two or four drachms at the most. Aqua Seminum Foeniculi dulc. or, sweet Foenil
seed Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, sweet Foenil seeds,
eight pound, Carawayseeds six ounces, three drachms, Aniseeds one pound, nine
ounces, five drachms, Distill into fine goods, and then dulcifie with white
Sugar eight pound. [Addition] Sweet Foenil seeds eight pound, Caraway seeds six
ounces, three drachms, grains fifteen, Aniseeds one pound, nine ounces, five
drachms, Cinnamon twelve ounces, six drachms and a half, Cloves three ounces,
one dram and a half, Sugar four pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Sweet Foenil seeds one pound and a
half, Carawayseeds one ounce, one dram, Aniseeds four ounces, seven drachms;
Distill into fine goods, and then dulcifie with white Sugar one pound and a
half. [Addition] Sweet Foenil seeds one pound and a half, Carawayseeds one
ounce, three drachms, grains five, Aniseeds four ounces, seven drachms,
Cinnamon two ounces, three drachms and a half, Cloves four drachms and a half,
Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. This Water takes off Stomachick Loathings, and creates an Appetite,
strengthening the Tones, imbibing sharp humors, and expelling Wind. The Dose
is from half an ounce to an ounce and half.

Aqua Calendularum, or, Marigold Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Marigold Flowers new
gathered, picked clean, three pecks and a quarter; bruise them, sweet Foenil
seeds, Aniseeds, ana. one pound; Distill into fine goods, and dulcifie with
white Sugar eight pound. [Addition] Cinnamon, sweet Foenil, ana. half a pound,
Caraway, Cloves, ana. three ounces, one dram and a half, Marigolds three
pecks,, Sugar four pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Marigold Flowers, new gathered, and
picked clean, peck, or what more suffices; bruise them; sweet Foenil seeds,
Aniseeds, ana. three ounces; Distill into fine goods, and dulcifie with white
Sugar, one pound and a half. [Addition] Cinnamon, sweet Foenil, ana. one ounce,
four drachms, Caraway, Cloves, ana. four drachms and a half; Marigolds qu. s.
e. Sugar twelve ounces.

Y-worth. It Is a wonderful strengthner, and as great a Preserver against any
Infection whatsoever. The Dose is an ounce or two in the morning, especially
when contagious Diseases do reign.

Aqua Seminum Cariu, or, Caraway Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of high Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Caraway seeds three
pound, Aniseeds one pound, Rosemary dry six ounces, three drachms, Limon Pills
dry, Cloves, ana. four ounces, six drachms and a half, Distill into fine goods,
S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar eight pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit three gallons, Caraway seeds nine ounces, Aniseeds
three ounces, Rosemary dry one ounce, one dram; Limon Pills dry, Cloves, ana.
seven drachms and a half; Distill into fine goods, S. A. and then dulcifie with
white Sugar one pound and a half.

Y-worth. This Water has been found very good for such as have been oppressed
with cold and moist Stomachs, as also for such as have been subject to Wind in
the Bowels; for it warms, comforts, and strengthens. The Dose is from three to
six drachms.

Aqua Nucum Moschatarum, or, Nutmeg Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Nutmegs two pound,
Aniseeds one pound, bruise them, and Distill into fine goods, S. A. and then
dulcifie with white Sugar, eight pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Nutmegs six ounces, Aniseeds three
ounces, bruise them, and Distill into fine goods, S. A. and then dulcifie with
white Sugar one pound and a half.

Y-worth. This Water chears the Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal; it
sweetens the Breath, and is a good Carminative and Diuretic. The Dose is the
same with Caraway Water.

Aqua Lavendulae, or, Lavender Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of high Proof Spirit sixteen gallons; Lavender Leaves dry,
four pound, twelve ounces, six drachms and a half; Lavender Flowers dry, three
pound, three ounces, one dram and a half; Mace, twelve ounces, six drachms
and a half; Nutmegs one pound, nine ounces, five drachms; Lavender Cotton dry,
three pound, three ounces, one dram and a half; Staechados, twelve ounces,
six drachms and a half; bruise them that are to be bruised, and Distill into
Proof Spirit, S. A. dulcifie with white Sugar sixteen pound, or what less
suffices.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit three gallons, Lavender Leaves dry, fourteen ounces,
three drachms and a half; Lavender Flowers dry, nine ounces, four drachms and a
half; Mace, two ounces, three drachms and a half; Nutmegs, four ounces, seven
drachms; Lavender Cotton dry, nine ounces, four drachms and a half; Staechados,
two ounces, three drachms and a half; bruise them that are to be bruised, and
Distill into Proof Spirit, S. A. Dulcifie with white Sugar three pound.

Aqua Lavendulae Composita, or, Lavender Water Compound
Distiller. Take Flowers of Lavender, Lily of the Valley, ana. twenty four
handfuls; Piony, Tillia, Flowers of Rosemary, ana. half an handful; Sage,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Cubebs, Galingal, Calamus Aromaticus, Mace, Misseltoe
of the Oak, ana. one dram and a half; Piony Roots, one ounce and a half; of
the best Wine what suffices; Infuse them in the Wine two days, and then
Distill in Bal. Mariae.

Y-worth. It Is good for such, as have the Mercurial Property abounding, and are
troubled with dullness of Spirit, as also against Faling-sickness, Convulsion
Fitts, and Infirmities of the Brain. The Dose is from one to three drachms.

Observe, Here is no quantity of Spirits given, because the Distillers have a
usual way in this thing to go by their own Experience; that is, they will make
them no richer of the Herbs, Seeds, and Spices, than as they will answer their
cost in the Sale; therefore they sometimes put two or three Cans more, than we
prescribe; nay, and omit one half of the Ingredients; only observing, that
according as the Water is called, to let that Herb, Seed, or Fruit, to have the
predominance of the flavours; so that they go more by Custom than by Book; but
for our part we don't in all things approve of this, for we love true
Prescriptions, though the Waters be something thing the dearer, and so to unite
sound Theory and Practice together.

Aqua Salviae, or, Sage Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons; great Sage dry, four
pound, twelve ounces, six drachms and a half; Red Sage dry, three pound, three
ounces, one dram and a half; Lavender Flowers, Sage Flowers, ana. one pound,
nine ounces, five drachms; Lavender Cotton dry, Southern-wood dry, ana. twelve
ounces, six drachms and a half; Nutmegs one pound; bruise or beat them, as is
most proper, and then Distill into fine goods, S. A. and dulcifie with white
Sugar sixteen pound, or what suffices.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons; great Sage dry, fourteen ounces,
three drachms and a half; Red Sage dry, nine ounces, four drachms and a half;
Lavender Flowers, Sage Flowers, ana. four ounces, five drachms; Lavender Cotton
dry, Southern-wood dry, ana. two ounces, three drachms and a half; Nutmegs one
ounce; bruise or beat them, as is most proper, and then Distill into fine
goods, S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar three pound.

Aqua Salviae Composita, or, Sage Water Compound.
Distiller. Take Sage, Marjoram, Thyme, Lavender, Epithymum, Bettony, ana. one
ounce, Cinnamon, half an ounce; lreos, Roots of Cyprus, Calamus Aromaticus, ana.
one ounce; Storax, Benjamin, ana. one dram and a half; infuse them four days,
in four pound of Spirit of Wine, and then Distill in Balneo.

Y-worth. It Is good for such as are cold and Phlegmatic, to revive the
Spirits, and fortify the digestive faculty, as also against oppressive
Vapors, that disturb the Microcosm. The Dose is from two drachms to an ounce.

Aqua Caryophillatorum, or, Avens Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirit, sixteen gallons; Avens Roots, six pound,
six ounces, three drachms, grains five; Orrice Roots, Nutmegs, Yellow Sanders,
Mace, ana. three ounces, one dram and a half; Lignum Rhodium, Saffron,
Storax, Benjamin, ana. one ounce and a half, grains fifteen; Angelica Roots
four ounces, six drachms and a half; Limon Pills Green, twelve ounces, six
drachms and a half; sweet Foenil-seeds, Aniseed, ana. one pound, nine ounces,
five drachms; Cloves, two ounces; Roman Wormwood, Mint dry, ana. four handfuls
and a half; Red Roses, Staechas Flowers, ana. six handfuls and a half; sweet
Marjoram, Balm, Burnet, Thyme, all dry, ana. nine handfuls and a half; Alkermes
Berries, three ounces, one dram and a half; bruise them all that are to be
bruised; and Distill into Proof Spirit; S. A. and then dulcifie with Syrups
thus made: Take Rosewater, six pound, six ounces, three drachms, grains
fifteen; white Sugar sixteen pound; boil it to a Syrup hight, then strain it,
and put it on the Fire again, adding thereto Confection of Alkermes, six
ounces, three drachms and a half; Syrup of Gilly-Flowers, one pound, nine
ounces, five drachms; Ambergreese (dissolved in Rosewater) four scruples,
grains sixteen, let these boil a little, till they be incorporated with the
Syrup, and so keep it for use.

Composition the lesser.
Take of good Proof Spirit three gallons, Avens Roots, one pound, three ounces,
one dram, two scruples, grains five; O^rice Roots, Nutmeg, Yellow Sanders,
Mace, ana. four drachms and a half; Lignum Rhodium, Saffron, Storax, Benjamin,
ana. two drachms, grains fifteen; Angelica Roots, seven drachms and a half;
Limon Pills green, two ounces, three drachms and a half; sweet Foenilseeds,
Aniseeds, ana. four ounces, six drachms; Cloves, three drachms; Roman Wormwood,
Mint dry, ana. q. s. Red Roses, Staechas Flowers, ana. q. s. e. sweet Majoram,
Balm, Burnet, Thyme, all dry, ana. q. s. e. Alkermes Berries, four drachms and
a half; bruise them all that are to be bruised, and Distill into Proof Spirit,
S. A. and then dulcifie with Syrups thus made: Take Rose water one pound, three
ounces, one dram, two scruples, grains fifteen; white Sugar, three pound;
boil it to a Syrup hight, then strain it, and put it on the Fire again, adding
thereunto Confection of Alkermes, one ounce, two drachms, one scruple, grains
ten; Syrup of Gilliflowers, four ounces, seven drachms; Ambergreese (Dissolved
in Rose Water) grains eighteen, let these boil a little, till they be
incorporated with the Syrup, and so keep it for use.

Y-worth. This water is a very great Cordial, Exhilarating the Spirits,
strengthening and comforting all the inward parts; it not only preserves against
the Consumption, but also strengthens and revives those that are in it. The
Dose is from one to six scruples, according to the age and strength of the
Patient.

Rosa Solis.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons; Cinnamon the best,
twelve ounces, six drachms and a half; Cloves, three ounces, one dram and a
half; Nutmegs, Ginger, Cara-way seeds, ana. six ounces, three drachms;
Marigold-flowers, Aniseeds, ana. one pound, nine ounces, five drachms; bruise
them, and Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A. Then add to the Distilled
Water, Liquorice Spanish, one pound, nine ounces, five drachms; Raisins of the
Sun, brown Sugar, ana. eight pound; Red Sanders, six ounces, three drachms;
bruise the Liquorice, and Raisins, stir them well together, and let them stand
twelve days, then being clear it may be drawn for use.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Cinnamon the best, two ounces, three
drachms and a half; Cloves, four drachms and a half; Nutmegs, Ginger,
Caraway-seeds, ana. one ounce, one dram; Marigolds, Aniseeds, ana. four
ounces, seven drachms; bruise them, and Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A.
Then add to the Distilled Water, Liquorice Spanish, four ounces, seven drachms;
Raisins of the Sun, brown Sugar, ana. one pound and a half; Red Sanders, one
ounce, one dram; bruise the Liquorice and Rasins, stir them well together,
and let them stand twelve days, then being clear it may be drawn for use.
[Addition] Add to the Spirit half as much as the rule of every particular
Ingredient therein expressed: And instead of Sanders, give it the Tincture of
Roses, Gilliflowers, or Poppies, S. A.

Y-worth. It Is esteemed an excellent Water for strengthening the Stomach,
expelling Wind, and fortifying the Sanguifying Faculty. The Dose is half an
ounce.

Ros Solis Proprius.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of high Proof Spirit, sixteen gallons; Ros Solis gathered in
due season, and clean picked, six pound, six ounces, three drachms, two
scruples, grains five; Juniper Berries, four pound, twelve ounces, six drachms
and a half; Sassafras rooted with the Bark; Caraway-seeds, ana. six ounces,
three drachms, two scruples, grains five; Marigold-Flowers, one pound, nine
ounces, five drachms; Aniseeds, two pound, six ounces, three drachms and a
half; bruise them that are to be bruised, and Distill into fine Goods, S. A.
Then take hereof ten pound, three ounces; add thereto of Aqua Pretiosa,
dulcified, one pound, nine ounces, five drachms; Liquorice bruised, one pound,
nine ounces, five drachms; and then dulcifie with white Sugar, sixteen pound:
If you add none of the aforesaid Water, then instead thereof, take Musk, one
dram and a half, grains six; Ambergreese, four drachms and a half, grains
eight; color it with the Tincture of Gilliflowers and Roses, what is
sufficient, S. A.

Composition the lesser.
Take of high Proof Spirit three gallons, Ros Solis, gathered in due season,
and clean picked, one pound, three ounces, one dram, two scruples, grains
five; Juniper Berries, fourteen ounces, three drachms and a half: Sassafras
rooted with the Bark; Caraway-seeds, ana. nine drachms, two scruples, grains
five; Marigold-Flowers, four ounces, seven drachms; Aniseeds, seven ounces, two
drachms and a half; bruise them that are to be bruised, and Distill into fine
goods, S. A. Then take hereof, one pound, twelve ounces, four drachms and a
half; add thereunto of Aqua Pretiosa, four ounces, three drachms, dulcified;
Liquorice bruised, four ounces, three drachms; dulcifie with white Sugar, what
suffices: If you add none of the aforesaid Water, then take instead thereof
Musk, grains eighteen; Ambergreese, grains twenty four; color it with the
Tincture of Roses, or Gilliflowers, what suffices, S. A.

Y-worth. This carries with it all the Virtues of the former; being also
powerful in opening Obstructions, relieving decayed Natures, and giving help in
the Falling sickness. The Dose is from two to six drachms.

Aqua Stomachica minor, or, Stomach Water the lesser.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of good Proof Spirit sixteen gallons; spearmints dry, Lovage
Roots dry, Aniseeds, ana. one pound, nine ounces, six drachms; Calamus
Aromaticus, Ginger, sweet Foenil-seeds, Imperatoria Roots, Wormwood dry and
stripped, ana. twelve ounces, seven drachms, two scruples; Caraway and
Coriander-seeds, ana. nine ounces, five drachms; Cummin-seeds, Cloves, ana.
four ounces, six drachms and a half; bruise them that are to be bruised; and
then Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar,
eight pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of good Proof Spirit three gallons, Spearmints dry, Lovage Roots dry,
Aniseeds, four ounces, seven drachms; Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, sweet
Foenil-seeds, Imperatoria Roots, Wormwood dry and stripped, ana. two ounces, five
drachms; Caraway and Coriander-seeds, ana. one ounce, seven drachms;
Cummin-seeds, Cloves, ana. seven drachms and a half; bruise them that are to be
bruised; and then Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A. and dulcifie with
white Sugar one pound and a half.

Aqua Stomachica major, or, Stomach Water the greater.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons; Calamus Aromaticus,
nine ounces, five drachms; Guajacum green Bark, Avens Roots dry, Galingal, ana.
six ounces and a half; Citron Pills dry, Orange Pills dry, white Cinnamon, ana.
four ounces, seven drachms, grains fifteen; Wormwood common dry, Wormwood Roman
dry, Spearmint, Rosemary tops, Costmary, Sweet Marjoram, wild Thyme, all dry,
ana. three ounces, one dram and a half; Nutmegs, Cinnamon, ana. four ounces,
four drachms; Cubebs, Cardamums, ana. two ounces, three drachms, grains
fifteen; Sweet Foenil-seeds, Coriander-seeds, ana. eight ounces; Aniseeds two
pound, six ounces, three drachms; bruise all that are to be bruised; and then
Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar, sixteen
pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three Gallons; Calamus Aromaticus one ounce, seven
drachms; Guajacum green Bark, Avens Roots dry, Galingal, ana. twelve ounces;
Citron Pills dry, Orange Pills dry, white Cinnamon, ana. one ounce, one dram,
two scruples, grains five; Wormwood common dry, Wormwood Roman dry, Spearmint,
Rosemary tops, Costmary, sweet Marjoram, wild Thyme, all dry, ana. four drachms
and a half; Nutmeg, Cinnamon, ana. six drachms; Cubebs, Cardamoms, ana. three
drachms, two scruples, grains five; sweet Foenil-seeds, Coriander-seeds, ana.
one ounce and a half; Aniseeds, six ounces, one dram; bruise those that are
to be bruised; and then Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A. and dulcifie
with white Sugar, three pound.

Aqua Stomachica Nostra, or, Our Stomach Water.
Y-worth. Take, Spirit. Vini Sulphurat. mentioned in the Chapter of
Rectification, ten gallons; of Gascoigne Wine, one gallon; mix them together,
and digest in the Still with a gentle warmth twenty four hours; then add in of
Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, grains of Paradise, Cloves ana. four ounces;
Aniseeds, sweet Foenil-seeds, Carawary-seeds, Hearts-Ease, ana. eight ounces;
Sage, Mint, Red Roses, the Flowers of the Lily of the Valley, ana. ten ounces;
Thyme, Pelitory, Camomil, Lavender, Avens, ana. four large handfuls; Spanish
Angelica Roots, Zedoary, Snake Root, ana. five ounces; Musk and Ambergreese,
ana. five scruples; put on the head, and lute all close, and let them remain
with a gentle warmth, twenty four hours more; and then Distill into high Proof
Spirit, S. A. To every gallon of this add ten ounces of our Potestates
Rosmarini, and a pound and a half, of the Syrup of Rasberies, or Black
Cherries, and let it refine, S. A.

Its Virtues. It Is a great Preservative against all Pestilential and Infectious
Diseases, powerfully corroborating and strengthening the Stomach; being endued
with such salutiferous Virtues, as that it will really perform as much as any
other Stomachick what ever. The Dose is from two, to four drachms.

Usquebaugh.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit, sixteen gallons; Aniseeds, one pound,
nine ounces, five drachms; Cloves, three ounces, one dram and a half;
Nutmegs, Ginger, Caraway-seeds, ana. six ounces, three drachms; Distill into
strong Proof Spirit, S. A. Then add to the Distilled Water, Liquorice Spanish,
Raisins of the Sun, ana. three pound, three ounces, one dram and a half;
bruise the Liquorice and Raisins, and then dulcifie with brown Sugar, eight
pound; stir them well together, and so let it stand ten days, and then (being
fine) draw off, and keep it for use.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons; Aniseeds, four ounces, seven
drachms; Cloves four drachms and a half; Nutmegs, Ginger, Caraway-seeds, ana.
one ounce, one dram; Distill into strong Proof Spirit, S. A. Then add to the
Distilled Water Liquorice Spanish, Raisins of the Sun, ana. nine ounces, four
drachms and a half; bruise the Liquorice and Raisins, and then dulcifie with
brown Sugar one pound and a half; stir them well together, and so let it stand
ten days; and (then being fine) draw it off, and keep it for use.

Irish Vsquebaugh.
Y-worth. Take of strong Canary Sack a Quart, the best Tent one Pint, Aqua
Vitae, one gallon; put them into a Glass Vessel, adding thereunto Raisins of
the Sun, choice and stoned, two pound; Dates stoned, and the white skin thereof
pulled out, two ounces; Cinnamon grossly powdered, two ounces, four good Nutmegs
bruised, of the best English Liquorice sliced and bruised, one ounce; stop the
Vessel very close, and let them infuse in a cold place six or eight days; then
let the Liquor run through a bag (called Manica Hypocratis) made of white
Cotton.

Vsquebaugh Royal.
Y-worth. Take of Aqua Vitae Glauberis; three gallons; Muskadine one gallon;
Raisins of the Sun stoned, seven pound, Figs one pound and a half; Dates
stoned, and the white skins pulled off, seven ounces; Cinnamon eight ounces;
Nutmegs three ounces; Cloves, broad Mace, ana. one ounce; English Liquorice,
twelve ounces; let them infuse in a cold place for twenty days, in a Vessel
close stopped; and then let them run through an Hypocrates Sleeve: Bottle it up
carefully, adding thereunto of the Syrup of Quinces, and Syrup of Limons, ana.
four ounces; of the well tinged Powers of Saffron, two ounces; let it refine it
self, and keep it close stopped. [Addition] Powers of Musk and Ambergreese,
Tincture of Pearl, ana. drops twenty: So does it become excellent, and vitally
fragrant.

This is a most famous and excellent Liquor fit indeed for such as its Name and
Superiority belongs unto; it is a most estimable Jewel for such as are inclined
to Melancholy, to drink now and then a quarter of a Spoonful thereof; it is so
great a Stomachick, that it helps the digestive faculties, prevalent in
Surfeits, and the defects of the Lungs, as Phthisick, Consumption, causing
expectoration; in brief it is equal to any Cordial Spirit whatever, for
fortifying the Natural, Vital and Animal Spirits. The Dose is from two, to six
spoonfuls at the most.

Aqua Bezoartica, or, Bezoar Water.
Prescription the first, Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of the Leaves and Root^ of Celandine, twenty one handfuls;
Rheu, six handfuls; Scordium, twelve handfuls; Dittany of Creet, Carduus
Benedictus, ana. nine handfuls; the Roots of Zedoary, Angelica, ana. two
ounces, two drachms; the inward Pill of Citron and Limon, ana. three ounces,
six drachms; Clove-Gilliflowers, eight ounces, four drachms; Red Roses, Centory
Flowers, the least, ana. one ounce, four drachms; let those be bruised, that
are to be bruised, and cut that are to be cut, and put them into the proper
Vessel, and pour on them of the best Spirit of Wine, and Malaga Wine, ana. ten
Quarts, one Pint; let them all steep three days, adding Vinegar of Cloves, and
Juice of Limons, ana. six pound; and let them be Distilled in Baln. in a large
Glass Cucurbit with its proper Helm, and Recipient. [Addition] Cinnamon, two
ounces, two drachms; Cloves, one ounce, seven drachms; Venice Treacle, two
ounces, two drachms; Camphire, four drachms; Troches of Vipers, three ounces;
Mace, one ounce and a half; the Wood of Aloes, six drachms; Yellow; Sanders,
one ounce, one dram, the seeds of Carduus Benedictus, six ounces; the Kernels
of Ci^rons, two ounces, two drachms; the Modus of its preparation is either to
digest these with the former, and Distill them over together at once, or else
after the first part is Distilled to add to the Liquor this addition, and
Distill a second time in B. M. with a most gentle Fire; and after you have
removed a third of the Aereal Spirit, you may Cohobate the rest two or three
times, to get the virtue of the Ingredients out; your Liquors you may add
together, and let it refine according to Art.

Composition the lesser.
Take of the Leaves of the great Celandine together with the Roots thereof,
three handfuls and a half, Rue two handfulls, Scordium four handfulls, Dittany
of Crete Cardius, ana. an handful and half, Roots of Zedoary and Angelica, ana.
three drachms, the outward Rind of Citrons and Limons, ana. six drachms, the
Flower of Wall Gilliflowers, one ounce and a half, Red Roses, the lesser
Century, ana. two drachms, Cloves, Cinnamon, ana. three drachms, Andromachus's
Treacle, three ounces, Mithridate, an ounce and half, Camphire, two scruples,
Trochies of Vipers, two ounces, Mace two drachms, Lignum Aloes, half an ounce,
Yellow Sanders, one dram and a half, the Seeds of Carduus, one ounce, the
seeds of Citron, six drachms; cut those things that are to be cut, and let them
be macerated three days in Spiritus Vini Glauberis, and Muskadine, ana. three
Pints and a half, Vinegar of Wall Gilliflowers, and the Juice of Limons, ana. a
Pint; let them be Distilled in the Glass Vessel, before described in B. Observe
that after something more than one half of the Liquor is Distilled off from
either of these two Compositions, then the remainder in the Vessel must be
strained through a Linen Cloth, and gently evaporated to the thickness of
Honey, which is called the Bezoar Extract.

Y-worth. We think it convenient to hang in the neck of the Alembick, Pearl
prepared, white Amber, ana. three ounces, Oriental Bezoar and Ambergreese,
ana. six scruples, and when the preparation is over, what remains may be added
to the Extract; then do both Spirit and Extract obtain a Nature something
agreeable to the name, and doubtless the Virtues are more powerful, being an
excellent Sudorifick, Alexipharmick and Antifebritick, and prevalent against
all Pestilential and infectious Diseases: it is not in vain said of it, that i^
resists Melancholy, and chears the Spirits, comforting such as are in a
languishing Nature or Consumptive; the Dose is from one dram, to an ounce, in
Scordium or Honey-Suckle-water, first in Mornings and last at Nights: but for
such as are afflicted with Fits let them take it in the time of the Paroxism.

Aqua Mathiae, or, Doctor Mathias his Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of Lavender Flowers three gallons, pour on them of the best
Spirit of Wine ten or twelve gallons, the Vessel being closely stopped, let
them macerate in a gentle heat, or in the Sun for the space of seven days, and
then Distill in an Alembick with its refrigeratory, and you have a Spirit of
Lavender, to which add Sage, Rosemary, Bettony, ana. three handfuls, Burrage,
Bugloss, Lilies of the Valley, Cowslips, ana. six handfuls; let the Flowers be
fresh and seasonably gathered, and macerated in a gallon of the best Spirit of
Wine, or rather Spiritus Vini Glauberis, and mix it with the aforesaid Spirit;
adding thereunto the Leaves of Bawm, Motherwort, Orange-Tree, newly gathered,
the Flowers of Staechados, Oranges, Bayberries, of each three ounces; and after
they are digested three days, let them be Distilled again; to which add of the
outward Rind of Citron, and the seeds of Peony, ana. two ounces, two drachms,
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cardamums, Cubebs, Yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes, of
each one ounce and a half, the best Jujubes the Kernels taken out, one pound
and a half; let them digest twenty one days, then strain the Liquor from the
drugs, to which add prepared Pearl, six ounces, prepared Emrald one dram,
Ambergreese, Musk, Saffron, Red Roses, Sanders, ana. three ounces; Yellow
Sanders, Rinds of Citrons dried, ana. three drachms let all these Species be
tied in a Silken bag, and hanged in the foresaid Spirit.

Composition the lesser.
Take of Lavender Flowers one gallon, Spirit of Wine three gallons, prepare it
as before directed; then take the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary Bettony, of each a
handful; Burrage, Bugloss, Lilly of the Valley, Cowslips, of each two
handfulls; the Flowers being truly gathered and macerated in a gallon of the
Spiritus Vini Glau^eris, must be added to the Spirit of Lavender as the former,
together with the Leaves of Bawm, Motherwort, Orange Tree, newly gathered, the
Flowers of Stechados, Oranges, Bayberries, of each an ounce; and so digest and
Distill as before directed; then add the outward Rinds of Citron, six drachms,
the seeds of Peony husked, six drachms; Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cardamums,
Cubebs, Yellow Sanders, of each half an ounce, Lignum Aloes one dram, the
best Jujubes, the Kernels taken out, half a pound: Digest and prepare as the
former; to which Liquor add of prepared Pearl, two drachms, prepared Emrald,
one scruple, Ambergreese, Musk, Saffron, Red Roses, Sanders, of each an ounce,
Yellow Sanders, Rinds of Citrons dried, of each a dram; let these Species be
tied in a Silken bag, and hanged in the foresaid Spirit. [Addition] The Essence
of Musk and Ambergreese, ana. Drops twenty, the Mel of Black-cherries, and of
Rasberries, ana. five ounces, the Syrup of Quinces, two ounces, so let it
refine S. A.

Y-worth. This is a most excellent Cordial, wonderfully strengthening the
principal faculties, good in Epilepsies, Convulsions, Palsies and all Diseases
of the Nerves; it is also excellent good to wash the wound bitten by any
Venomous Creature, or to bath any grieved part; the Dose inwardly, is from one
dram to three, either per se, or in Wine.

Aqua Scorbutica, or, French's Scorbutic Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of the Leaves of Garden and Sea Scurvey-grass, picked and
cleansed, of each eighteen pound, let them be bruised and the Juice pressed
forth, to which add the Juice of Brook-lime, Water cresses, of each one pound
and a half, of the best White Wind, three gallons; thirty six whole Limons cut,
of the fresh Roots of Briony, twelve pound, of the fresh Roots of
Horse-Raddish, six pound, of the Bark of Winteran, one pound and a half, of
Nutmegs, twelve ounces, let them be macerated three days and then Distilled.

Composition the lesser.
Take of the Leaves of Garden and Sea Scurvey-grass, picked and cleansed, of
each six pounds, let these be bruised and the Juice pressed forth; to which add
of the Juice of Brook-lime, Watercresses, of each half a pound, of the best
Whitewine eight Pints, twelve whole Limons cut, of the fresh Roots of Bryony
four pound, the fresh Roots of Horse-Raddish two pound, of the Bark of Winteran
half a pound, Nutmegs four ounces; let them be macerated three days, then
Distill: [Addition.] Syrup of Mustard two ounces, Syrup of Elder three ounces,
Tincture of Coral and Milk of Pearl, of each Drops forty, mix them S. A.

Y-worth. This is a most excellent Anti-scorbutick not only good in the Scurvy,
but also prevalent in the Jaundice and other refractary Diseases. The Dose is
from half an ounce to two ounces, first in a Morning and last at Night.

Aqua Aperitiva, or, a Carminative opening Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take Roots of Eringo, Vipers-Grass, Fern, the greater Centaury, of
each one ounce and a half, Roots of Foenil, Barks of Capparis, Tamarisk, Ash,
of each one ounce, one dram, Barks of Citrons, seven drachms and a half,
seeds of Carduus Benedictus, Cichorie, of each one ounce and a half, seeds of
Endive, Cresses, Citrons, Scariol, of each six drachms, Polytricon, Adianthum,
Ceterach, Dodder, Scolopendria, Bettony, Endive, of each four handfuls and an
half; tops of Thyme, Epithymum, Hops, Flowers of St. John's Wort, Broom,
Borage, Bawm, of each three handfuls, small Raisins, three ounces, Cinnamon
four drachms and a half; Spec. Dialacc. one dram and a half, Water of Carduus
Benedictus, Hops, Scolopendria, Paul's Bettony, of each three pound,
Rhenish-wine, seven pound and a half; let them stand two days in a warm place,
in a Vessel close stopped, afterward Distill them in Balneo.

Composition the lesser.
Take Roots of Eringo, Vipers-Grass, Fern, the greater Centaury, of each half
an ounce, Roots of Foenil, Barks of Capparis, Tamarisk, Ash, of each three
drachms, Bark of Citrons two drachms and a half, seeds of Carduus Benedictus,
Cichory, of each half an ounce; seeds of Endive, Cresses, Citrons, Scariol, of
each two drachms, Polytricon, Adianthum, Ceterach, Dodder, Scolopendria,
Bettony, Endive, of each a handful and a half; tops of Thyme, Epithymum, Hops,
Flowers St. John's Wort, Broom, Borrage, Bawm, of each one handful; small
Rasins, one ounce, Cinnamon, one dram and a half; Spec. Dialacc. half a
dram; Water of Carduus Benedictus, of Hops, of Scolopendria, of Paul's
Bettony, ana. one pound, Rhenish Wine, two pound and a half; let them stand two
days in a warm place, in a Vessel close stopped, afterward Distill them in
Balneo. [Addition] Aqua Vitae Glauberis, two pound; the Juice of Goose-berries,
two pound, or in place thereof Goose-berry Wine, made as prescribed in our
Brit. Magazine of Liquors; the Juice of Black-berries, half a pound, the Juice
of Buckthorn Berries, six ounces, Cinnamon and Nutmegs, ana. two ounces, Sugar
half a pound; let it be prepared Secundum Artem.

Y-worth. It Is a prevalent Water to open the Obstructions of the whole Body,
especially of the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery: The Dose is from two drachms, to
six or eight, two or three times a day.

Aqua Vulneraria, or, VVound Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take Plantain, Rib-wort, Bonewort, Wild Angelica, Red Mints,
Bettony, Agrimony, Sanicle, Blew-Bottles, White-Bottles, Scabius, Dandelion,
Avens, Honey-Suckle Leaves, Bramble buds, Haw-thorn buds and Leaves, Mugwort,
Daisie Roots, Leaves and Flowers, Wormwood, Southern-wood, of each four
handfuls; boil all these in two gallons of white wind, and as much Spring
water, till one half be wasted; and when it is thus boiled, strain it from the
Herbs, and put to it two pound of Honey, and let it boil a little after; then
divide this into two parts, the one part head with common ferment, and let it
ferment for three days, then add into every Quart thereof, a pound of Aqua
Vitae Glauberis, and Distill into high Proof Spirits, S. A. [Addition]
Cinnamon, Lignum Aloes, of each four ounces, Mirrh, Aloes and Saffron, of each
one ounce, then perfume and color, as in other precious Waters, and dulcifie
with Syrup of Cinnamon, and Syrup of Poppies, of each three ounces; and lastly,
add in of Laudanum Liquidum, four drachms, Tincture of Coral six drachms; let
it resin S. A.

Y-worth. It Is not only excellent for such as are wounded, but also for those
that are subject to internal bleedings; it mortifies the Corrosive, Acid, and
Saline juices, so sweetens and thickens the Blood; the Dose in such a case is,
from half an ounce, to an ounce and half, according to the Age, Strength and
Constitution of the Patient, every three hours; as also every two hours, for
three days together, for such as are subject to Vomitting of Blood. The first
Water made by decoction is very famous in curing Wounds, Impostumes and Ulcers;
such cures have been done by it that few may credit it; it first gives ease in
a very short time, and then perform the cures, if not so far declined, as that
the highest Specificks, will not prevail: For inward wounds you must take this
with the other; but this Mornings and Evenings, four or five spoonfuls at a
time, and that all times of the day. If the Wound be outward it must be washed
therewith, and Linen Clothes wet in the same be applied thereto. Note that the
Herbs herein contained must be gathered in their true Signature, as also in the
Month of May.

Aqua Mariae, or, the Ladies Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take Sugar Candid, four pound, Canary Wine, one pound and half;
Rosewater, one pound, boil them well into a Syrup to which add Aqua Caelestis,
eight pound, Ambergreese, Musk, ana. one dram, grains twelve; Saffron one
dram, Tincture of Coral (says Dr. Boylwharfe) one ounce, Yellow Sanders
infused in Aqua Caelestis, hereafter described, one ounce; Distill or make a
clear Water, S. A.

Composition the lesser.
Take Sugar Candy one pound, Canary Wine six ounces, Rose Water four ounces,
make of these a Syrup, and boil it well, to which add of Aqua Imperialis, two
Pints, Ambergreese, Musk, of each eighteen grains, Saffron fifteen grains;
Yellow Sanders infused in Aqua Imperialis, two drachms; [Addition] Aqua
Preciosa, hereafter expressed, half an ounce, the Tincture of Coral, Bezoar,
and the aucrified Sulphur of Antimony, ana. two drachms, refine and unite, S. A.

Y-worth. It Is very good against the Plague, and all Pestilential Diseases, and
an excellent Counterpoison; it strengthens the Spirits, and is prevalent
against fainting and swooning fits; it is good against most cold Diseases of
the Head, Brain and Stomach, and principally for Men, but not so good for
Women, unless the Musk and Ambergreese be left out. The Dose is a spoonful or
two, first in the morning, and last at night going to Bed.

Aqua Anticolica Nostra, or, Our Water against the Colic.
Composition the greater.
Y-worth. Take of Daucus, or wild Carrots, twelve ounces, Aniseeds, eight
ounces, Cumminseeds, three ounces, two drachms; Cinnamon four ounces and a
half; Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, ana. seven drachms, Galingal one ounce and half;
Calamus Aromaticus dried, two ounces and a half, the dried Rind of Oranges and
Limons, ana. six ounces, Galls and Grains, ana. one ounce, two drachms; infuse
these by way of Fermentation, for twelve days in the fragrant Wine of Camomile
Flowers five gallons; Elder-wine a gallon and half; then pour on five Gallons
of Proof Spirit, and draw into high Proof, or fine goods; dulcifie with white
Sugar four pound: [Addition] Apricocks, Centaury, Agrimony, Adonis, of each
half a pound; Palma Christi, Hart-wort, Lavender of each six ounces; Yarrow and
Zedoary, of each four ounces, white Sugar four pound, Tinctura Anodyna, or
Laudanum Liquidum, four unces, refine S. A.

Composition the lesser.
Take of Daucus, or wild Carrots, four ounces, Aniseeds, two ounces, five
drachms, one scruple; Cumminseeds one ounce, two scruples; Cinnamon one ounce
and a half; Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, ana. two drachms, one scruple; Gallingal
half an ounce; Calamus Aromaticus dried, seven drachms the dried Rind of
Oranges and Limons, ana. two ounces, Galls and Grains, ana. three drachms, one
scruple; infuse these by way of fermentation for twelve days, in fragrant Wine
of Camomile Flowers, one gallon and a half; Elder-Wine half a gallon; then pour
on a gallon and half of Proof Spirit; and draw into high Proof or fine goods,
dulcifie with white Sugar, one pound, four ounces, [Addition] Apricocks,
Centaury, Agrimony, Adonis, of each two ounces, five drachms, Palma Christi,
Heart-wort, Lavender of each two ounces, Yarrow and Zedoary, of each one ounce,
two drachms, grains fifteen; white Sugar one pound, six ounces, Tinctura
Anodyna, or Laudanum Liquidum, one ounce, two drachms, two scruples, refine, S.
A.

Its Virtues. It is not only good against the Colic, but also oppression of
wind in the Stomach and Bowels, how offensive soever it be, and the more
especially if you dilate it in a little cold Distilled Water of Yarrow, and
sweeten it with the Syrup of Poppies, and drink it as a Cordial; in which Case
you may take half a Pint at two draughts, with an hours intermission: it is most
excellent also for the Gripes in Sucking Children, being taken to the quantity
of a spoonful, or spoonful and ha^f in Breast Milk.

Aqua Nostra in Vermes, or, Our Worm-Water
Composition the greater.
Y-worth. Take of Hellebore, Savin, Broom Flowers and tops, ana. a Peck, pour
thereon the Water of Tansie, Rue and Peach Flowers, ana. two gallons, adding
thereunto Sugar, five pound, and with the common ferment, let them ferment five
or six days; then take of Worm-seed bruised one pound, Wormwood tops and seeds
six handfuls, Peach Flowers three handfuls; the fine shavings of Hartshorn a
pound, strong Proof Spirit ten gallons, Distill into fine goods, and dulcifie
with white Sugar, eight pound; [Addition] Agrimony, Cedar, Elecampane, Garlic,
Mustard, Nettles, Hart's-tongue Leaves, ana. an handful, Aloes bruised, six
ounces, Christals of Tartar, half a pound; fine Sugar six pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of Hellebore. Savin, Broom tops and Flowers, ana. a quarter of a peck,
pour thereon of the water of Tansie, Rue and Peach-flowers, ana. four Pints,
adding thereunto Sugar, one pound four ounces; and ferment, with the common
ferment five or six days: then take of wormseed bruised, four ounces; Wormwood
tops and seeds two handfuls, Peach flowers a large Pugil, the fine shaving of
Harts-horne four ounces; strong Proof Spirit two gallons and ahalf; Distill
into fine goods and dulcifie with white Sugar two pound; [Addition] Agrimony,
Cedar, Elecampane, Garlic, Mustard, Nettles, Hart's-tongue Leaves, ana. half a
Pugil or a small Pugil, Aloes, bruised one ounce and ahalf; Chrystals of
Tartar, four ounces, fine Sugar one poundand a half.

Its Virtues. It Is prevalent against all kind of Worms both in Young and Old;
for being Dilated into a Cordial with the Syrup of the three first Herbs, it
becomes a Medicine, not to be surpassed by any thing short of a specific: The
Dose is from half an ounce, to an ounce, according to the Age Nature and
condition of the diseased: you must observe to take it seven mornings together
fasting.

Aqua Nostra Convulsiva, or, Our Water against the Convulsion.
Coposition the greater.
Y-worth. Take of Black-cherries bruised, with their Kernels two gallons; of
the Flowers of Lavender, nine handfuls; White-Mustard seeds bruised three
ounces; mix them together and put some ferment to them, and let them ferment
for five or six days, then add two gallons of our Sulphurated Spirit of Wine,
or rather Aqua Vitae Gla^beris, and Distill into fine Spirits according to Art.

Then take of Ros Vitrioli (which is the water that Distills from Vitriol, in
the Calcination thereof) six quarts, Misseltoe of the Oak, and Paeony, ana. two
ounces, two drachms; of Rue three handfuls, Juniper Berries three ounces,
Bay Berries an ounce and a half, Camphire an ounce, Rhubarb sliced two ounces
and an half, Cats Blood two pound, Spirit of Turpentine three ounces, digest
ten days, and then Distill in Balneo Mariae; you may mix this with the former
in equal parts, [Addition] Bawm, Dean-wort, Capers, Coffee, Hearts-Ease,
Mastick, Bright-wort, St. John's Wort, Spicknard, Rosemary and Valerian, ana.
six handfuls fine Sugar eight pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of Black-cherries bruised with their Kernells four Pints, of the Flowers
of Lavender two handfuls and a half; white Mustard seed bruised six drachms;
mix them together, and put some ferment to them, and let them ferment for five
or six days; then add of our Sulphurated Spirit of Wine, or rather Aqua Vitae
Glauberis, four Points, and Distill into fine Spirits, S. A.

Then take of Ros Vitrioli three Pints, Misseltoe of the Oak, Paeony, ana. four
drachms, one scruple, grains ten; Rue one handful and a half; Juniperberries,
half anounce, two drachms; Bay Berries, three drachms; Camphire, two drachcms;
Rheuburbisliced, five drachms; Cats-blood, half a pound; Spirit of Turpentine,
six drachms; digest ten days, and then Distill in Balneo Mariae; you may mix
this with the former in equal parts, [Addition] Bawm, Dean-wort, Capers,
Coffee, Hearts-Ease, Mastick, Bright-wort, St. John's wort, Spicknard,
Rosemary, Valerian, ana. one handful and a half; fine Sugar, two pound.

Its Virtues. It Is excellent for the weakness of the head, not only good
against Convulsions, but also for Vertigoe's, and most Disseases of the
superior region; it strengthens the Sinews, and expells wind out of the Head
and Stomach-giving powerful relief in Hypocondriack and Hysteric Passions;
it is a prevalent help for Children that have Convulsive Fitts, and especially
if given in a few drops of our Essentia Crani-humant, spoken of in our Chymic.
Rational. The Dose is from a dram to two, and from thence to an ounce, or an
ounce and half; according to the Age and strength of the Patient.

Thus (Reader) I have given the Basis and foundation of such Waters, as
hitherto have not been so plainly published; that so they may be of some
advantage to such, as languish under the burden of Diseases, for want of their
precious Virtue; for whose benefit we shall yet proceed, as follows, first, of

Aqua Preciosa, or, Precious Water.
Composition the greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, of the Roots of Enula
Compana, Avens, Angelica, Cyprus, Calamus Aromaticus, Sassafras, ana. eight
ounces, Zedoary, Galingal, ana. six ounces, three drachms; Cassia Lignea,
Lignum Rhodium, Yellow Sanders, ana. four ounces, six drachms and a half; the
dry Pills of Citrons and Oranges, ana. nine ounces, four drachms; Cinnamon
white, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, ana. eight ounces, the choicest Cinnamon, two
pound; Cloves, Cardamoms, Cubebs, ana. three ounces, six drachms; sweet
Chervile-seeds, Basil-seeds, ana. five ounces, three drachms; Coriander-seeds,
sweet Foenil-seeds, ana. one pound; Aniseeds two pound; bruise them and Distill
into Proof Spirits, and then dulcifie with white Sugar, twenty four pound, S.
A. and let it stand till it be fine, then draw it off, and add Musk, one
dram, two scruples; Ambergreese, six drachms, two scruples, then let it
clear, and draw it off for use.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons; Roots of Enula Campana, Avens,
Angelica, Cypress, Caamus Aromaticus, Sassafras, of each one ounce and a half;
Zedoary, Galingal, ana. one ounce, one dram; Cassia Lignea, Lignum Rhodium,
Yellow, Sanders, ana. six drachms and a half; the dry Pills of Citron and
Orange, ana. one ounce, six drachms, grains fifteen; Cinnamon white, Nutmegs,
Mace, Ginger, ana. one ounce and a half; Cinnamon best, six ounces; Cloves,
Cardamoms, Cubebs, ana. six drachms; sweet Chervile-seeds, Basil-seeds, ana.
one ounce, one dram; Coriander-seeds, sweet Foenilseeds, ana. three ounces;
Aniseeds, six drachms; bruise them, and Distill into strong Proof Spirit, and
then dulcifie with fine white Sugar, four pound and a half; S. A. Let it stand
till it be fine, then draw it off, and add Musk, grains eighteen, Ambergreese,
one dram, grains twelve, then let it clear, and draw it for use.

The Syrup for dulcifying the water is thus to be made.

Take Apricocks, Quinces, Cherries, English Currants, of each what suffices,
all full Ripe, and of equal weight, when they are thus prepared as follows.

Prepare the Quinces and Apricocks, take out the stones and Kernels, and slice
them very thin; stone the Cherries, and bruise them and the Currants; then lay
them in a flat basin or pan thus: A lane of Fruit of a fingers thickness, and
then a lane of white powder Sugar of like thickness, and so proceed in order,
lane upon lane, till all be laid into the basin; then pour on good Aqua Vitae,
gently, till all be covered therewith, and so let it stand two hours, then
bruise, or posh them all together, and press out the Juice as dry as possibly
you can through a thick linen bag; then take the Juice, and let it stand till
it be settled clear, which Juice, by a gentle Exhalation in a hot bath, boil up
to a Syrup height, according to Art, and keep it for use; To every eight pound
of the Spirit put a pound of this Syrup, and when it is clear draw it off for
use.

Y-worth. It Is a rare and excellent Water for such as are inclined to
Melancholy; for it strengthens the Heart, revives the Spirits, preserving and
comforting the Senses, and will demonstrate its virtue, in the time of
Contagious Diseases, as Plagues and malignant Fevers. The Dose is from two
Drams to an Ounce.

Aqua Carminativa, or Wind-water.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong proof Spirits 16 Gallons, Enula Campana roots dry,
Aniseeds, of each one pound nine ounces and five drachms, Cyprusroots, bark of
the roots of Bay Tree, or as much leaves, Sassafras with the bark, Cinnamon
white, of each nine ounces, four drachms, two scruples, and five grains,
Calamus-aromaticus, Orange pills dry, of each 6 ounces and 3 drachms, Clary,
red Mint, Calamint, Elder-flowers, Camomile-flowers, of each eight ounces,
sweet Fennel seeds, Carraway-seeds, Angelica-seeds, of each six ounces and
three drachms, Coriander-seeds, Cardamums, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Cloves,
and Ginger, of each four ounces, Pepper long and white of each two ounces,
bruise them all grosely, and distill into sine Goods S. A. and then dulcifie
with white Sugar sixteen pound, and draw it off for use when it is perfectly
clear.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Ennula-campana-roots dry,
Aniseeds, of each four ounces and seven drachms, Cyprus-roots, bark of the
roots of Bay Tree, or as much leaves, Sassafras with the bark, Cinnamon white,
of each one ounce, six drachms, and fifteen grains, Calamus-aromaticus,
Orange-pills dry, one ounce and a dram, Clary, red Mints, Calamint,
Elder-flowers, Camomile-flowers, of each an ounce and an half,
Sweet-Fennel-seeds, Caraway-seeds, Angelica-seeds, of each one ounce and a
dram, Coriander-seeds, Cardamums, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Cloves, and
Ginger, of each six drachms, Pepper long and white, of each three ounces,
bruise them all grosely, and distill into fine goods S.A. then dulcifie with
white Sugar three pound, and draw it for use when it is perfectly clear.

Aqua Sudorifica, or Water to procure Sweat.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit 16 gallons, Butter-bur-roots dry,
three pound, three ounces, one dram and an half, Valerian (common) roots,
Aniseeds, of each one pound and an half, one ounce, and five drachms,
Vincetoxicum-roots, Sassafras-roots with the bark, of each twelve ounces, six
drachms and an half, Angelica herb dry, Carduus Benedictus, Great-Valerian herb
and roots, all dry, Scordium, of each, one pound, three ounces, one dram and
an half, Cowslip-flowers, Marigold-flowers, of each, one pound,
Juniper Berries, two pound, bruise them all, and distill into fine goods S. A.
and then dulcifie with white Sugar sixteen pound.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of Strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Butter-bur-roots dry, nine ounces,
four drachms and in half, Valerian (common) roots, Aniseeds, of each four
ounces seven drachms, Vincetoxicum-roots, Sassafras-roots with the bark, of
each, two ounces, four drachms, and an half, Angelica herb dry, Carduus
Benedictus, Great-Valerian herb and roots all dry, Scordium, of each, three
ounces, four drachms and an half, Cowslip-flowers, and Marigold-flowers, of
each three ounces, Juniper berries, six ounces, bruise them all, and di^^ill
into fine goods, S. A. and then dulcifie with White Sugar three pound.

Y-worth. This Water is very excellent in pro^^king Sweat, the Patient drinking
an Ounce thereof, ^^d then to be covered close in bed; by which means ^iny
Disseasysdea's will be dissipated and carried off, and ^e Spirits and Body
strengthened.

Aqua contra Crapulam, or Surfeit Water.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Juniper berries, three
pound, three ounces, one dram and an half, Enula Campana roots dry, one
pound, nine ounces, and five drachms, Calamus aromaticus, Galingale, of each
six ounces, and three drachms, Wormwood, Spearmint, and Red-Mint all dry, of
each four ounces, Caraway-seeds, Angelica-seeds of each three ounces, one
dram and an half, Sassafras-roots with the bark, and White Cinnamon, of each
four ounces, six drachms and an half, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, and Ginger, of
each, one ounce and an half, two scruples, and five grains; Red-Poppy-flowers,
six pound, six ounces and an half, Aniseeds four pound, bruise them all, and
distill into fine goods S. A. and then dulcifie with white Sugar sixteen pound.

Composition the lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Juniper berries nine ounces, four
drachms and an half, Ennula Campana roots dry four ounces and six drachms,
Calamus-aromaticus, and Galingale, of each an ounce and a dram, Wormwood,
Spearmint, and Red-Mint all dry, or each six drachms Carraway-seeds and
Angelica-seeds, of each four ounces and an half, Sassafras-roots with the bark,
white Cinnamon, of each seven drachms and an half, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, and
Cloves of each two drachms and fifteen grains, Red-Poppy-flower sone pound
three ounces and an half, Aniseeds, twelve ounces, bruise them all, and distill
into fine goods, S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar three pound.

Y-worth. This Water is not only good for Surfeits, but also for Fevers,
Agues, and Obstructions, and all others, wherein a sharp and Acid ferment too
much affects the Blood. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce. If in this
Dose you mix two or three drachms of (...) Spiritus Mundus, and drink it two or
^hree times a day, it will cure most Plurisies without ^mae-section.

Aqua contra Scorbutum, or Scorbutical Water.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit, sixteen gallons, Horse-radish-roots
dry three pound three ounces one dram and an half, Enula-Campana-roots dry,
Aniseeds, of each one pound nine ounces and five drachms, Watercresses,
Winter-cresses and Garden-cresses, Taragon, Balsamint, Scurvy Grass (garden)
Wormwood, Brook-lime, Trefoile (water,) Sweet-Chervile, of each nine ounces and
an half two scruples and five grains, Arsmart twelve ounces six drachms and and
half, Mustard, Bank-cress, Rocket, Radish, of the seeds of each, four ounces
six drachms and an half, Citron-pils, Orange-pils dry, Cinnamon white, and Mace,
of each six ounces three drachms and fifteen grains, bruise them all, and then
distill into fine goods S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar sixteen pound or
what suffices. For use take seven parts of this Spirit, and one part of the
Juice of Limmons (or more) mingle them together, and dulcifie with white Sugar
what suffices.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Horse-raddish-roots dry nine ounces
four drachms and an half, Enula-Campana-roots dry, and Aniseeds of each four
ounces and six drachms, Watercresses, Winter-cresses, Garden-cresses, Taragon,
Baisamint, Scurvy Grass (garden) Wormwood, Brook-lime, Trefoile (water) and
Sweet-Chervile of each one ounce six drachms and five grains, Arsmart two
ounces three drachms and an half, Mustard, Bank-cress, Rocket, Radish, of the
seeds of each seven ounces and an half, Citron pills, Orange-pils dry, Cinnamon
white, and Mace, of each one ounce one dram two scruples and five grains,
bruise them all and then distill into fine goods S. A. and dulcifie with white
Sugar three pound: For use take seven parts of this Spirit, and one part of
Juice of Limmons (or more) mingle them together and dulcifie with white Sugar,
what suffices.

Y-worth. This Water is excellent for purifying the Blood and for carrying off
the Scorbutic Acidity, by way of mortification; for it sweetens the same all
one, as Spirit of Wine does the Spirit of Salt; The Dose for such is from two
to six drachms, twice or thrice a day.

Aqua contra Pestilentiam, or Plague-Water.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Butter-bur-roots dry
one pound nine ounces and five drachms, garden and common Valerian-roots both
dry, Angelica-roots, Imperatoria, Gentian, Enula-Campana, Snake-grass-roots of
each nine ounces and an half two scruples and five grains, Contrayerva,
Zedoary, and Galingale, of each six ounces three drachms and fifteen grains,
Rue-leaves dry, white Horehound, Scordium, Carduus-Benedictus of each eight
ounces, Elder-flowers, Lavender, and Mace of each four ounces, six drachms and
an half, Citron-pils dry, Juniper Berries of each twelve ounces six drachms and
an half, Green Walnuts with the husks one pound nine ounces and five drachms,
Venice Treacle, and Mithridate, of each three ounces one dram and an half,
Aniseeds (best) two pound six ounces three drachms and an half, Camphire an
ounce and an half two scruples and five grains; Distill into fine goods S. A.
and dulcifie with white Sugar sixteen pound.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Butter-bur-roots dry four ounces
and seven drachms, Garden and Common Valerian-roots, both dry, Angelica-roots,
Imperatoria, Gentian, Enula-Campana, Snake-grass roots, of each one ounce and
in half two drachms and five grains, Contrayerva, Zedoary, and Galingale, of
each one ounce one dram two scruples and five grains, Rue-leaves dry,
White-Horehound, Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, of each one ounce and an half,
Elder-flowers, Lavender, and Mace, of each seven drachms and an half, Citron
pills dry, Juniper Berries of each two ounces three drachms and an half, Green
Walnuts with the husks, four ounces and seven drachms, Venice Treacle, and
Mithridate, of each four drachms and an half, Aniseeds best seven ounces two
drachms and an half, Camphire two drachms and fifteen grains, distill into fine
Spirit S. A. and dulcifie with white Sugar three pound.

For Use, let the party infected take of this Water one Ounce mingled with warm
Posser drink (or any other water proper in that case) and be kept warm, and
sweat well thereon.

Aqua nostra contra Pestilentiam, or our Plague-Water.
Y-worth. Take of Spanish Angelica Roots half a pound, English Angelica leaves,
Rue, and Sage, of each three handfuls, Long Pepper, Nutmegs, and Ginger of each
one ounce and an half, Venice Treacle and Mithridate of each four ounces,
Malaga Wine two quarts, Aqua Vitae Glauberis one gallon, digest twenty days,
and then distill into fine Spirit S. A. [Addition] Contrayerva, Virginia Snake
root, and Zedoary of each three ounces, the Powers of Vipers four ounces,
Camphire one ounce, Syrup of Wine Vinegar one pound, with which refine down
after distilled.

This Water is an incomparable preservative in, and against, the Plague,
Smallpox, Measles, and all Pestilential and Contagious Diseases; Two Spoonfuls
being taken three or four times a day as a Cordial: It Is good also for all cold
Stomachs, want of Digestion and the like.

Aqua Florum, or Water of Flowers.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, and put it into a
wide-mouth'd-pot (or other Vessel) stopped very close; take these several
Flowers following, in their Seasons, and being clean picked, put them to the
Spirit in the Pot, viz. Cowslips, Woodbine, Stock-Gilli-flower of all the three
sorts, Damask-Roses, Musk-Roses, Sweet-Briar-flowers, Lillium Convallium,
Jasmine, Citron-flowers, Orange-flowers or their pills dry, Tilliaflowers,
Garden-Limmon and wild Thyme-flowers, Lavender, Marigold, Chamomile, Mellilot,
and Elder-flowers, of each twelve ounces six drachms and an half; being
furnished with all your flowers as above, when you would distill them, add
thereunto Aniseeds three pound three ounces one dram and an half, Coriander
seeds one pound nine ounces and five drachms, bruise the seeds, 'twere also
best to bruise all the flowers, as you put them up into the Spirit, for the
more orderly working; Distill into fine Spirit S. A. then add to the distin'd
water, Roses, Gilly-flowers, and Elder-flowers, of each one pound nine ounces
and five drachms; after twelve days Infusion it may be drawn off, then dulcifie
it with white Sugar sixteen pound, and being fine it may be drawn for use.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, put it into a wide-mouthed Pot (or
other Vessel) stopped very close, take those several flowers following in their
seasons, and being clean picked put them to the Spirit in the Pot; viz.
Cowslips, Woodbine, Stock-Gilli-flower of the three sorts, Damask-Roses,
Musk-Roses, Sweet-Brier-flowers, Clove-Gillyflowers, Lillium-Convallium,
Jasmine, Citron and Orange-flowers, or their pills dry, Tillia-flowers,
garden-Limmon and Wild Thyme-flowers, Lavender, Marigold, Chamomile, Mellilot,
Elder-flowers, of each two ounces three drachms and an half; Being furnished
with all your flowers as above, when you would distill them add thereunto
Aniseeds nine ounces four drachms and an half, Coriander seeds four ounces and
seven drachms, bruise the seeds, and 'twere also best to bruise all the
Flowers, as you put them up into the Spirit, for their more ord erly working,
Distill into fine Spirit S. A. then add to the distiled water, Roses,
Gilli-flowers, Elder-flowers, of each, four ounces, and seven drachms; after
Twelve days Infusion it may be drawn off, then dulcifie it with white Sugar
three pound, and being fine, it may be drawn for use.

Y-worth. This is a great Cordial for strengthening and refreshing the Spirits,
and therefore proper for those who are troubled with Hypocondriack Melancholy.
The Dose is from one dram to five, according to the Age, Strength and
Condition of the Patient

Aqua Frugum, or Water of Fruits.
Composition the Greater.
Distiller. Take of strong Proof Spirit sixteen gallons, Juniper Berries six
pound, six ounces, three drachms and fifteen grains; Quince and
Pipping-pairings both dry, of each three pound, three ounces, one dram and an
half; Limmonpils, Orange-pils dry, of each one pound, nine ounces and five
drachms; Nutmegs, six ounces, three drachms, and fifteen grains, Anisceds,
three pound, three ounces, one dram and an half, Cloves three ounces one
dram and an half; Distill into fine Spirit S. A. To the Spirit add
Strawberries, Rasberries bruised, of each eight pound, stir them well together,
and after ten days, it, being clear, may be drawn off; then dulcifie with
Syrrup made as is taught in Aven's Water, and so let it stand till clear, and
then draw it off for use.

Composition the Lesser.
Take of strong Proof Spirit three gallons, Juniper Berries one pound, three
ounces, one dram, two scruples, and five grains; Quince and Pippingpairings
both dry, of each nine ounces, four drachms and an half; Limmon-pils,
Orange-pils dry, of each four ounces and seven drachms, Nutmegs one ounce, one
dram, two scruples and five grains; Aniseeds nine ounces four drachms and an
half; Cloves four drachms and an half; Distill into fine Spirit S. A. To the
Spirit add Straw-berries, Ras-berries bruised, of each one pound and an half,
stir them well together, and after ten days, it being clear may be drawn off,
Then dulcifie with Syrrup made as is taught in Aven's Water; and so let it
stand till it be clear, and then draw it off for use.

Y-worth. This is a great Carminative, expelling Wind, good in Surfeits and
Fevers, it abates Thirst: The Dose is from one dram to five, in some proper
Vehicle, or dilated to a Julip.

We having thus run through the Prescriptions of such which are varied into a
greater and lesser Composition, we shall add some Observations, and then
proceed to lay down some particular waters that are purely for the use of such
as would supply the defect of an Apothecary when not near etc.

You are first to observe, that in the distilling of these Waters, you must not
make use of the Wool in the Head; for that will be apt to suckand drink in too
much of the Oleous part, and so considerably destroy the virtues of the waters;
and although there will often come over a white thick shadowary Oil toward the
latter end, by which the pure fine Spirits are troubled and made thick, yet we
say, that this may be thus prevented; Take a fine Holland-Cloath, and rub one
side of it very well with Black-Lead, and bind the side so rubbed inwardly
toward the end of the Worm, and this will keep the thickness back, as
Experience demonstrates.

But as to Rich and Costly Waters you need not draw so long, and yet no loss;
for what remains being Fermented will give a very good Spirit for other
beginnings; and although in every Receipt the way to color, perfume, and dulcifie
the same, is showed, yet the Distiller, as seldom regards it, as he does the
quantity of Spirits to the Pondus of Herbs and Spices, for they are led by that
rule, which will return most Profit into their Pockets; their general way is
thus, they make a Syrup with ordinary Sugar, and too too often Treacle, having
first decocted Brasil, Sanders, or the like to color the same, and then strain
the whole through a Canopy, and so add it to the water, to allay and dulcifie;
one of their Prescriptions is thus,

For Red Water.
Take of Spring Water one gallon, or rather of the purified Liquor for allayes,
of Red Sanders one pound, Brasil half a pound; decoct these in the water,
closely stopped on the Embers so long, until you obtain all the Tincture from the
Wood, then the wood is strained out, to which quantity of water you add six or
eight pound of Treacle, or course Sugar, and let it gently simper, then
Clarify with the whites of ten or twelve Eggs, and strain it through a fustian
Canopy; this you add to twenty or thirty gallons of common Aquavitae, more or
less, according as it is in strength, and you would have it in sweetness, then
to fine it, it is usual to take Flower and the Whites of two or three Eggs, and
with a spoonful or two of Yeast you beat them well together, adding thereunto a
scruple of Musk, and ten grains of Amber-grease, and put them in a small bag,
the which you let hang by the Bung-hole into your Liquor, and in fourteen days
it will be fit for sale: Now these following Simples, are generally made use of
for coloring your Liquors withal, viz. Reds, with Rose leaves, Poppie leaves,
Clove-Gilli-flowers, Turnsole, Root-Akanet, Coachenele, Juices, Cherries,
Rasberries, Mul-berries, and Black-berries: For Yellows, Safron, Turmerick, and
Yellow-Sanders; But seeing we must color this way, we think it convenient to
add our Opinion concerning the same; which is, if you use Woods, whether
Brasil, Sanders, etc. that you decoct them in the cold distilled water of the
herb, appropriated to the Water, or else in cold distilled Rose Water, twenty
four hours on gentle Embers, and then strain forth, and add of fine clean
Sugar, boil up and Clarify: with a sufficient quantity of Whites of Eggs, and
so let it pass through the Canopy or Fustian-sleeve, and then add it to the
Waters you intend to Dulcifie; and as for the Perfumes you add in, it is best
that they be ground very well in a Mortar with some of he Spirits, and then
added; or else let them be dissolved, in it (close luted) in a gentle heat, and
then added to the Quantity; otherwise your waters will want that smell to
Perfume them, which only radical Dissolution obtains. Now for tender Leaves, as
Poppies, Roses. etc. you had best also to take out their Tinctures, by some of
the Spirit in a Vessel (close luted) in Balneo, which you must repeat so often
till they remain pale, the which you must add to your Quantity with your
Sweets; and that you fine it with. Let your Fruits and Berries be separated
from their stones, and strained so as that they may not be broken therein, for
then it will make the pleasant Juice bitter; to these so prepared you may add
your Sugar, and proceed as has been directed S. A. by such Variations as
Experience must prompt you in; thus have we ^^id down what is sufficient for
any reasonable and Industrious person to build his practice on, so that what
remains is only to give you the Prescriptions of those Rich and Costly Waters
promised.

Aqua Mirabilis.
Take Cloves, Cubebs, Galingale, Mace, Nutmegs, Cardamums, and Ginger, of each
two drachms, the Juice of Salendine one pint, Spirit of Wine two pints,
White Wind six pints, Infuse all these, twenty four hours, and then distill off
four ^ints by an Alembick.

Y-worth. This is of Admirable Force and Ver^^, to preserve the body from the
Apoplexy, and all Diseases of the Nerves, it is very good against the Pals^,
Co^vulsion and Cramp, as also for cold stomachs. The Dose is from two drachms
to half an ounce.

Aqua Mirabilis Nostra.
Y-worth. Take Cloves, Galingale, Cubebs, ^ace, Cardamums, Nutmegs, and Ginger
of ^ach three drachms; Balm, Sage, Betony, Bug^oss, and Cowslip-flowers, all
gathered in their ^^ime, of each one handful, the Juice of Salendine one pint
and and half, Aqua vitae Glauberis three pints, the Wine of Black Currants two
gallons, digest twenty four hours, and distill off one gallon in Balneo Mariae.

This has all the Virtues of the former in Superiority, more Cordial, thence
wonderfully strengthening the Heart, Stomach, and principal Vessels; and
therefore by us often, called, Aqua Coroborans: The Dose is the same with the
former.

Dr. Stephens's Water.

Take of Gascoign-wine two gallons; Ginger, Galingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs,
Grains, Ani-seeds, Fennel-seeds, and Caraway-seeds, of each two drachms; Sage,
Red Mints, Red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile, and
Lavender, of each two handfuls; beat the Spices small, and bruise the herbs,
letting them macerate twelve hours, stiring them now and then; Distill by an
Alembick or Copper-still with it is Refrigeratory; keep the first quart by it
self, and the second by it self. N. B. that the first quart will be the hotter,
but the second the stronger of the Ingredients.

Y-worth. It is very Excellent in strengthening the Heart, fortifying the
Spirits, relieving languishing Nature. The Dose is from one dram to two.

Aqua Imperialis.
Take of the Rind of Citrons and Oranges dried, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Cinnamon,
of each four ounces; the roots of Flower-de-luce, Cyprus, Calamus Aromaticus,
Zedoary, Galingale, and Ginger, of each one pound; of the tops of Lavender, and
Rosemary of each four handfuls, the Leaves of the Bay Tree, Marjoram, Balm,
Mints, Sage, Thyme, the Flowers of White and Damask-Roses, of each one handful,
Rose Water eight pints, the best White Wind two gallons, bruise what must be
bruised, then Infuse them all twenty four hours after which Distill.

Y-worth, This Water strengthens and Corobo^ates the Heart, and is therefore
Good for such as are subject unto faintings, swoonings, and Palpitations of the
Heart, and is a preservative against Apoplexies. The Dose is from one dram to
three.

Aqua Celestis.
Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, Zedoary, Galingale, Long pepper,
Citron pill, Spicknard, Lignum Aloes, Cubebs, Cardamums, Calamus Aromaticus,
Mace, Ground Pine, Germander, Hermodactyls, Tormentil, White Frankincense, the
pith of Dwarf Elder, Juniper Berries, Bay Berries, the Seeds and Flowers of
Motherwort, the Seeds of Smallage, Fennel and Anise, the Leaves of Sorrel,
Sage, Felwort, Rosemary, Marjoram, Mints, Pennyroyal, Stechados, the Flowers
of Elder, Red and White Roses, of the Leaves of Scabious, Rue, the lesser
Moonwort, Egrimony, Centory, Fumitary, Pimpernel, Sowthistle, Eyebright,
Maidenhair, Endive, Red Saunders, Aloes, of each four ounces, pure Amber, the
best Rhubarb, of each four drams, dried Figs, Raisins of the Sun, Dates stoned,
sweet Almonds, Grains of the Pine, of each two ounces, of the best Aqua vitae
to the quantity of them all, of the best hard Sugar two pound, of white Honey
one pound; then add the Root of Gentian, Flowers of Rosemary, Pepperwort, the
Root of Bryony, Sowbread, Wormwood, of each an ounce. Now before these are
distilled, quench Gold being made Red hot oftentimes in the aforesaid Water;
put therein Oriental Pearls, beaten small two pound, and then distill it after
twenty four hours Infusion.

Y-worth. This is a very good Cordial Water, prevailing against Malignant and
Pestilential Fevers, and a great restorative to such as are in Consumption, it
comforts the Heart, and revives drooping Spirits; it is very hot in Operation;
you must not exceed half a dram for the largest Dose without the Advice of a
Physician; In Fevers mix it with cooling Juleps.

Aqua Nostra Multifera Virtutum, or our Water of Many Virtues.
Y-worth. Take Pawme, Sage, Bettony, Buglosse, Cowslips, all gathered in their
prime, of each a handful, Motherwort, Bay Leaves, of each a handful and half,
Marygold-flowers two handfuls, flowers of Rosemary, Lavender, Lillies of the
Valley, Rosa-solis, of each four handfuls, the Juice of Salendine two pound,
Saffron two ounces, Lignum Aloes an ounce and half, Turmerick four ounces,
Spirit of Wine six Quarts, digest all six days, and then distill in B. S. A.

This Water is excellent in the Diseases of the Head, Breast and Heart, Liver
and principal parts, fortifying the Faculties, and strengthening Nature, as far
as can be expected from simple Cordial Spirits, without being enriched with
some Mineral Sulphurs, the which will be shown in our Spagyrick Philosophy
Asserted, and Spagyrick philosophies Triumph. Now by the way observe, that most
of these Waters or Spirits, are too strong to be taken alone, Nature not loving
to ride in fiery Chariots, it is best therefore that they be dilated and reduced
into Cordials, the way by which it is performed, will be shown in our Medicina
rationalis.

Crollii Aqua Theriacalis Camphorat. Or Crollius his Treacle Water Camphorated.
Take of Andromachus his Treacle ten ounces, the best Myrrh five ounces, the
best Saffron one ounce, Camphire four drams, mix them together, then pour upon
them of the best Spirit of Wine ^wenty ounces, and let them stand twenty four
hours in a warm place, then distill them in Balneo with a gradual Fire;
Cohobate the Spirit three times.

Y-worth. This Water is of Excellent Virtue against the Pestilence, and other
Fevers; it is a very good Counter-poyson, and good for those that have been bit
by any Venomous Creature, or such as have the French Pox; for it drives forth
all virulent Humors from the heart, and is a great Cordial. The Dose is from
half an ounce to an ounce.

Aqua Composita contra Scorbutum, or a Scorbutical Water.
Take of the Leaves of both sorts of Scurvy Grass, being made very clear, of
each twelve pound; let these be bruised, and the Juice pressed forth; to which
add the Juice of Brooklime, Juice of Water Cresses, of each a pound, of the
best white Wine sixteen Pints, twelve whole Lemmons, cut; of the fresh Roots of
Briony eight pound, of the fresh Roots of Horseradish four pound, of the Bark
of Winteran one pound, of Nutmegs eight ounces; let them macerate three days,
and then distill S. A.

Y-worth. This Water is Excellent for the Scurvy, with all the Symptoms that
attend the same, 'twill radically cure those that are not too Rebellious in a
Month or six Weeks time, if you take two Spoonfuls thereof in a Morning and
Evening.

I could indeed enlarge my self with various other Prescriptions, but I think
it needless, seeing you have here what is sufficient to accomplish any
Distiller; nay peradventure more than ever you may have occasion to make; so
that others of a more Superior and Higher Order will be superfluous; as to such
as have a desire to know more, thinking them necessary in their Medicinal
practice, let them resort to our Medicina Rationalis, where they shall find
them under the head of such Diseases as they are appropriated to: And for those
that would be curious and have variety of chargeable Prescriptions, let them
apply themselves to the London Dispensatory, and other Authors wherein they are
prescribed: But as to such as desire the healing Virtues of one single Cordial
which has been found for many years to supply the place of many others, such
we advise to our Spiritus Prophe^^^ticus Imperialis, treated of in our
Spagyrick Philo^^phy asserted; for this indeed is various ways to be ^^dered,
and that to such an advantage, as that it ^^swers all that can be desired from
any thing of this Nature; and therefore for the good of such as languish under
deplorable Diseases we thought it ^^quisite to give its Virtue and Use: First
of the Spirit, and then of the way of dilating it into a Cordial.

Spiritus HEADrophelacticus Imperialis, or the Antipeleptick HEADowers,
Sovereign for all the Diseases of the Head, Womb-Fits, sudden surprisals, and
infectious Diseases, being a general Cordial for all Diseases incident to the
Body.
As to its Preparation, it is given in our Spagyrick, Philosophy Asserted.

Its Virtues in General.
This is a great Cordial, truly helping Nature, in^^rdly or outwardly applied,
and is of admirable benefit to poor fainty drooping Spirits and weak Nature,
and a great Reliever and Comforter of Old Aged people, Strengthening and
Comforting the Heart and Stomach, prevalent against Wind, Chollick, Gripes,
Yellow Jaundice, Cough and Colds, and such like Distempers: And also Bruises,
and Contusions, withered and benumbed Members and Cramp; it is efficacious
against Cold, moist Diseases of the Head, Stomach and Heart; as Apoplexies,
Falling Sickness, Palsies, Trembling, Headache, Megrim, Vertigo, Carus,
Lethargy, Sleepiness and Dimn^s^ of Sight, cold Rheums, Catarrhs, Rhumatisms,
Old Aches of the Back and Loins, stinking breath; as also good against
Convulsions.

Its Use and Dose.
For any Bruise, Squatt, Aches, or weak and decayed parts, you must dip a
Cloth therein, and lay it four or five times double on the part, and at last
having repeated this three or four times bind it fast thereon: For the Diseases
of the Face and Head, you must anoint your Face and Temples, and take the
savours up your Nostrils; For Rickets in Children, it must be applied as well
outwardly as inwardly, chasing the grieved part with the clear Spirit before
the Fire? Dipping a Scarlet cloth in it, and laying it on the part affected,
repeating of it as often as occasion requires, and swathing from the Armpits
to the Groins with a Linen Swath: For weak and pained Limbs the same Method is
to be observed as before.

It Is also an Excellent preserver for dead Bodies; for if you wash the dead
over with it two or three times, and then strike over all the body with our
double Spiritus Odontugiasus, it preserves the same a ^^iderable while, without
being embowell'd; and more ^^^cially if you afterward apply to the Mouth,
Stomach, ^^^^el, and bottom of the belly some of our Elixer ^^^oprietatis
Helmontii with a Sponge, by which ^^bod the dead shall be not only preserved,
but also kept (...) giving the least Annoyance or Evil Smell to any (...) shall
come a near it; or the least infection, although (...) died of an infectious
Disease; for if you repeat the (...) of these three or four times, the
poisonous Venom (...) be totally mortified. Now of what moment ^^^ht this be in
preserving people in the Family, (...) the Chambers are kept sweet, and the
person, (...) ever so gross, from purging, as experience ma^^^ ^^sts. Thus
having given you its External uses, (...) shall now proceed to the Internal
ones, Viz. as (...) dilated into a Cordial.

^^^dialis Nostra Generalis; or our General Cordial.
Take Spiritus Prophelacticus Imperialis, well tin^^^ with Pilula Nepenthe
nostr. one pound, the ^^grant Wine of Camomile Flowers, Yarrow and ^^^cus two
pound, Mel Vegetabile qu. sa. e. to Dul^^^ it into a Cordial; to which add of
the Radi^^^ Tincture of Gold, Bezoar, and the Milk of ^^^^s Eyes, of each Gutt.
20. shake them well ^ther, then let it stand and settle, and decant (...)
clear, so is it prepared.

^his Cordial is in many Cases as profitable unto the (...) as their Food,
especially for weakness, Faintness, and violent Illness, that seize on people,
for this will (if designed for Life) measurably fortify and strengthen the
Vital, Natural and Animal Spirits; it cherishes the prinoipal Organs, and
makes them better to perform their Office in the preparing of good Juices; for
it agrees with the Callidum Innatum, or Sulphur, as well as with the Humout
Radicalis, or Mercury; it stirs up the digestive Faculties, and so not only
prevents from being surfeited, but also Relieves from Surfeits, when
Contracted; and therefore may it properly be esteemed as a rich Treasure in
Families; it comforts both Young and Old; it is good in oppressions of Wind and
Cholick, expelling the same from the Stomach and Bowels, and is also good for
the Strangury and Gravel, etc.

There is not yet known or Practiced by a more Excellent Medicine, both for
safeness pleasantness and speed, to expel the painful Gripes in Children,
whether with or without a Looseness, which are so incident to these poor Babes,
that thousands die thereof, as we may see by the weekly Bill of mortality;
therefore let such as have Children subject to Wind, or as are so themselves,
make use thereof; and in few Minutes they shall find the comfortable Relief
thereof; and indeed so will such as are subject to fainting and painful
Diseases: It Is very prevalent not only to prevent Fits in Children, but also to
relieve such as have them; In fine, its almost imparallel'd Virtues are such,
as that we could fill pages therewith,; but however shall here omit them, seeing
we have been more large in the precited Book, which God willing shall ere long
see the Light; seeing it may be of such public Service in the distinguishing
of the Nature of truly prepared Medicines from the common slops.

The Dose of this Cordial is from a pap Spoonful to three or four Ordinary
Spoonfuls, according to the Age, Strength and Condition of the Patient; and
that as often received as is requisite, which must at least be three, and
sometimes five or six times a day, when the Patient takes little Food or Rest.

Thus (Courteous Reader) have we with painful Labors passed through the Garden
of Distillation, in which the various Flowers are to be gathered, which may be
found profitable to you; the which indeed was the end of our undertaking it;
that you may see the Nature and difference of Waters, even of the first, second
and third order; and that you may not be deficient in any thing, which may be
said to appertain to this Art, we shall stretch forth our hand in the following
Chapter, and show you the True and Genuine way of preparing of Vegetable
Powers, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Treatis concerning Vegetable Powers, Oleosum's and Essential Salts.

POwers are by such a preparation only obtained as will indue them with the
Strength, Force and Quality of that Conc^^at, whence they are prepared, that is
to say, the virtuous one; for the three Principles must be united and brought
to a Volatile Spirit, and here we observe, that the Abstersive Nature proceeds
from the fixed Salt, the Specific from the Sulphur and the spirituality from
the Mercury; for these being in union you have the true Essentiality of the
Concreat, which according to the various Preparations is more or less exalted,
for if it is done by the help of Urinous Spirits, it may as well be called an
Oleosum as Powers, and especially if the Alkalie, contained in the Concreat, be
not radically Volatized, for here is the difference between an Oleosum and
Powers, as they are generally prepared, the First is that, wherein Vrinous
Spirits are most predominant, and is made fragrant by the Vinor together with
Aromatic Oils added in the Preparation; but in the Latter the Vinor fragrancy
is essentially predominant, and what Volatile or Alkalizated Spirits are
therein, they are so invisible as not to be discerned; but in the Preparation
of both we observe one grand defect, which is, that although they are both
spiritual, and if Distilled distiller with flasks A Separating Glass. An Vn^
(...) Funnell. A Retort the Helm A (...) Body and Head A bolt Head A Retort
Place this Figure before Chap IIII in page 139.

stilled, contain many Volatile Particles of the Oils and Spirits, insorb'd by
the hidden fermentative Action of the three, yet the more solid and substantial
part of the Body and Oil is not Elivated into the Spirit; as is plainly evident
in this, that there is a great quantity of Oil and fixed Salts remaining in a
ponderous Form at the bottom of the Cucurbit after the Operation is over; and
the more especially if you put quantity sufficient to make Powers of; that is
to say, a fourth, third or half part of the Pondus of the whole, and yet more,
if united with their fixed Salt, which cannot be truly volatilized till it has
received in three or four times its weight of Essential Oils, as will be
hereafter more largely shown; but now in defect of this you must learn to
prepare Oils, as we have mentioned in our Answer to the 10th. Query of the
Learned Dr. Boylewharfe in our Spagyrick Phil. Asserted; that is to say, they
must be bereaved of their internal water and floating Earth, so that they will
readily dissolve in and unite with Water or Spirit of wine, this is repeated
because that book may not come into the hands of those that this does; and
further, we say, that Oils may be thus very easily prepared by Art, so as to
cast forth their combust Earth, and as it were, an insipid Faeces, when as
without the same twenty Rectifications shall not so readily perform it; and in
this it is yet more dubious, seeing the Oils by the heat of the Fire will be
converted into a Combust Earth, remaining in the bottom of the Vessels; and
although Oil of Vitriol, Aqua-Fort, and such like Corrosives may revive part
thereof, yet we look upon the Oil to be considerably exhausted not only in
Pondus, but also in Virtue; when as that which hinders their union by a genuine
Preparation is not above a tenth part; and it is observeable that these Oils will
then unite with a fourth, third, or half Pondus of any truly rectified Spirit:
But to perform this, is not for the Head-wise Chemists, but for such indeed
whom Experience has made Heart-wise, seeing Nature must first graduate them
with her hidden Diaploma, which indeed is our Uniter and Reconciler of
Extremes; and that we may hint how it is performed, Observe, Let the highly
purified fixed Alkalie of any Concreate be herein dissolved, and then pour in
what quantity you please of its own Essential Oil, digest and supply it with
oil until the Alkalie is partly reversed from its Saline into a Sulphurous
Nature, and elivated into one Body, with the oil, then pour on this the fixed
Salt of Sal Anat. Lyb. and that will immediately precipitate all the gross
parts, digest three, four, or five days, or until the oil will dissolve in
Water or Spirit of Wine as aforesaid, the which you may every day try; this is
one good step toward the Preparation of noble Powers and Oleosums, and without
it twill be impossible ever radically to unite the whole body of the oil with
the Spirits, whatever some may vainly and falsely pretend, or ever to have the
virtue of the fixed Salt elivated into the Spirit, much more once ounce of the
Body brought up into some gallons of the same; so that the pretense that is in
the World of saying, that the Spirit is united with the fixed Salt, is a grand
abuse imposed on the Age by Pseudo-Spagyrists: for the fixed Salt, Oil, and
Spirit cannot by any way be united or reconciled, but by this Medium; neither
can these be obtained in their full and Essential Virtues without the benefit
of its exaltative Power: therefore let the Ingenious observe our words, and
receive them for their Profits, as given forth; not regarding the
Quacking-noise, of those who put forth so many Tables filled with the virtue of
their Powers and Essential Spirits, from thence drawing their Superiority to
others, therein saying, that they are impregnated with their fixed Salts; when
alas! it is impossible, that the Spirit should be either therewith united, or
thereby exalted until truly Prepared and Volatilized, as has been said; the
which we are very well satisfied these men connot Perform; for although their
pretenses are never so great abroad, of doing general service, yet when we
truly consider the thing, we know that their Ambition would be such as to
expose the Volatile Salt of Tartar, or any other fixed Alkalie to Sale, seeing
the greatest Philosophers have laid thereon so great an applause, in so much
that any rational man will believe it to be a Medicine fit and able to serve
the public; but this is not to be obtained from them, neither abroad nor at
home, although one would give ten times its weight in Gold for an ounce thereof;
we could never yet obtain one dram of it, although we have made their intimate
Acquaintance our friend in this Case, and therefore we shall but esteem of
their noise, as Rattles to deceive or please Fools and Children; but however
leaving this we shall come to show under how many heads Powers and Oleosums may
be properly stated, which we shall only name, and so orderly proceed to Treat
thereof; under the first we Comprehend

Potestates per Hermaphroditicum Salem Ammoniacum, or Powers by the help of a
prepared Sal-Armoniack: And under the second, Potestates nobilissimae
succedaneae Specificae per salem Tartari Volatilem; or, Noble Succedaneous and
Specific Powers: And under the third, Potestates verae and arcanae per salem
nostrum Panaristos, or the true essential and genuine Powers. Now these are the
three heads, under which may be comprehended all that can be said of Powers, we
shall begin with the first, they being easiest to be prepared.

Now seeing that every one cannot obtain the Volatile Salt of Tartar, neither
will some indeed spend their time or money after it, but would rather accept of
easy things; for the sake of such we shall first describe those which are made
by the help of the said Sal-Armoniack, and how the said Sal Armoniack is also
to be prepared.

Those which are made by the help of the said Sal-Armoniack; are of a noble and
cleansing nature; the which they borrow from the Hermaphroditical Salt, that is
radically united with the Oil and Spirit, and this in part supplies the want of
the Volatile Salt of Tartar, and enriches the Powers far above those that have
no Salt in them; for this Preparation, to perform it well, is no small part of
the Chemical Art; and there be many of those who pretend to succedanous Keys,
that cannot not do it; for the Urinous Spirit must first be bereaved of its
faetor or stink, and secondly radically united with the Vinor and Oleous ones;
the way to bereave it of its faetor is thus, take of pure Red-Wine two pound,
and filtre exactly through a double Cap-paper, put it in digestion for seven
days, pouring on now and then four or five ounces of Spirit of Wine distilled
from rich Aromaticks, and as it begins to smell very fragrant, put in a pound
of common Sal-Armoniack that has been dissolved in the distilled waters of
Aromatick-spices, exactly filtred and again boiled up into the body of Salt;
which being therein dissolved you must feed it as before with the Aromatic
Spirit, adding thereunto of the Essential Oil of Cinnamon Guaiacum, and
Sassaphrax, of each half an ounce, and by a very gentle heat bring it to a
dryness; the which Salt remove, and carefully preserve, for it is of an
inestimable value.

Then take Oyster-shells, wash them very clean, dry them, and Calcine them to
an exceeding white Calx, the which power very finely, and sift through a fine
sieve; then take of this, and the highly purifyed Sal-Armoniack, of each a like
quantity, mix them well together, and put them into a Retort, and pour thereon
twice their weight of the Alkalizated Spirit of that Concrete, whence you
intend to make your Powers, and by degrees of fire distill to dryness, the
spirit that comes over you may rectify from a proportionable Quantity of dried
herbs, spices, or seeds, from whence you make your Powers or Oleosum; and then
unite three pound thereof with half a pound of Essential Oil by two or three
Cohobations; or if your oil is prepared as before directed, you may only shake
them together and they shall be united; or in defect of this, you may do it by
digestion, by adding in three or four ounces of our Common Reconciler, or
Vegetable-preserving-Salt; and so have you an Oleusum or Powers superior to
any as yet by others exposed to sale, being not only endued with the middle
nature of the Concreate, but also an Abstersive Virtue, as will be seen more at
large hereafter; for what is here said in general is sufficient to signify
unto you the preparation and nature of those Powers and Oleosums prepared by
the Hermaphroditical Sal-Armoniack; we shall therefore proceed to the
Particulars and first of,

Potestates Cinamomi, or the Powers of Cinnamon.
Take of the aforesaid prepared Sal-Armoniack one pound; of the highly
Alkalizated Spirit of Wine four pound, Distill and Unite, as before directed;
then Rectify from Cinnamon one pound moistened with a little Oil of common salt
run per del. in a strong B. M. and Cohobate two or three times upon the
Cinnamon, by which means its Virtue will be obtained, put this upon a pound of
fresh Cinnamon, and Cohobate as before, repeat this a third time, and your
Spirit will become very rich of the Cinnamon; now on the Cinnamon that remains
pour good Spirit of Wine, and extract the Tincture as long as any will come,
add these Tinctures together, and put them into a Retort, and call off; 8/4;
gently dry the Extract; the Cinnamon that remains after Distillation must be
gently dried and Calcined into Ashes, the which, while so warm as to be
handled, must be put into a Cucurbit pouring thereon the before mentioned
Spirit, called over by making the Extract, put on a blind head and digest three
days, decant the clear, and if after that you think any Spirit remains in the
Ashes you may call it off by Distillation, and then with Distilled Rainwater
extract the Salt from the Ashes in the Cucurbit, the which exactly filtre,
evaporate and Christallize; Now add your two Spirits together, and then take
the Salt and extract, and grind them together with six ounces of the Oil of
Cinnamon, put them into a large Retort and pour your Spirits on them, Distill off
and Cohobate three or four times, and lastly return your spirit back, adding in
of our Common Reconciler four ounces, digest four days, decant the clear, and
so are the Powers prepared.

Their Virtues.
They are prevalent in Vertigoes, Palsies, Apoplexies, deprivation of Sense,
Frensies, Madness, inveterate pains of the Head, Megrims, sudden Coughs, Colds,
and difficulty of Breathing, they not only comfort the Head and Brain and
refresh the Senses, but also cheer the Heart, resist Poison and revive the
Spirits, being a powerful Medicine in Palpitations, Faintings, Swoonings, and
Sickness at the Heart and Stomach, good against a stinking Breath, Indigestion
and want of Appetite, and other the like Defects: They are good for vomiting
and spitting of Blood, and excellent for weak and consumptive People.

They are also prevalent in the Cholick, Griping of the Guts, Wind, Pain of the
Stomach and Spleen, Iliack Passion, sharp and corroding humors in the Bowels,
and all other pains whatsoever; they cure a Diarrhea, Dysentery and Lientery,
the flux of the Liver, overflowing of the Terms, and Whites in Women.

Their use and manner of being Taken.
For Fits or any Diseases that suddenly approach, take thirty or forty drops in
a glass of spring water sweetened with a little Sugar, anointing the forehead
and temples therewith and forcing the savours up the nostrels, but for weakness
and fluxes, let forty drops be drank in a glass of Tent two or three times a
day, observe by the same rules are made the Powers of Sassafras, and all such
woods, as will yield an Essential Oil by Distillation, all of which are more
noble in virtue, than any of their common Prescriptions hitherto Dispensed. The
price ten shillings an ounce.

Potestates Menthoe, or the Powers of Mint.
Take of Mint, gathered in the right signature in a clear day, what quantity
you please, let them be chopped very small or rather pounded in a great stone
Mortar, and put them into a large Tunn or Oyle-fatt, as is ordered for
Distillation, and pour thereon new Wort or rather Mead sufficient to cover them
at least an hands breadth; either of which must be blood-warm, head them well
with yeast, and let them work as we have ordered in our first part of
Distillation, and after five days distill with a large Refrigeratory into
Low-wines; the which pour again upon a fresh quantity of Mint gently dried [the
herbs are best to be hanged in a bag as described figure the second, for so
they will get no ill tangue] and distill into proof goods; then add fresh herbs
as before, and distill a third time, which is called Rectification; but in this
we advise you to put in a Can or two of water to keep the body of your Still
from burning, as is usual in Re^^ification, then rectify from Christallized
Salt of Tartar, and unite it with purified Sal Armoniack, and again rectify
from the herbs in a large Cucurbit with its glass Helm, and so the Spirit
becomes rich, pure, vital, strong, and fragrant of the Herb; take of this,
three pound, of the oil of Mint six ounces, and unite as directed in the
generals. Observe that if Essential oils are rectified from mortified Bay Salt,
they may be brought to unite in equal pondus with the Spirit.

VIRTUES.
These Powers are superior to any of this nature hitherto extant, and
wonderfully fortify the Spirits, exhilerate the mind, strengthen the stomach,
and provoke Appe^ite, stays the Hiccough and Vomiting, and stops the fury of
choleric Passions; their like prevalency is also seen in stopping the Flowers
and Whites; externally the Temples being bathed with them eases the Headache
and cures Watry-eyes, strengthening weak sinnews, and being internally taken
and externally applied, are a Counter-poyson against the venom of Serpents: The
Dose is from twenty to forty Drops in Mead, Wine, or rather some cordial Julep
made from it is distilled water or Syrrup: The Price is Twelve pence an ounce.

Potestates Melissoe, or the Powers of Bawm.
Let your Bawm be gathered in its right signature and ordered in all things as
was said of Mints, only it is best to add in the Fermentation a little fixed
Niter, because the oleous part is not so easily manifested, as in some other
herbs, and you may make use of Sugar instead of Honey, in your fermenting, as
we have directed in that of the fermentation of flowers, herbs, and seeds by
Sugar; but you must observe that after it is brought into Proof-goods, you must
rectify at least four or five times before you Alkalizate it or unite it with
the purified Sal Armoniack, and then you may proceed in all things, as in that
of Mint; for the making of Vegetable Powers, is rather a common place than bare
receipt.

VIRTUES.
These are a great Comforter of the Heart, good against cold and moist
stomachs, and thence help Concoction, they imbibe evil Fume, and so not only
open the Brain, but also strengthen and refresh the same, they ease the
Toothache, powerfully purifying the Blood in the King's Evil, Scurvey, Dropsy,
Gout, Jaundice and Worms, they expel Poison and the Plague, and cure the biting
of Mad-dogs; they so wonderfully fortify the vital and natural Spirits, that a
certain Author says, they are endued with renovating virtue, even to restore
Old Age to a withful strength; but whether so or not, we cannot say, but this we
know, by Experience, that they revive the most melancholy person into a
wonderful cheerfulness, and are also excellent, being externally used, for hard
swellings and the Gout, and to bath grieved parts: The Dose is from fifteen to
thirty Drops, sometimes forty, according to age and strength, in a glass of
Ale, Mead or any fragrant wine, you may give them thrice a day; the price is
fourteen pence an ounce.

Potestates Sambuci Succinatoe, or the Powerful United Spirit of Elder
Essentificated with Amber.
Take the Berries when ripe, and pick out the stalks and green ones, and with a
large press, as for Apples, press out their Juice, cask it up with a little
bay salt and sweets or stumme, and in a warm place cause them well to ferment;
you may let them have some age, and then refine down with Izing-glass and rack
of, so you will have a noble Wine as you were showed in the first part; then on
the cheese or berries that remain you may pour rain or spring water, and press
a second time, and boil the Liquor half an hour, and then putting it into the
receivers let it stand till about blood-warm, and to every gallon add a pound
of Sugar, stir them well together, and with Ale-yest set it as you do a Back,
and after five days distill with a Refrigeratory into Low-wines, Proof-goods,
and Rectified Spirits, by the third extraction, then take fresh berries and
fill an Earthen-pan therewith and after the bread is drawn set them in the
Oven, and then press forth their Juice, to every pound of which add a pound of
six-penny-sugar, and boiling it into a Syrrup, clarify it with Whites of Eggs,
then to every gallon of the said Wines, add a pound of the said Spirit, and two
pounds of the Syrrup or Sweets, and let them ferment, but observe to row them
well together as you put them in, and so will you have a Noble Wine Royal of
Sambucus, endued with noble Virtues, as we have said in our first part; now
this must be again distilled into Low-wines and proof Spirits, and then
rectifyed from the flowers, seasonably gathered, until it is a Sulphur wholly
inflamable; it will be yet the purer, if you rectify it from its own salt drawn
from the Ashes of the Wood burnt: now that Salt volatilized, and an Oil drawn
from the dry wood, and these three united was formerly our Powers, but to
succinate it, proceed thus: Take of the best Amber three pound, and distill in a
Glass retort by the degrees of Fire, separate the Spirit from the Oil, and
rectify the Oil from spirit of Salt or A. R. as we have shown in the Chapter of
Oils in our Chym. Rational. and then from the dried wood of Elder macerated
with Bay Salt in a large Refrigeratory, and so you have a noble transparent
Oil, the which reserve 'till hereafter; now the Spirit and Salt of Amber you
must mix with equal parts of purifyed Sal Armoniack, and by means of the
aforesaid Oyster-shells force them into a Spirit, which being rectifyed is in
it self a most noble Medicine, and being united with common Tartarisated Spirit
of Wine, will perform more than that which is made from the flowers of
Sal-Armoniack sublimed from common Salt, both in its Philosophical use in
drawing Tinctures, as also in its Medicinal virtues: now take of the aforesaid
Spirit of Elder seven pound, of the succinated Spirit of purifyed Armoniack,
even now taught one pound, and of the aforesaid Oil of Amber twelve ounces, and
of our Common Reconciler six ounces, shake them well together and they shall be
united, and digesting four days, decant the clear, and thus are the Noble
Succinated Powers of Elder Prepared.

Observe, I thought it convenient to give this at large for two Reasons, the
first is, that if the shell of the Berry is fermented, instead of relieving the
Animal Faculties, it will toxicate the brain like Man-drake or Hen-bane; the
second is, the Oil being hard to prepare without our Sal Panaristos, therefore
have we added the Oil of Amber, which Magnetically attracts it out of the wood;
we have seen the Effect of the former by such who have made the Spirits by
fermentation, without expressing the Juice; therefore have we given this
caution.

VIRTUES.
This is a most excellent and praiseworthy Medicine, far beyond that set forth
in onr Britanean Magazine of Liquors, both sor internal and external uses, it is
prevalent for most Diseases incident to the Body, especially for agues and
fevers, surfeits, pains in the head or back, vomiting, gripes and looseness;
it is a safe and powerful Medicine in the jaundice, scurvey, and dropsy, gout
and stone, and several other diseases, as will be seen by its Use and Dose.

In all Acute Diseases you may take from forty to fifty drops every three hours
in a glass of Sack mull'd with Cinnamon, and sweating plentifully in Bed
thereon, wonderful Relief will be found, for the offending Matter will be
carried off by sweat and urine.

In Pestilential diseases, such wherein the mass of blood is Corrupted, as
smallpox, swine-pox, measles, etc. you must take it five or six times a day in
a glass of sack posset drink, wherein safron is braid, and so the Venom will be
carried from the heart, and the vital spirits be strengthened, and as the
disease begins to abate, purge two or three times with the Golden-spirit, to
carry off the Relics of the same.

For Gripes and tormenting pains of the Wind, Cholick, Strangury. and want of
Rest, make a Brandy Caudle and as it is fit to drink put in at least sixty
drops, sweat well in Bed and admirable Relief will be found.

For the Phthisick, shortness of Breath, Consumption, Dropsy, Scurvey, and
Stone in the Bladder, you must take forty drops every six hours in the juice of
baked Turnips clarified, and as much of its own syrup as will serve to make it
into a Cordial, whose use must be continued until Relief is found; this also
does excellent well in the Gout, and for Ricketty, Consumptive Children; as
also for sprains, bruises and squatts, only let the spirit without any mixtion
be externally used, and chaff the grieved part therewith.

In fine, its Virtues are so excellent, that we advise all Sea faring-men never
to be without some bottles of it, for twill not only preserve them from such
Diseases as are incident to them, as Scurveys, Calenture, Loathings, Gripes,
etc. but also ease and cure them of the same, being taken in Water sweetened
with its own Syrrup, or a little Sugar, in which Cases the ordinary Dose is
from thirty to sixty drops, according as the strength and Age of the Patient
is: The Price of our first Powers of Elder, is one Shilling the Ounce-bottle,
but of these, one shilling and six pence.

Observe, Mine is only to be had at my house, because there is a nameless Bill
put forth by one Andrew Soul, who has made use of most of my words out of my
receipt given in our Britanean Magazine, and therefore I thought it convenient
to signify that I cannot own his Spirit, much less his proceedings, seeing it is
great imprudence in him to ascribe to himself that which his Experience cannot
demonstrate the hundredth part of.

Potestates Rosemarini, or the Powers of Rosemary.
Take the Leaves of Rosemary gathered in the right signature and dried, and put
them into a large Matrix, and cast thereon four or five handfuls of fine Calx
vive and gently stir them together, if your quantity is large it must be more,
even a third part of the weight of the herb, then pour thereon rainwater,
distilled from its Feces, after forty days putrefaction, and distill off about
two thirds, and you will have a Low-wine very pregnant and strong of the herb,
then take the like quantity of Rosemary and put it into the distilled
rainwater, just enough for the water to cover, and putting on a blind head
decoct it Thirty hours in Balneo, let this be put blood-warm upon an other
quantity of Rosemary-leaves, flowers and all, and the aforesaid Low wines
already distilled off, and adding a pound of Sugar to every gallon, stir them
well together, head them well with Yest and let them ferment five days, distill
again a second time into Proof-goods, and adding fresh Rosemary with a little
Bay Salt bring it into rectified Spirits, and a fourth time make it fine by
Rectifying from fresh herbs and equal parts of the Oil of its own fixed Salt
run per del. Tartar, or any other fixed Alkaly; then unite two pound of this
with one pound of the highly purifyed Sal Armoniack by the help of the
aforesaid Calx, and add this to a gallon of the aforesaid prepared Spirit, put
it into a great Cucurbit and fill as full as you can with flowers, and let it
stand close luted in the Sun for five days, then put on the Alembick with its
Receiver and distill, and you will have a volatile, subtle, and fragrant Spirit,
which quantity being united with a pound of the Oil, as was directed in the
other Powers, you have the true Powers of Rosemary.

Their Virtues.
This indeed is a Medicine of praiseworthy Virtues, for superior to the slop
Hungarian Water sold, being prevalent against most Diseases of the head,
stomach, heart, womb, or any other viscera, it may be applied to any disease of
the head, especially Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Convulsions and Vertigoes, the
weakness of Nerves, Headache, hardness of Hearing, and dimness of Sight, it
comforts the Head and Brain, refreshing the Animal Spirits, and clearing the
Vital ones, therefore good against all palpitations, faintings, swoonings, and
fits of the heart, neither does it forget to do its part toward the natural
Spirits, for it opens the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, and so cures
Agues, Fevers, Scurveys, Jaundice and several other Deseases as will be seen
by its Use and Dose.

For any of the aforesaid Diseases, you must take from Twenty to thirty drops,
three or four times a day in a glass of Mead or Wine, that is, an hour before
each meal; but for the Gripes of the Guts, Cholick, Oppression of Wind, or
sharp Acrimonious Humors in the Spirits or Bowels, you must take sixty drops
in a glass of muli'd Sack in the Paroxisins, repeating it every three hours
'till relief is found; For Agues you must take the largest dose an hour before
the fit, and soundly sweat thereon; it is also good to be given thus in mull'd
Wine both before and after Delivery to facilitate the Birth, and to ease
Afterpains: It is Observable to us that it is an health-preserving Medicine,
keeping People lively that take it: But for Old Aches, the Gout, Rheumatism,
pains and weakness of Sinews and Nerves, the Palsy and Cramp, violent Head
achs, and dimness of sight, you must externally strike the grieved parts
therewith two or three times a day, taking the savours up the nostrils; if you
wash the face therewith it is an excellent Cosmatick, clearing and beautifying
the Skin, The Price is Twelve Pence an Ounce.

Observe, thus may be prepared the Powers of Peniryal and others.

Potestates Cochleariae, or the Powers of Scurvey-grass.
Take Scurvey-grass-wine, the Preparation of which is shown in our Britanean
Magazine of Liquors or else in place of that, take Scurvey-grass in May, June
or July, when it is in its flowers, and stamp it in a stone Mortar, and put it
into a large Tun, and pour thereon as much Liquor bloodwarm in which Molasses
or Honey is dissolved, as will just cover them, head them well with Yeast, and
set them to ferment, and after four days distill into Low-wines, and
Proof-spirits: Observe that the Fermentation is promoted by an Onion dipped in
strong Mustard, and a Ball of Whiting cast in, this will bring a Tun of
Molasses-goods forward when defective in working; Argell does well to give an
internal Ferment, it also moderates and flats a Tunn when too violent; now
being brought into Proof-goods, you must take Scurvy Grass, which has been
compressed with Christals of Tartar or Salt, Honey or Molasses in a close Tub
smeered over with Barm, but no Liquor must be put to it; and having stood three
days in a cold place, for in a warm one we have observed that much of the
Crafis will be lost, which consists in a Volatile Armoniack, put it into your
Distill as full as you can cram, and then pour thereon the aforesaid Aireal
Spirit, for it is far superior to Spirit of Wine which too too many use, enough
to cover or moisten them just to the top, close the Head of your Still very
exactly, and let your Recipient be so, as that no Air may come in; give it for
the first day a ferment in the still, and the second distill, but as it begins
to work, you must damp your fire very close, for it must come but softly, so
let it run as long as any goodness comes; you must repeat this Operation a
second and third time with fresh Grass, and if you add in a little Volatile
Salt of Tartar, or Sal Anotasier Lybianus, and have a Peuterhead you may
distill, and receive a part as long as it runs all fire; the after running you
may save for afresh beginning: Observe, when you think that you have too much
phlegm in the Still, you may add a quantity of decripitated Bay Salt, and so
will it be deflegm'd: the way to make the Spirit purging is shown in our
Chymicus Rationalis; but for the Powers proceed thus; take Scurvy Grass and
smeer it over with new Mustard, and lay a lay of that and another of
Scurvey-grass-seed, so continue str. sup. str. and smeer up the uppermost also
with Mustard, ferment with Water and Salt, and distill into Essential Oil, the
way is shown in our Chymicus Rat. then being separated unite one pound of this
with six pound of the Spirit, according to the way directed in other Powers;
and so are they Prepared.

Their Virtues.
These Powers are abundantly surpassing in virtue any other preparation of
Scurvy grass whatsoever, and as I formerly told you, they were originally
prepared by me in Holland,and presented to both Universities, which for
goodness, strength, and pleasantness of Taste were allowed to stand parallel
with, nay some were of Opinion that they clearly out striped those of the
greatest Pretenders in Europe, the Modus Operandi of which I never so plainly
before communicated; but I have now done it on purpose to be serviceable to the
Ingenious, and to destroy the use of that sophisticated Spirit sold, which is
made in six or eight hours time, with a little Malt Spirit and Scurvey grass,
made burning and sharp in Taste with Horseradish, but this Spirit is not to be
valued; for it is impossible to take out the specific virtue of the Grass
without an higher exaltation; and the reason why the sick are often
disappointed in their Expectation is this, the slight preparation that many
Pretenders make, for the Grass will not so easily give forth its central
Virtue, for this, when truly obtained, has an excellent effect in relieving
from many Diseases, and principally the Scurvey, because the herb has a
signature against the Disease, it helps the Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera in
their Defects; it fortifies the vital Spirits and gives Circulation to the
Blood, its internal texture being made up of a Volatile Armoniack and Vinor
Essence united with a vital medicinal Crasis, and as the Learned Physicicians
allow, as well Modern as Ancient which that worthy Mrs. Experience daily
confirms, there is no herb in the Vegetable Kingdom of a more Specific Virtue
in curing the Scurvey, than the aforesaid Scurvey-grass, for it is a great
Abstersive and so dissolves and dissipates congealed humors, for by its
Alkalisated nature it opens and mundifies, and by it is Vinor are the Venoms
imbibed and destroyed, so by its carrying off all the Saline trude humors
which are the Original Cause of the Scurvey, whether proceeding from living in
crude moist and foggy Airs, where the Sea-damps are, or from raw sour fruits,
or exceeding Salt Fish or Flesh, as is plainly demonstrated by the incident of
the Diseaseupon Seafaring-persons, especially such as use long Voiages, it
sweetens the blood; this Spirit does not only cure this Disease in all its
Symptoms, but also prevents it from approaching in such as take it for
prevention sake, therefore in brief, what we have to say is, that it is endued
with virtue to give Sanity to the principal Faculties, and is a certain
specific both at Sea and Land where this popular Disease Reigns; as also in
Camps and Armies against the Chillbane and Rot, which are usually there, by
which men dye as Chore-sheep.

Their Use and Dose.
For the Scurvey, Jaundice, Dropsy, Consumption, Ph^hisick, or shortness of
Breath, these Powers may be used at all times, the oftener the better, The Dose
is ten, twenty, thirty or forty drops according to the Age, Strength, and
Constitution of the Patient, in a glass of Wine, Beer, Tea, or Coffee, as best
liked, The Price is one Shilling an Ounce.

Now according to these Rules you may make any Vegetable Powers, therefore we
shall omit instancing such as depend on common places, and come to give a
description of such as are Compound.

Potestates Emundantes, or our General Cleansing Powers.
Take of Venice-Turpentine four pound, Tartarizated Spirit of Wine the like
quantity, and put them into a large Retort, distill, and there will ascend a
Spirit and fragrant Oil, as we have shown in making the Essential Oil of
Turpentine in our Chymicus Rationalis; the Oil must be made Aireal by
Rectifying several times from Bay Salt, as is also there shown; the Spirit you
must pour on Frankincense, and Mastick of each two ounces, Aloeshepatic,
Date-stones, Laudanum, Castor, the Roots of Bettony, and Elecampane of each one
ounce and an half, Cardamums, Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, Galingal, Cubebs,
Calamus Aromaticus, Lignum Aloes, Yellow-Saunders, Zedoary, Pepper, Spicknard,
Lawrel-berries, Smallage-seeds, Mug-wortseeds, Sweet-fennel-seeds, Ani-seed,
Sorrel-seeds, of each two ounces and an half, the Flowers of Brasil, red and
white Roses of each three ounces, Germander, Tormentil, Juniper Berries,
Agrimony, Centory, Fumitory, Pimpernel, Dandelion, Eyebright, Feverfew of each
two ounces, Rhubarb three ounces, dried Figs, Raisons, Sweet Almonds of each
four ounces, Virgins Honey six pound, Mevis Sugar ten pound; to these add of our
Fermentative Salt three ounces, and being close luted digest in the heat of
Horse-dung twenty days in the Vessel described fig. 4. Then take out, and
clapping on an head with its Receiver lute all fast and distill in B. 'till all
is over that will ascend, which first will come in a white Spirit, secondly
more deep, and thirdly a yellowish-red with some floating Oil, which fragrant
Spirit and Oil preserve and unite with the aforesaid Etherial Oil of
Turpentine; Observe you may remove your Vessel out of the B. into a Sand or
Reverberatory Furnace, and by degrees of fire force over all that will come,
which will be a stinking Phlegm with some fetid Oil, the which may be rectifyed
from Spirit of Salt, as we have taught in our Chymicus Rationalis, and so it
will become fragrant and fit to be united with the Medicine; then take of Musk,
and Ambergreece three ounces, Safron four ounces, Camphire three ounces, and
Cohobate in B. two or three times till united, and lastly force all over till
dry in the Bottom; the subtle Spirit carefully preserve, out of the faeces that
remains in the bottom, you must extract the Tincture with highly Rectified
Spirit of Cinnamon, as long as it tinges the Spirit, all which said Tinctures
put together and Filtre; and putting it in Baln. adapt a Receiver, lute close
and call off two thirds, the which may be put away for other uses; then
evaporate the Phlegm unto the consistence of an Extract, the which add to your
Medicine, and digest with three ounces of fine Sugar till united, and if any
thing precipitate, decant the clear, the which carefully pre^er^^ for use.

VIRTUES.
These Powers are a noble Medicine, carrying a superiority of Virtue with them,
answering all that is attributed to the Powers of Turpentine, the Stone powers,
and others; but if you esteem of Cantharides, Hog-lice, and dried Toads
distiled by violence of Fire, and then rectified and united, you may take them
for me, and I Will administer these, although we confess that if these were
dissolved by the volatile and genuine Spirit of Tartar, or having respect to
Glauber in his prescription for the Stone, which is prepared by his wonderful
Sal Mirabilis, much might be expected therefrom; for we know that a Toad, although
so great a poison, may by these be so prepared, as to deserve the name of an
Arcanum in the Plague, far above any hitherto known in the World; but this
being treated of in its proper place, shall be omitted here, and so proceed to
speak on of the excellent virtue of these Powers, which indeed are profitable
in many Diseases, especially in the Strangury, or difficulty of making Water,
Stone, Gravel, Sand, or Sline, and such offensive things which obstruct the a
Vrinary passage; they open Obstructions and highly provoke Urine, being very
profitable in all kind of Fluxes, excellent in Fevers, Agues, Jaundice,
Scurvey, Leprosy, and all foulness and corruption of Blood; externally used,
they cure new and green Wounds, tho in the Nerves, Old Aches, Ulcers, tho never
so rebellious; they are excellent for Noli-metangere's, and Plague-soars,
Impostumes and Fistula's, they case the Gout, and are helpful in Rheumatisms,
Palsy, and weakness of Members; they are good in the Hemmorrhoids or Piles, and
many other Diseases, for they will perform all that can be expected of a
Medicine short of succedanous ones.

Their Way of being Taken.
You may take from fifteen to twenty drops, mornings only i^ a glass of
Rhenish-wine sweetened with the Syrrup of Marshmallows, but strong
Constitutions may take thirty or forty: For external uses, where any grief is,
you must bath the part till relief is found; for Sore-eyes, or those that have
a Pearl, you must drop in a drop once in two days; but for Wounds and Ulcers
you must dip a pledge therein and apply it with some proper Plaster:

The Price is 2 s 6 d an Ounce.

Potestates Nepenthoe, or our Annodyne Pain-easing Powers.
Take Poppies gathered in their right signature, and in a cold Still, Distill
the Water therefrom, then take fresh Poppy-leaves, and putting them into a
Matrix strew them over with Calx vive, after the same manner as directed in
making Potestates Rosmarini, distill off about 5/8 thereof, ferment with Sugar,
Distill into Low-wine, and from fresh flowers rectify into Proof-goods, and by
reiteration into fine Spirits; then take a large quantity of Poppyseeds, which
by Art must be macerated, and so distill into Essential Oil, then take of the
best Thebian Opium and with the aforesaid Spirit extract all the Tincture, and
make an Extract as before directed, and to every three pound of the Spirit you
call over, add one pound of the aforesaid purified Sal Armoniack, and a pound
of the prepared Calx of Oyster-shells, and macerate them together with the
Faeces of the Opium that was left of the Extract, put them into a retort, and
by violence of fire, force over all that will come, the which preserve, and the
Faeces that are in the Retort, set in a cold moist Cellar to run per deliquium,
the which exactly filtre and Christallize, and you will have a noble Opiated
Salt, take the whole quantity of this Salt, and of Cinnamon ten ounces, Nutmegs,
Cloves, and broad Mace of each four ounces, macerate them and put them into a
Retort, and pour the aforesaid Spirit on them, and distill in B. to dryness,
then take this Spirit so prepared and aromatized, and equal parts of the first
Spirit, put them together, and add in the Extract, and Camphire one ounce, of
the Narcotick Sulphur of Venus six ounces, and of the aforesaid Essential Oil
eight ounces, digest till united, which will easily be if you proceed by
Cohobation, and Digestion as before directed.

These are wonder-working Powers and perform more than we are willing to put
upon them; being far above any Liquid Laudanum hitherto extant to the World,
and more prevalent in any Disease to which that is attributed; for by this
method is the Opium well corrected and brought to a safe and pleasant Medicine,
prevalent against Spitting of Blood, Catarrhs, Fluxes of any kind, Terms,
Whites, and Gonorrhea's, as also in Restlesness, Watchings, and Fevers,
Melancholy, Frensy, Epilepsy, Convulsion, and Fits of the Mother, Plurisy,
Vomiting, and Cholick; there is hardly a better Remedy to be found for any
violent Pain or Restlesness in the Body, whatever vain Applauses too too many
fill Books with, who make as if one Medicine should be Universal against all
Diseases; but our Knowledge of Nature has learned us so much the contrary,
that we have a perfect abhorrence against this canting way, however our
limitations being given in other Writings, we shall omit it here: The Dose is
from three to five, from thence to twenty Drops in some Cordial Julep,
according to the strength of the Disease, and Age and Constitution of the
Patient. The Price is 2 s. 6 d. an Ounce.

Potestates Baccarum Juniperi, or the Powers of Juniper Berries.
Take of Juniper Berries twenty or thirty pound, or what Quantity you please,
pound them small, and putting them into a Tub pour thereon Rainwater, adding
thereunto an handful of Bay Salt, and so let them stand ten or twelve days, and
then distill in a Copper-still with a Refrigeratory, so that pure Oil will
ascend with Water in good quantity; and when the Liquor and Berries are taken
out of the Still, if you press through an hairbag, filtre and evaporate, you
shall find good quantity of Extract, and yet the more, if they have had a
ferment by some Gummous and Vinor Nature; the Water that comes over, must be
separated from the Oil by a separating glass, and then distilled over again with
resh Berries and Calx vive, as directed in other Powers, and so brought to
Low-wines, Proof-goods, and Rectified Spirits, by adding in fresh Berries to
enrich the same; Now some talk of drawing the Calcined Salt out of the Berries,
but we, as an Operator, tell you that the Quantity will be so insignificant, as
not to be worth your fire and time spent about it, as upon Trial you will find;
if it is to cleanse your Spirit, Salt of Wormwood, or Tartar will do the same:
But to talk of Volatilizing this, or any other fixed Alkaly in a whiff, is
stuff; for it is not to be performed under Ten Weeks or Three Months, and that
by the hand of a Skilful Philosopher, and then only by essential Oils, and so
it takes on it the taste and smell of that Oil by which it is Volatilized, and
has all the Power, Strength, and Force of the Concreat, so that it is no
matter what the Alkaly is, and therefore have not Stark^^ and Helmont in vain
called Tartar the public Family of Alkalies; but we will not teach you here
such difficulties, but advise you to the Hermaphroditical Salt before
described, one pound whereof is to be united with two of the Spirit by
Distillation, then that with a gallon of the other Spirit, and a pound of the
Essential Oil, as directed in other Powers, so are they prepared being tinged
by their own Extract.

These Powers are of great Service in the Cholick, Gripes, Oppressions of Wind,
and Gravel in the Kidneys, Vreters, and Bladder, they not only ease violent
pains, but also open the Obstruction of parts, they prevalently provoke Urine,
comfort the Stomach, Bowels, and all the Viscera, the vital Spirits receive the
Benefit thereof, It is a general Custom in Holland, when the Child is troubled
with Oppressions of Wind, for the Mother whilst the Child is sucking, to drink
of the Powers or Spirit of Juniper, by which the Child is Relieved; what shall
I say more than this, we know that the Powers are endued with all the virtue of
the Juniper-berry, let it be by what manner so ever prepared, so that we leave
the rest to the discretion of the Ingenious: The Dose is as of other Powers
from fifteen to forty drops, in a glass of Beer, Wine or Mead, for complicate
Diseases they may be variously mixed with other Powers, and principally for
violent pains, with our Potestates Nepenthe. The Price 1 s. an Ounce.

Now by these Rules may be made the Powers of any Berries whatsoever, nay from
what is here said and laid down, you may comprehend whatever belongs to
Vegetable Powers: And as to Vrinous Powers, their Preparation, Use, and Dose,
is described in our Chymicus Rationalis, and Spagyrick Philosophy Asserted,
under the Title of Oleosums and Powers, so that it would be but fruitless
Repetitions to Insert them here.

Potestates Cosmeticae, or our Beautifying Powers.
Take of Bean-flowers five handfuls, Nants Brandy two quarts, digest them
fourteen days in the Sun, and Distill; then add thereunto of the Roots of white
Lillies gently dried, Aron-roots, Fenugreek, Contra yerva, Virginia Snake-root,
of each four ounces, Spurge three ounces, Pimpernel, Rosemary, and Celendine of
each, two ounces, Camphire one ounce, and Distill S. A. Then take of this one
pound, of the Oil of Talk described in our Chym Rat. two ounces, Digest them
till united, and so are the Powers prepared.

Their Virtues and Use.
These being Externally used are powerful in taking off all enormities of the
Skin, wonderfully beautifying the same, and by the right use thereof Freckles,
Sun-burn, Pimples, and Scurf will vanish, they make the Skin so truly Smooth,
and Beautiful, that Wrinkles and Old Age are hardly discernable: But observe
that you clean the Face well before you use it, you may either rub your face
with it alone, or mixed with White wine, which you please. The price is from
one to five Shillings an Ounce, according as it is exalted with the Oil of Talk.

Potestates Mercurii, or our Powers of Mercury.
The Preparation hereof we have faithfully discovered in our Chym. Rat. under
the Title of the Oil of Mercury, together with their Virtue; being most
prevalent in the Scurvey, Gout, Pox, Leprosy and Itch; but we think it
convenient to add, that they are also an excellent Cosmetick, taking off
Tetters, Herpes, Scabs and Pocky Eruptions, and for persons that are very
Tarony, they are necessary to be used before our Potestates Cosmeticae:
Spring Water proceeding from a good Chalk well, is as good a Vehicle or
Dilative as can be, therefore we need not prescribe another. The Price is 7 s.
6 d. an Ounce.

Now having given the gradual Preparation of several noble Medicines, in our
Chym. Rat. and largely explained the Specific in our Spagyrick Phylosophy's
Triumph, we shall thither refer you for your Satisfaction, and we are almost
persuaded, that you will not think your Money, Labor and Time in reading them
lost: But that you, if you put your hand to the plow, and come experimentally
to know and witness the Mysteries therein contained, will then only value them
according to their deserved Merit; so leaving the whole to your judicious
Consideration, hoping that this at present will suffice concerning Powers of
this order, we shall now proceed to touch at those in general which are of a
more superior one, sc.

Potestates Nobilissimae Succedaneae and Specificoe per Salem Tartari
Volatilem, or Noble Succedaneous Specific Powers.
As to these Succedaneous Powers, we shall first speak thereof in general, and
then more particularly show their Preparation: In the first place you must make
the Spirit by Fermentation, and the Essential Oil by Maceration and
Distillation, as has been ordered in other Powers, and the fixed Salt by the
Fire of Conflagration and Calcination, and let it be purified by Distillation,
Filtration, Evaporation, Christallization, and another gentle Calcination, with
perpetual Motion, and then a reiterated Dissolution and Congelation, that so it
may be purified by Decoction, stiring up the internal fire, whereby the
intermixed Attoms of corruptible defilements will be separated, which by no
other way can be performed: Now your Salt being brought to this degree, you may
through it purify your Spirit by Distillation, whereby the same will be better
deflegm'd than otherwise can be accomplished; for the Salt drinks in the
grosser sulphurous parts therein contained; as is plainly evident by the
Spirit's being bereaved of its strong Taste more at once, and also of its Phlegm,
than otherwise at many times; then you may Rectify it from fresh herbs, and so
it gets a friendly, pleasant, vital Taste thereof; now it is observable, that
although the Salt drinks in the Phlegm, and robs the Spirit of its grosser Sulphur,
by which it is made very pure, yet it communicates to the Spirit but very little
of it is own fixed nature; for as Experience daily demonstrates the Saline,
Abstersive qualities of the Alkalie will not pass into the Spirit till
Volatilized; and as has been already hinted in the beginning of this Chapter,
they are not to be elivated but as they are radically united with their
Essential Oils, and Volatile Spirits, by means of the Dispositio media, and
that in such a way as the Salts must thereby have swallowed up enough to
assatiate their thirst, the which is called Pondus naturae; and this is
performed by humidations and exications, or by succesful feeding, and as that
ever worthy George Starkey says, they must be dried by the Air, and moistened
by the Fire, and Ferment of Nature, so by a gentle Decoction brought to a total
Volatility, the which may either be distilled into a Spirit, or sublimed into a
Salt, as you please; But we say that you need not proceed so high; for when all
the Principles are so united as readily to dissolve under an highly Alkalizated
Spirit; then by Distillation you will have the flavours brought over very rich
and fragrant, and a sweet Balsam remain behind, the which you must deflegm very
carefully, and by Digestion unite with the Volatile Spirit: and then you have
not only an Oleosum and Powers, but also the Essence of that Concreat, whose
Virtues are so noble, that they really will perform as much as can in Reason
therefrom be expected as you shall see more at large in the following
Preparation, etc.

Potestates Abscinthii, or the Powers of Wormwood.
Take Wormwood gathered in its proper signature, rich and full of Seeds, what
quantity you please, let it be somewhat gently dried, chopped small, and then
put into a Tub with water and Salt, (as directed in other Powers) then distill
therefrom the Essential Oil, remove and separate by a Separatory, and the Oil
carefully preserve: N. B. the Water will serve to macerate fresh Wormwood to
which, being put into the Still, you may add the former Oil, and distill again,
by which means you will not only get the larger quantity of oil, but the same
will also be purer and richer of the Essential Virtues of the Herb; Now the
remaining herbs may be dried in the Sun and then burnt to Ashes in a Chimney;
or for brevity sake, let dry Wormwood which has not been distilled, be burned
(the which will yield the greatest quantity of Salt) which calcined Ashes put
into a large Hypocrates sleeve, and hang the same over a large Funnel, wherein
is placed a double Cap-paper, and gently pour on the Ashes distilled Rainwater
about blood-warm, and so the saline water will pass through the bagg and be
received by the Funnel, from thence filtre into the under Receiver, and become
very pure; you must observe to cast on fresh Liquor as long as any saltness
comes out of the Ashes, and when they will give no more, place your Receiver in
a Sand Furnace, give fire and continue the same until the whole is evaporated
off to a dryness; then remove and put into a Calcining pot in a Wind-furnace,
and with a small Iron rod keep stirring until it is thoroughly glowing hot; then
remove, and when cold put them on a Marble, or Glass made for that purpose, set
it in a cold Cellar, and let run per del. the which again filtre and
Christallize, and so is the true Salt of Wormwood Prepared; which is excellent
for the destroying Acidities in the Body, and stopping Vomitings of any kind,
But to exalt it, the Essential oil must therewith be spagyrically united, as we
have before said, which in plain terms is performed by adding in our Dispositio
media or Reconciler of Extremes, what this is we have briefly intimated in our
Spagyrick Philosophy Asserted, together with its Preparation, but more fully
and amply in our Spagyrick Philosophy's Triumph, Trifertes Soladini and Ignis
Astralis Adeptorum; the which (God willing) shall see the Light, they being
preparing for the Press. Now take of this Salt one pound, of the Essential oil
two or three pound, and of our Red Wine Q. S. E. to elixerate, and then by a
secret fermentative Coction, like the heat of the Sun in Aries, the Compound
will be changed into a third Nature, neither saline nor sulphurous, but white
and creamy of a saponary consistence, which nevertheless is no common Sapo, but
Philosophical; for we say that it is not sufficient to unite the salts and oils
by a bare association of parts, but by a radical union, they entering into each
others profundity: Now when the Circulation is so far performed as that the
Alkaly has drank in three times its weight of oil, and none swim on the top,
then pour thereon the pure Alkalizated Spirit of Wormwood, and draw off, and
you shall have a volatile burning Spirit, very fiery with the oil, which is
more noble Powers than any hitherto extant, although it has not yet a third part
of the Exaltation of its virtues; for after the Spirit is over you have an
insipid Phlegm, as also a noble tinged Balsam, the which you must by Circulation
unite with the former; and so by another Rotation you have the true Powers of
Wormwood.

Whose Virtues are so many, as that we shall not here insert them, but refer
you to the Famous Radolphus Glauber, the Worthy Starkey, and Renowned Helmont,
and that mighty Chemical Monarch Paracelsus, and so proceed on to show the way
of making the Essential Salt, that being most advantageous to the curious
Artificers in Liquors.

Whose Preparation Helmont expressly says, may be Performed in three Months by
his hidden Circulation without Water: And we say, that as the aforesaid
Elixeration is performed, being again dissolved in its own Menstruum, by a
gentle decoction, the whole will be converted into a Christalline Salt, a small
part of the oil only excepted, which will be turned into a Rosinary Gum,
distinct from what is Salified, which said Salt contains the Vita media and
whole Crasis of the Vegetable; for by this way of Union they contract from each
other a wonderful Virtue; for from the Salt proceeds, the Abstersive, and from
the Oil, the Balsamic and Vital Nature, both Contributing for the performing
real Cures; this is that Salt of Wormwood, which Helmont says, is a true
Specific for the curing all kind of Fevers; Now what we further observe in
this Salt is, that it has a communicative Ferment to all Herbs: for their
macerated Tinctures being taken out (as we have shown in our Chymicus
Rationalis) and Digested therewith in a Chicken heat, 'twill all in about
twelve or fifteen days be converted into a Christalline Salt, thus the Tincture
of Wormwood exalts its own Salt, and so the like of other Vegetables: Nay
moreover by this way you may have a Salt of such herbs, as will not by
Distillation yield their Essential Oils, as Hellebore, Jallop, Briony,
Elecampane, and many others, nay even from Safron, and many things of a more
gummous nature. Let this of the Essential Salt of Wormwood suffice, seeing
therein are laid down rules sufficient for the making as many more as you
please; it being rather a common place than single Receipt, for as Starkey and
Helmont say, in the learning of one, you learn to make all.

Now the way to know the goodness and true Preparation of this Salt is thus, in
the first place it is very sweet and fragrant, smelling strong of the Essential
Oil, whence made, without having the least urinous scent: Secondly, 'twill
readily dissolve in water, without making the same muddy; and boil up again
without the least loss of Virtue: Thirdly, it is totally Volatile, as is evident
in this, that being cast upon a Red-hot plate of Iron, it will fume all away,
without leaving the least grain of Faeces, and give a Comfortable refreshment
to the Brain, prevalent in Epilepsies and Convulsions, etc. awakening the
Brain, and relieving from many stubborn Diseasie Ideas, and refreshes the
Animal Spirits, superior to the best Aromatic used in fumigation, nay it may
be brought over by Distillation, and then is it not only an Antidote it self
but also has Power to correct all Vegetable Poisons, and at the same time to
advance their Medicinal Virtues: For by the means of this you may command a
Salt from Opium, which is a wonderful Arcanum for Fevers, Agues, and
tormenting Pains; the like from Hellebore for Melancholy, Madness, and lingering
Fevers, for thus by knowing these Salts you have a true Key whereby you may
command Nature's choicest Specific Medicines, which are shut up in the most
Virulent and Poisonous Vegetables.

These are those Salts instanced in our Brit. Mag. where we said that fixed
Salts, burning Spirits and Essential Oils must be United, Distilled, and
Cohobated, until brought over in a Balsamic Spirit, which being imbodied into
an Essential Salt plainly manifests its Calidum innatum, or drying enriching
Sulphur, which gives Life and Sulphurous Fatness, durable, lasting, and
substantial Virtues to Wine, exalting both its Taste and Smell; thus the Salt or
Essence of Wormwood will make rich Wormwoodwine; the like will that of Mint,
Bawm and Angelica, etc. It also gives Fermentation thereunto and makes pure
Wine indeed, like that refined from its Lees, giving it such qualities as
deserve the highest Commendations, as we could by undeniable Reasons in
Philosophy prove, nay more than this, it exalts Spirits, giving them the taste
and flavor of the herb, and makes Powers without any more difficulty.

The manner of its being used is thus, Take an ounce thereof, and in a gentle
heat dissolve it in a Pint of the Wine, which you intend to enrich, and then
with two or three ounces of Sugar, cast it into what quantity of Wine you
please, as you will have it smaller or richer in Taste, Smell, and Virtue; but
for Spirits, take these Salts, and pour upon them, of the said Spirit, and then
digesting in a gentle heat, the Spirit by refusion or pouring off, as often as
it is tinged, will extract the whole Tincture of the Vegetables, leaving the
Salt behind robbed of the same, from whence it may be gathered, that the Salt
and Tincture are centrally distinct, tho they have centrally wrought each on
the other; this Tincture you may add into your Spirits, and so will they
thereby be truly enriched; Thus from Clary you may obtain the most noble
Preparation, that has hitherto been used among the Exalters of Wine; and so of
others. For which Communication you ought to be thankful unto the great
Creator, who has given me a tenderness of mind you-ward, and not despise the
Instrument, who is yet inclined to your further Service by proceeding to the
third Head, sc.

Potestates verae and Arcanae per Salem Nostrum Panaristos, or The true
Essential and Genuin Powers of Bodies.
The Sal Panaristos being Prepared, as we have laid down in our Spagyrical
Pharmacopaea, as also in our Ignis Astralis Adeptorum, and exalted by its
Volatile Spirit, it becomes a Menstruum, as it is distilled over with the
Magical Gold, so powerful, that it dissolves and opens the Texture of Bodies,
either in the Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral Kingdom, and brings them over the
Helm in their distinct Principles; and although they are by it reduced to their
first matter, yet it scorns to contract Unity with any body but its own, tho
never so highly purified: (hence as that worthy George Starkey says) its
Transmutation is as impossible, as the washing the Blackamore white, wherefore
by all the Adepts it is called Homogeneous and Immortal; Now this being
distilled off from a Vegetable, as before said, until it is totally Volatile,
and the Liquor again separated therefrom, and the Principles of the Vegetable
reunited by digestion in a gentle, heat equal to that of the Sun in Aries, and
so brought to a Salin-Sulphureous and Balsamic Quality, endued with the full
power, force and virtue of the Concreate, whence prepared; one Grain thereof
contains more Virtues than a whole Ounce if Administered inits Crude Nature, tho
but simply endued with the Concreat's virtue without any addition whatsoever;
and therefore not improperly called the true Essential and Genuin, or purely
Natural and Proper Powers; yet in virtue abundantly superior to any other
preparation whatsoever; being that wherein Glauber, Starkey and Helmont so much
Gloried, the last highly commending the first Ens of Cedar thereby prepared,
thereunto attributing virtues sufficient to preserve long Life; and his Elixer
Proprietatis as a Balm to defend against Corruptions and Death: and although we
cannot boast, that we have in all things prepared Helmont's Alkahest, yet in
this we are very confident, that we know the Matter whence it was prepared, and
have seen and made a Salt therefrom, which stands parallel with what Glauber
attributes to his Sal Mirabilis, having made some experiments by it, especially
in taking off the ill tangue of Malt Spirits, which have answered so far above
our expectation, as that we could do no less than give it the name of Sal
Panaristos; for being so much superior to others we thought it not unworthy of
the Superlative Degree.

And you may observe that this Salt carries with it an Universal Tendency,
having obtained its Virtue from superior and inferior Beings, for as we
formerly said, the three first Principles are Christallized in the three last
by means of that fire, which (as Sandivogius says) burns up three, and leaves
one, which is the Diamond-like powder the true fixed Nitre of the Wise, and
doubtless Paracelsus's Sal Enixum, and Glauber's Sal Mirabilis, this performing
all that can in reason be to them attributed; the manner of whose preparation
we could freely communicate in words at length, were we but satisfied that the
fullness of time was come, for the revealing such Secrets; but however from
hence proceeds the Key, for the true Preparation of all Arcana, and principally
Powers, Tinctures, Essences, Quintessences, and Elixers, particular and
universal Medicines, according to the exaltation of the Specific Sulphur in
the one, and the degrees of Purity and Universality in the other, even to a
Magoreum; for it carries with it Universal Principles, even such as exalt
bodies, nay it contains those Airy and Nitrous ones, by which they are caused
to vegetate and multiply; and therefore have we not improperly called it the
Mercurial Life, which conveys the Solar Virtues into the Lunar Matrix, he
therefore that knows this Airy Life, the nourisher of Beings, and how to
concatinate its pure Effluvia, so as to make them corporeal, may boldly depend
that he knows the Nature of that by which Transmutation of Form is made,
especially if he is acquainted with the Vinum rubrum Philosophicum and its
Spirit; for as Hermes says in Chao generali cap. 19. fol. 268. number. 14. The
chiefest cleansing of our Mercury is, by the help of Wine to deprive it of its
Saturnal Form and Darkness, that so it may become clear and pellucid like a
Christalline Transparent Salt: which Salt is impossible to be made, but by the
help of the said Wine; and this Wine is also very difficult to be obtained;
witness Basilius Valentinus in p. 310. where he speaks of the true Spirit of
Wine by which the Tincture of Sol is extracted, and without which there can be
no true Aurum Potabile; but (says he) few men know how a true Spirit of Wine
is made, much less can it is property be wholly found out: for it is endued with
such a strange one, as not to be prepared by any new invented ways, for Nature
has an irrevocable Law; therefore tho this has been sought after by many, yet
it has been found by very few; Its qualities are such as to declare its
Excellency; for it must be subtle, penetrating, without any Phlegm, Pure,
Aerial and Volatile, so that Air in a Magnetic quality may attract it;
therefore it had need to be kept close in; it is of a penetrating and effectual
Operation, and its uses are several; for without it you cannot obtain any true
Specific Medicine; and it is by this that we prepare the Powers before
described; and therefore we thought it necessary to insert this, that if this
Aqua-vitae be truly rectified and lighted, then the Mercury and Vegetable
Sulphur separate, and that Sulphur, being a mere fire, burns bright, and the
tender Mercury betakes himself to his wings and flies to his Chaos; therefore
shall we conclude concerning this with the words of Basilius, where it is said,
He that can shut up and catch this fiery Spirit may boast, that he has gotten
a great Victory in the Chemical Battle: Now what remains is to show the
harmonious Familiarity and Love that there is in Wine with Mankind and Gold.

Wine does not only allure the Spirits of man to show forth their greatest
Activity, but also Comforts the same; for (as Helmont says) the Spirit of Wine
is soon Converted into the Arterial Blood, it also obtains the Tincture of Sol,
or that true Aurum Potabile, which expells Melancholy and Sadness and rejoices
man's heart; restoring the Diseased unto Sanity: now Basilius calls man (or you
may understand it, the Vrinous Classis; because he says that he that drinks
Wine converts it into the same in a more noble form, yea even into a clear
Salt, which makes fixed things volatile, as in p. 283.) Wine, and Gold three
Stones, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral; saying, that he who has them may
boldly depend that he has the Stones of the Universal, abundantly talked of,
but the true Nature thereof little known; but we also say, that besides the
three Principles, Urinous or Microcosmical, therefore called Animal, which by
the help of Salt, unite Sulphur, so as to bring it into Azoth, or an Exalted
Lunar Oil, the Vegetable is discerned as they are separated from the Volatile
Corruptions of the nethermost waters, and purified by the Servant of Nature, so
as to flow forth into a pure Vinor Spirits, and the Mineral as the Wine is put
into a glass, by means of the Gold runs not over, as the famous John Grasseus
alias Cortalasceus says, but Coagulates into Laton, which is the true Magical
Gold or Leo rubus and Blood of the Red Lion etc. you have three Universal
Stones, Medicinal, Angelical and Transmutative, Medicinal, as it is brought to a
Quintessence, and diluted into an Aurum Potabile; Angelical, as this Red Stone
is again Volatilized into a glorified, yellowish, purple Oil, and that again
imbibed by more of the rubified Quintessence, by which it is made yet more
highly Spiritual, penetrating all things; and Transmutative, as the said
Rubified Quintessence is melted and fermented with common Gold, so as to be
brought to exalt imperfect Metals. These are the three Triumphant Stones of the
Wisemen, or Universal, most Universal, Cabalistical, Elixerating Tinctures for
Men and Metals; called by some the Triune Stone, because proceeding from one
matter or root, sc. That general Chaos described by all the Philosophers,
containing a spermatical Essence of all created beings, the Book of Wonders,
and Looking-glass of Nature, wherein so many mysteries may be discerned, that
we dare not here discover them, because time and place are too short; therefore
shall desist from speaking any further of it, and come to show some Excellent
virtues of our Sal Panaristos, not only in preparing those things by which
Liquors are exalted, but also in exalting them itself.

The things prepared by it, principally for this use, are Tartar, Sulphur and
Venus, although it dissolves all tangible Bodies, yet we shall here describe no
more than what is pertinent to the discourse, sc. for the meliorating and
exalting these Spirits; at Tartar we have already you may remember largly
touched, but however we once more tell you, that all Salts for this use must be
Calcined with a very strong fire; especially Tartar, Sulphur and Venus; or else
you shall not obtain any radical melioration by them; but the ingress must be
such as that any Spirit of Wine may extract its Tincture; but you must know
that the Ancients had a twofold fire, sc. the Culinary, which by its sharp
flames Corrodes and Calcines Bodies, bringing them to Fixity, but indeed it is
after such a way, as that the Volatile and Active Parts thereof go away in
smoke or fume, learn therefore to catch that the which you may, if you know but
that, Vulcan, which was husband to Venus, yet consecrated to the use of the
chaste Vesta; it is indeed a Christalline, Pure, or Liquid Fire, yet abundantly
more sharp, penetrative and Corrosive than the former; for it radically
dissolves and preserves those, which the other will not touch, if it does not
destroy it by the fury of its flames, and although we cannot be without it, yet
happy is he that knows the other, seeing that by it we are able to perform the
great business of Art and desire of the Artist; for in plain Terms, it is
through this that we are able to Volatilize the sweet Colcothar of Venus
radically fixed, and then to distill and bring it all over the Helm, the Sulphur
being separated from the Mercury, which is then called the Element of Fire of
Venus, and is an excellent Arcanum for meliorating Wines and Vinor Spirits,
being therein diluted; you must also know the Office of our Sal Panaristos, and
by it to reduce common yellow Sulphur into a red fiery stone which then will
meliorate Wines, like that of the Sulphur of Venus; and if you put a little
thereof into a Cask of Wine, the Wine acquires a grateful Taste and Odor, and
will be so consolated, as not easily to admit of changing or perishing, which
otherwise so often happens to Wines, especially such as have not had their
exalted maturity by the benevolent Rays of Sol, this Solar or Lunar Salt does
not only measurably supply this defect, but also enrich and meliorate Spirits;
for having prepared your Magnet, we shall give you the use of it in sweetning
of Spirits.

Take of any sort of ill smelling Spirit or Brandy made from Corn, one part, of
pure spring water two parts, mix them together, that so the stinking and
ungrateful Savours may diffuse themselves into the added water; having so done,
you must again free this Brandy thus tempered with the water by putting your
Magnet thereinto, and so will you draw therefrom all the stinkingness, and it is
then just as if you had washed that Wine, and rinsed off all it is filth,
without any charge or difficulty; for the Magnet or exalted Salt desires not to
contract friendship with any Impurity. N. B. It remaining the same as before,
being freed from its phlegm; so that this Work is neither chargable nor
difficult; therefore the principal business is to be Master of such a Salt, the
virtues whereof are known by Experience, because some years ago we have
prepared it, and are now again preparing of it, although at present the quantity
that we have by us is very inconsiderable, as having lost above two pound three
ounces of it by the misfortunate breaking of a glass, in a considerable Trial,
for which great loss we often lament our unhappy mischance; seeing we might have
been more wary in making smaller Trials, but this we shall pass by, hoping that
Providence may in due time multiply our Stores; if not, we must learn to be
content, submitting our will to the Divine Pleasure, who distributes of his
Riches and Gifts in his own time, and there is no obtaining of it by force,
it is his own free Gift, so that if it is not again bestowed on us, we may say
with Helmont, God Almighty knows for why, he has given the Goat so short a
Tail; peradventure we use not the Tallent bestowed upon us aright, for we are
convinced in our conscience, that had we applied it the genuin way, it might
have been helpful to hundreds that languish, etc.

We having run through what is necessary to be treated off, as to this Part,
shall Conclude the same; only we think it Convenient to add this following and
general Head, Containing as it were, a Summary of our Labors, being an Answer
to the Request of a Person of Worth, which is as follows.

Worthy Friend,
IN Answer to your earnest Desire I have given you the Heads of my Books
Printed and those ready for the Press; First, you have our Britannean Magazine,
or Assays to Artificial Wines, which (God willing) we intend suddenly to
Correct and Enlarge with Experimental Additions: Secondly, Cerevisiarii Comes,
or the Art of Brewing, Containing the Grounds thereof proved and demonstrated
by sound Philosophy: Thirdly, Chymicus Rationalis, or the Chemical Art
rationally stated and demonstrated by a short, but effectual, Course,
containing the Heads of the chief Medicines so highly valued: Fourthly, this
said Treatise which is the Art of Distillation Complete, to which is added the
Doctrine of the Nature and Preparation of Vegetable Powers: Fifthly, Spagyrick
Philosophy Asserted, or the true Physical Principles demonstrated by way of
Answer to that Learned Dr. Boylwharf, in which the Foundation and Preparation
of true Specificks are so delivered, as easily distinguishable from those
pretended to be such by the Pseudo-Chymists, a Work highly necessary, and as
much desired, and therefore (God willing) as soon as may be shall see the
Light: Sixthly, Speculum Morborum, in which you may see various Opinions
concerning the Original of Diseases, and also discern the true Nature thereof:
Seventhly, Medicina Rationalis, or the whole body of Physic rationally stated
upon a new Hypothesis; containing not only the Original and Definition of
Diseases, but also their Cure: Eighthly, Historia nova de Thesauro Britannioe
interno Celato, or a new History, containing the yet undiscovered Mysteries of
Englands Gloay and unspeakable Riches, which may be obtained by the true
advancing of its Vegetables and Minerals, by a multiplying and concentrating
the Universal Spirit: Ninthly, The Magicians Magazine, or the Wise-man's
Storehouse, containing the chief and profitable Heads of all the Voluminous
Writings of the Ancient Philosophers: Tenthly, Our Ideas of Divine and Natural
Things, being a Philosophical Discourse of the Macro, and Microcosmical World;
all which shall be hastened with what possible speed can be; so that I hope in
the mean while you will accept of what is done, for that our Resolutions are to
improve our Talent according to the Abilities given, and that for the Benefit
of such, as prefer realities, as they are delivered: For we can truly say in
what we have done, we have cleared our Conscience toward the Sons of Art, as
for my rewards, I expect it at the Final End, if I persevere in Christian
Duties, only to be the Sentence of Well done thou good and faithful Servant;
Hence forth is prepared for thee a Crown of Bliss. Amen.


FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by, John Tailor at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
In Folio.
THE Travels of Monsieur Thevenot into the Levant, in three Parts, viz. into
Persia, Turkey, and the East Indies. Rushworth's Historical Collections. Dr.
Goad's Aphorisms of the Weather. Tarsis and Leile, a new Romance. Book of
Homilies, for Churches. Smith's Christians Religions Appeal.
In Quarto.
Mr. Love's Complete Surveyor, or the Art of Measuring Land made easy, in a
more exact Method than hitherto Extant. Curious Enquiries in six Discourses,
viz. of the Longitude, the Tricks of Astrological Quacks, of the Depth of the
Sea, of Tobacco, of Europe's being too full of People, the various Opinions
concerning the Time of keeping the Sabbath. Mr. Strode's new and easy method of
the Art of Dyalling. Several Letters written by French Protestants refug'd in
Germany, concerning the Unity of the Church. Foxes and Firebrarnds, or the
Harmony of Popery and Separation. Archbishop Cranmer's Judgment concerning the
Holy Scripaures, Published by Edmund Gee with a Preface. The present French
King drawn to the Life. Angliae Decus and Tutamen, or the Glory and Safety of
this Nation under our present King and Queen. The Church of Englands Doctrine
of Non-resistance Justified and Vindicated as truly rational and Christian, by
Lewis Sharp Rector of Morton-Hamstead-Deoon.
In Octavo.
Mr. Boyl's Free Enquiry into Nature in English and Latin. -- His Disquisition
about the final Causes of natural things; with a Tract of Vitiated sight. --
His Martyrdom of Theodora and Dydimus. -- His Christian Virtuoso. --
Experimenta and Observationes Physicae, Wherein are briefly treated of several
Subjects relating to Natural Philosophy with a Collection of strange reports.
Quintilian's Declamations in English, with the Approbation of several eminent
Schoolmasters of Land. Lord Vicount Shanon's Moral Essays on several Subjects
relating to the present times. Reasons why a Protestant should not turn Papist.
Le Grand's Historia Sacra. Situation of Paradise found out. Dr. Owen's
Meditation of the Glory of Christ. Osborn's Works, Divine, Moral, Historical,
and Political. Dr. Newton's Complete Arithmetician. A double Grammar, for
Germans to learn English, and for English to learn the German Tongue.
In Twelves
The Modern Courtier. Dr. Salmon's New Method of Cuting the French Pox wherein
is the Practice of an eminent French Author, with the Method of Monsieur
Blauchard, as also Dr. Sydenham's Judgment on the same. Rider's Practical
Surgery in Observat Cases and Cures, both for Sea and Land. Galliae notitia, Or
the Present state of France, containing a general Description of that Kingdom.
Mr. Gouge's Young man's Guide, and Word to Saints and Sinners. Minelius on
Virgil. Dyer's Works. History of the Wars of York, and Lancaster. Mr. Evelin's
French Gardener. Bishop Hall of Contentment. An Exposition of the Church
Catechism. History of Lysander and Sabina. A Novel. Observations on the Mineral
Watch in France.
Books newly Published.
Dr. Salmon's Medicina Practica or Practical Physic, showing the Method of
Curing the most usual Diseases happening to human Bodies, to which are added
the Philosophic Works of Hermes Trismegist, Kalid Persicus, Geber Arabs,
Artefius Langoevus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Scriptures, and George Ripley,
Complete in three Books. Cervisiarii Comes, or the newest and truest Art of
Brewing, Illustrated by various Examples in making Beer, Ale, and other Liquors
so that they may be most durable and fragrant, with the true method of making
Salt Water Fresh, and the Art of manuring Lands, by W. Y-worth, M. P. Miracles
Performed by Money. A Poem.
Just Published.
The true Interest of Familys, or Directions how Parents may be happy in their
Children, the Children in their Parents, to which is Added a Discourse about
the right way of improving our time, by a Divine of the Church of England, with
a Preface by Ant. Horneck D. D. A Sermon at the Funeral of the Hon. Rob. Boil
at St. Martin's in the Fields, by the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum. Mr. Boy's Seraphick Love etc. General Heads for the Natural
History of a Country Great or Small, drawn out for the use of Travelers and
Navigators, Imparted by the late Honorable Rob. Boil Fellow of the Royal
Society, Ordered to be Published in his Life time at the Request of some
Curious Persons, to which is Added other Directions for Navigators etc. with
particular Observations of the most noted Countries in the World by another
hand.
Finis.

