A serious and pathetical Description OF HEAVEN AND HELL,
According to the Pencil of the HOLY GHOST, and the best Expositors: sufficient
(with the blessing of GOD) to make the worst of men hate Sin, and love Holiness.

Being five Chapters taken out of a Book entitled, The whole Duty of a
Christian: Composed by R. YOUNG, late of Roxwell in Essex, Florilegus.

CHAP. XIX. Section I.
T^us as the Unbeliever and Disobedient is cursed in every thing, and
wherever he goes, and in whatsoever he does: Cursed in the City, and cursed
also in the held; cursed in the fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his
ground, and in the fruit of his cattle: Cursed when he comes in, and cursed
also when he goes out; cursed in this life, and cursed in the life to come; as
is at large expressed, Deuteronomy. 28. So the Believer that obeys the voice of the
Lord, shall be blessed in every thing he does, wherever he goes, and in
whatsoever befalls him, as God promises in the former part of the same Chapter,
and as I have proved in the eleven foregoing Sections. Yea, God will bless all
that belong unto him, for his children and posterity, yea, many generations
after him, shall fare the better for his sake Exodus 20. 6. Genesis 30. 27. Isai.
54. 15. and 65. 8. Romans 11. 28. Genesis 18. 26. 29, 31, 32. and 26. 24. and 39. 5.
1 Kings 11. 12, 32, 34. and 15. 4. 2 Kings 8. 19. and 19. 34. Isai. 37. 35. and
45. 4. Mat. 24. 22. yea, the very place where he dwells, perhaps the whole
Kingdom he lives in, Genesis 39. to 48. chap. Whereas many, yea multitudes, Number.
25. 18. Deuteronomy. 1. 37. and 3. 26. Psalm. 106. 32. even a whole Army, Josh. 7. 4,
to 14. yea, his childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation, fare
the worse for a wicked man, and an unbeliever, Exodus 20. 5. Besides his prayers
shall profit many; for he is more prevalent with God, to take away a judgment
from a people or a Nation, than a thousand others, Ex. 17. 11, 12, 13. And he
counts it a sin to cease praying for his greatest and most malicious enemies, 1 Samuel 12. 23. though they, like fools, would (if they durst, or were permitted)
cut him off, and all the race of Gods people, Ps. 83. 4. Esth. 3. 6. 9, 13.
Which is as if one with a hatchet should cut off the bough of a tree upon which
he stands. For they are beholding to Believers for their very lives: yea, it
is for their sakes, and because the number of Christ's Church is not yet
accomplished, that they are out of Hell. But to go on, as all things (viz.)
poverty, imprisonment, slander, persecution, sickness, death, temporal
judgments, spiritual desertions; yea, even Sin and Satan himself, shall turn
together for the best unto those that love God, as you have seen: So all things
shall turn together for the worst unto those that hate God, as all unbelievers
do, Romans 1. 30. Joh. 15. 18. even the mercy of God, and the means of Grace,
shall prove their bane, and enhaunce their damnation: yea, Christ himself that
only summum bonum, who is a Savior to all Believers, shall be a just revenger
to all unbelievers; and bid the one, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41, 46. Which shall be an
everlasting departure, not for a day, nor for years of days, nor for millions
of years, but for eternity, into such pains as can neither be expressed nor
conceived, Jude 6. 7. Rev. 20. 10. Mat. 3. 12. Heb. 6. 2

Sect. 2. Wickedness has but a time, a short time, a moment of time; but the
punishment of wickedness is beyond all time: There shall be no end of plagues
to the wicked man, Prove. 24. 20. Their worm shall not die, neither shall their
fire be quenched, Isai. 30. 33. and 66. 24. Mat. 25. 41. Mark 9. 44. And
therefore it is said, The smoke of their torment does ascend for ever and ever,
Rev. 4. 12. and 20. 10. So that if all the men that ever have or shall be
created, were Briareus-like, hundred-handed, and should at once take pens in
their hundred hands, and do nothing else for ten hundred thousand millions of
years, but sum up in figures as many hundred thousand millions as they could;
yet never could they reduce to a total, or confine within number, this
trissyllable word [Eternal] or that word of four syllables [Everlasting].

Now let such as forget God, but seriously consider this: it will not be an
imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, but during the King of Kings pleasure:
It is not a captivity of seventy years, like that of the children of Israel in
Babylon; for that had an end: nor like a captivity of seventy millions of
generations; for that also would in time be expired: but even for ever. The
wicked shall live as long in Hell, as there shall be a just God in Heaven.

Here we measure time by days, months, years; but for Eternity, there is no
Arithmetician can number it, no Geometrician can measure it: For suppose the
whole world were turned into a Mountain of sand, and that a little Wren should
come every thousandth year, and carry away from that heap but one grain of the
sand, what an infinite number of years would be spent and expired, before the
whole heap would be fetched away? But admit a man should stay in torments so
long, and then have an end of his woe, it were some comfort to think that an end
will come: But alas! when she has finished this task a thousand times over, he
shall be as far from an end of his anguish, as ever he was the first hour he
entered into it.

Now, Suppose thou should lie but one night grievously afflicted with a
raging fit of the stone, strangury, toothache, pangs of travel, or the like;
though thou had to help and ease thee, a soft bed to lie on, Friends about to
comfort thee, Physicians to cure thee, all cordial and comfortable things to
assuage thy pain; yet how tedious and painful would that one night seem unto
thee? How would thou toss and tumble, and turn from one side to another?
Counting the Clock, esteeming every minute a month, and thy present misery
unsupportable. What then will it be to lie in flames of fire? (To which our
fire is but air in comparison) fire and brimstone kept in the highest flame by
the unquenchable wrath of God, world without end; where thou shall have nothing
about thee but darkness and horror, wailing and wringing of hands, desperate
yellings and gnashing of teeth: thy old Companions in vanity and sin, to ban
and curse thee; the Devils insulting over thee with cruelty and scorn; the
never dying worm of conscience, to feed upon thy soul and flesh for ever and
ever. O everlasting eternity! a never-dying life, an ever-living death!

Which yet is but just with God; for if thou might have lived for ever, thou
would have sinned for ever. If God would everlastingly have spared thee, thou
would have everlastingly hated and provoked him. What then can be more equal,
then that thou should suffer everlastingly?

O then bethink thy self of this word eternal and everlasting, and ponder upon
it: yea, do but indeed believe it, and it will be enough to break thine hard
heart, and make it relent and repent, and thereby prevent the wrath to come. It
will put thee to a demur, What have I done? What am I now aabout? Whether will
this course tend? How will it end? What will become of me if I go on, in
chambering and wantonness surfeiting and drunkenness, strife and envying,
swearing, profaneness, earthly-mindedness, and the like? For indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, shall be upon the soul of every one that does
evil, and continues therein, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 2. 8, 9. O then,
break off thy sins without delay, and let there be an healing of thy errors.

Sect. 3. Neither is the extremity of pain inferior to the perpetuity of it;
it is a place full of horror and amazedness, where is no remission of sin, no
dismission of pain, no intermission of sense, no permission of comfort: its
torments are both intolerable, and interminable, and can neither be endured nor
avoided, when entered into, Rev. 19. 20. and 20. 14. and 18. 6. Mat. 25. 30. 2
Pet. 2. 4. Heb. 10. 27. Jude 6.

The pangs of the first death are pleasant, compared with those of the second:
For mountains of sand were lighter, and millions of years shorter, than a tithe
of those torments, Rev. 20. 10. Jude 7. It is a death which has no death; it
has a beginning, it has no ending, Mat. 3. 12. Isa. 66. 24.

The pain of the body, is but the body of pain, the anguish of the soul, is the
soul of anguish: For should we first burn off one hand, then another, after
that each arm, and so all the parts of the body, it would be deemed
intolerable, and no man would endure it for all the profits and pleasures this
world can afford; and yet it is nothing to the burning of body and soul in
hell. Should we endure ten thousand years torment in hell, it were grievous,
but nothing to eternity: Should we suffer one pain, it were miserable enough;
but if ever we come there, our pains shall be for number and kinds, infinitely
various, as our pleasures have been here; every sense and member, each power
and faculty, both of soul and body, shall have their several objects of
wretchedness, and that without intermission, or end, or ease, or patience to
endure it, Luke 12. 5. and 16. 23. Mat. 3. 12. and 5. 22. and 22. 23.

The Schools affirm, that the least torture in hell, exceeds the greatest that
can be devised by all the men on earth; even as the least joy in heaven,
surpasses the greatest comfort here on earth. There is scarce any pain here on
earth, but there is ever some hope of ease, mitigation, or intermission; of
some relief or deliverance: but in Hell, their torments are easeless, endless,
and remediless; unsufferable, and yet inevitable, and themselves left hopeless,
helpless, pitiless.

It were misery enough to have the headache, toothache, colic, gout, burning
in the fire; or if there be any thing more grievous: Yea, should all these and
many more meet together in one man, at one instant, they would come infinitely
short of the pains of hell. Yea, they would all be but as the stinging of Ants,
to the lashes of those Scorpions; but as drops, to those Vials of wrath; as
sparks to that flame, as Chrysostom speaks. The Furnace of Babel, was but a
flea-biting to this tormenting Tophet, prepared of old, Isai. 30. He has made
it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the
Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it, ver. 32. So that it were happy
for reprobate spirits, if they were in no worse condition, than so many Toads
or Serpents. As consider, If a dark dungeon here be so loathsome, what is that
dungeon of eternal, of utter darkness? If material fire be so terrible, what is
Hellfire? Here we cry out of a burning fever, or, if a very coal from the
hearth do but light on our flesh, O how it grieves us! we cannot hold our
finger for one minute in scalding lead, but there both body and soul shall fry
in everlasting flames, and be continually tormented by infernal fiends, whose
society alone would be sufficiently frightful.

Sect. 4. Now consider, Is one hours twitche of the worm of conscience here?
Yea, is one minutes twitch of a tooth pulling out so unsufferable? What is a
thousand years? What is eternity of hell torments? If the Glutton being in
hell, in part only (viz. in soul) yet cried out, that he was horribly tormented
in that flame; what think we shall that torment be, when body and soul come to
be united in torment? since the pains of Hell are more exquisite than all the
united torments that the Earth can invent. Yea, the pains and sufferings of the
damned, are ten thousand times more than can be imagined by any heart under
heaven, and can rather (through necessity) be endured, than expressed. It is a
death never to be painted to the life; no pen, nor pencil, nor art, nor heart,
can comprehend it, Mat. 18. 89, 10. and 25. 30. Luke 16. 23, 24. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
Isai. 5. 14. and 30. 33. Prove. 15. 11. Yea, were all the Land paper, and all
the water ink, every plant a pen, and every other creature a ready Writer, yet
they could not set down the least piece of the great pains of Hellfire.

Now add eternity to extremity, and then consider Hell to be Hell indeed. For
if the Ague of a year, or the Colic of a month, or the Rack of a day, or the
burning of an hour be so bitter here; how will it break the hearts of the
wicked, to feel all these beyond all measure, beyond all time? So that it is an
evil and bitter thing to depart from the living God.

We poor mortals (until God does bring us from under (...) power of Satan unto
himself) do live in the world as if (...) were not so hot, nor the Devil so
black as indeed they are: in Hell and Heaven were the one not worth the
avoiding, the other not worth the enjoying: but the heat of fire was never
painted, and the Devil is more deformed than represented on the wall. There are
unexpressible torments in Hell, as well as unspeakable joys in Heaven.

Nor will this be their case alone that are desperately wicked; cursing and
blaspheming Drunkards, and shedders of blood, but of all, impenitent persons.
As for instance, they who have lived in the fire of lust here, must not think
much to be scorched in the flames of hell hereafter, Heb. 13. 4. Rev. 21. 8.
and 22. 15. The detractor is a devil above ground; his tongue is already set on
fire from hell, Jam. 3 6. Rev. 16. 10, 11. which does sadly presage, what will
be his portion for ever, unless repentance quench those flames; and so of the
like offenders, Ps. 9. 17. Rev. 22. 12. As what says the Apostle? Neither
fornicators, nor thieves, nor murderers, nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor
raylers, nor liars, nor covetous persons, nor unbelievers, nor no unrighteous
person shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, but shall have their part and
portion in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Rev. 21. 8. which did they well consider, they durst
not continue in the practice of these sins without fear or remorse, or care of
amendment.

Sect. 5. Now what heart would not bleed, to see men run headlong into those
tortures that are thus intolerable? Dance hoodwinkt into this perdition? O that
it were allowed to the desperate ruffians of our days, that swear and curse,
drink and drab, rob, shed blood, etc. (as if Heaven were blind and deaf to what
they do) to have but a sight of this Hell! how would it charm their mouths,
appall their spirits, strike fear and astonishment into their hearts? Yea, if a
sinner could see but one glimpse of hell, or be suffered to look one moment
into that fiery Lake, he would rather choose to die ten thousand deaths, than
wilfully and premeditately commit one sin. Nor can I think they would do as
they do, if they did but either see or foresee what they shall one day (without
serious and unfeigned repentance) (...) And indeed, therefore are we dissolute,
because we do not think what a judgment there is after our dissolution: because
we make it the least, and last thing we think on; yea, it is death, we think,
to think upon death: and we cannot endure that doleful hell which summons us to
judgment, Lam. 1. 9. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that men would believe and consider this
truth, and do accordingly.

Oh that thou would remember, that there is a day of account, a day of death,
a day of judgment coming, Heb. 9. 27. Mat. 25. wherein the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, to
render vengeance unto them which obey not his Gospel; and to punish them with
everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, as the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. Jude 15. Isa. 33. 14. Mat.
25. 46.

As consider seriously, I beseech you, whether it will not be worth the while,
so to foresee the torments of hell, that you may prevent them: Or if otherwise,
will you not one day wish you had, when death comes and arrests you to appear
before the great and terrible Judge of all the world? Luke 16. 23. to 32. Mat.
13. 30, 38. at which time an Assizes or Quarter Sessions shall be held within
thee, where Reason shall sit as Judge, and Satan shall put in a Bill of
Indictment, as long as that Book in Zachary; chap. 5. 2. Ezekiel. 2. 9, 10.
wherein shall be alleged all the evil deeds that ever thou have committed, and
all the good deeds that ever thou have omitted, with their several
circumstances that may aggravate them, Eccles. 11. 9. and 12. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
and all the curses and judgments that are due to every sin. Thine own
conscience shall accuse thee, and thy memory shall give bitter evidence against
thee; and thou shall condemn thy self, before the just condemnation of thy
Judge, who knows all thy misdeeds better than thy self, John 3. 20. Which sins
of thine will not then leave thee, but cry unto thee, We are thy works, and we
will follow thee, Rev. 14. 13.

And then who can sufficiently express what thy grief and anguish will be, when
the summons both of the first and second (...) do overtake thee at once? Prove.
1. 27. And when at once thou shall think of thy sins past, the present misery,
and the (...) of thy torments to come; and how thou have made earth (...)
Paradise, thy belly thy God, and lust thy Law; so sowing (...) and reaping
misery, and finding, that as in thy prosperity thou neglectedst to serve God,
so now in thy adversity God refuses to save thee, Prove. 1. 24. to 32. Ezekiel.
23. 35. When thou shall call to mind the many warnings thou have had of this
doleful day, from Christ's faithful Ambassadors, and how thou then made but a
mock or jeer at it, Prove. 1. 25. and think how for the short sinful pleasures
thou have enjoyed, thou must endure eternal pains, Luke 16. 24, 25. and Rev. 6.
12. to 18. Which yet thou shall think most just and equal, saying, As I have
deserved, so I am served: for I was often enough offered mercy, yea, entreated to
accept thereof; but I preferred the pleasing of my senses, before the saving of
my soul, and more regarded the words of wicked men, and the allurements of
Satan, than the word of God, or the motions of his holy Spirit, Prove. 1. 24.
etc. Mark 16. 16. And (which I would have thee think upon) Hellfire is made
more hot, by neglecting so great salvation, Heb. 2. 3. This is the condemnation
(says our Savior, none like this) that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil, John 3. 29.
Now salvation is freely offered, but men reject it; hereafter they would accept
of salvation, but God will reject them. Yea, then a whole world (if thou had
it) for one hours delay, or respite, that thou might have space to repent,
and sue unto God for mercy: but it cannot be, because thy body, which joined
with thy soul in thy sinful actions, is now altogether unfit to join with her
in the exercise of repentance; and repentance must be of the whole man.
Besides, death will take no pity; the devil knows no mercy, and the God of
mercy will have utterly forsaken thee. Then will thou say, O that I had been
more wise, or that I were now to begin my life again; then would I contemn the
world with all its vanities? yea, if Satan should then offer me all the
treasures, pleasures, and promotions of this world, he should never entice me
to forget the terrors of this dreadful hour, and those worse which are to
follow, Luke 16. 24. etc. and 13. 28.

But, oh wretched Caitiff that I am; how has the Devil and my own deceitful
and devilish heart deluded me? An^ how am I served accordingly? For now is my
case more m^serable than the most despised Toad or Serpent, that peris^^^ when
it dies; in that I must go to answer at the great Judgment Seat for all my
sins, that am not able to answer for one of the least of them, Eccles. 12. 14.
Mat. 18. 34. that I who heretofore gloried in my lawless liberty, am now to be
enclosed in the very claws of Satan, as the trembling Partridge within the
griping tallons of the ravening and devouring Falcon. Oh, cursed be the day
when I was born, and the time when my mother conceived me, etc. Job 3.

Sect. 6. And so death having given thee thy fatal stroke, the Devil shall
seize upon or snatch away thy soul, so soon as it leaves thy body, Luke 12. 20.
and hale thee hence into the bottomless Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone; where she is to be kept in chains of darkness, until the general
judgment of the great day, Jude 6, 7. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Rev. 21. 8. Thy body in the
mean time being cast into the earth, expecting a fearful Resurrection, when it
shall be reunited to thy soul; that as they sinned together, so they may be
everlastingly tormented together, Heb. 10. 27. At which general Judgment,
Christ sitting upon his Throne, John 5. 22. shall rip up all the benefits he
has bestowed on thee and the miseries he has suffered for thee; and all the
ungodly deeds that thou have committed, and all the hard speeches which thou
have spoken against him, and his holy ones, Jude 15. Eccles. 12. 14. and 11. 9.
Within thee shall be thine own conscience, more than a thousand witnesses to
accuse thee; the Devils, who tempted thee to all thy lewdness, shall on the one
side testify with thy conscience against thee, and on the other side shall
stand the holy Saints and Angels approving Christ's Justice, and detesting so
filthy a creature: behind thee an hideous noise of innumerable fellow -damned
Reprobates, tarrying for thy company: before thee all the world burning with
flaming fire; above thee an ireful Judge of deserved vengeance, ready to
pronounce his heavy Sentence upon thee: beneath thee the fiery and sulphurous
mouth of the bottomless pit, gaping to receive thee, Isa. 5. 11. 14. And in
this woeful and doleful condition, thou must stand forth to receive, with other
Reprobates, this thy Sentence, Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10 [Depart from me] there
is a separation from all joy and happiness, [ye cursed] there is a black and
direful excommunication, [into fire] there is the extremity of pain,
[everlasting,] there is the perpetuity of punishment, [prepared for the devil
and his angels,] there are thy infernal tormenting and tormented companions,
Mat. 25. 41. O terrible sentence! from which there is no escaping,
withstanding, excepting, or appealing. Then, O then shall thy mind be tormented
to think, how, for the love of abortive pleasures, which even perished before
they budded; thou have so foolishly lost heavens joys, and incurred hellish
pains, which last to all eternity, Luke 16. 24, 25. Thy conscience shall ever
sting thee like an Adder, when thou call to mind, how often Christ by his
Ministers offered thee remission of sins, and the Kingdom of heaven freely, if
thou would but believe and repent, and how easily thou might have obtained
mercy in those days. How near thou wast many times to have repented, and yet
did suffer the devil and the world to keep thee still in impenitency; and how
the day of mercy is now past, and will never dawn again. Thy understanding
shall be racked to consider, how for momentany riches thou have lost eternal
treasure, and exchanged heavens felicity for hells misery: where every part and
faculty, both of body and soul, shall be continually and alike tormented,
without intermission or dismission of pain, or from it: and be for ever
deprived of the beatifical sight of God, wherein consists the sovereign good
and life of the soul. Thou shall never see light, nor the least sight of joy;
but lie in a perpetual prison of utter darkness, where shall be no order but
horror, no voice but howling and blaspheming; no noise but screeching and
gnashing of teeth; no society but of the devil and his angels, who being
tormented themselves, shall have no other ease, but to wreak their fury in
tormenting thee, Mat. 13. 42. and 25. 36. etc. Where shall be punishment
without any pity, misery without any mercy, sorrow without succor, crying
without comfort, malice without measure, torment without ease, Rev. 14. 10, 11.
where the wrath of God shall seize upon thy soul and body, as the flame of fire
does on the lump of pitch, or brimstone, Dan. 7. 10. in which flame thou shall
ever be burning, and never consumed; ever dying, and never dead; ever roaring
in the pangs of death, and never rid of those pangs, nor expecting end of thy
pains. So that after thou have endured them so many thousand years as there are
blades of grass on the earth, or sands in the Sea, hairs on the heads of all
the sons of Adam, from the first to the last born; as there have been creatures
in heaven and earth; thou shall be no nearer an end of thy torments, than thou
wast the very first day that thou wast cast into them: yea, so far are they
from ending, that they are ever beginning. For if after a thousand times so
many thousand years, thy damned soul could but conceive some hope, that those
torments should have an end: this would be some comfort, to think that at
length an end will come; but as often as thy mind shall think of this word
never (and thou shall ever be thinking of it) it will rend thy heart in pieces
with rage and hideous lamentation: as giving still new life to those
unsufferable sorrows, which exceed all expression, or imagination. It will be
another hell in the midst of hell. Wherefore, consider seriously what I say,
and that while the compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive you;
and do thereafter, Prove. 1. 24. etc. take warning by Pharaoh's example. We in
the rich man's scalding torments, have a Discite a me, Learn of me, Luke 16. 23.
etc. For he can testify out of woeful experience, that if we will not take
warning by the word (that gentle warner) the next shall be harder, the third
and fourth harder than that; yea, as all the ten plagues did exceed one
another, so the eleventh single exceeds them altogether. Innumerable are the
curses of God against sinners, Deuteronomy. 28. but the last is the worst,
comprehending and transcending all the rest. The fearfullest plagues God still
reserves for the upshot: all the former do but make way for the last.

Hell in Scripture is called a Lake, that burns with fire and brimstone; and,
than the torment of the former, what more acute? than the smell of the latter,
what more noisome?

CHAP. XX.
Sect. 1. THus, I say, shall they be bid Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, etc. while on the contrary the same Christ shall say unto the other, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from before the
foundation of the world, Mat. 25. 34. Which Kingdom is a place where are such
joys as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

A place where there shall be no evil present, nor good absent, Heb. 9. 12.
Mat. 6. 20. In comparison whereof, all the Thrones and Kingdoms upon earth, are
less than the drop of a bucket, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. Isai. 66. 1.

Heaven in Scripture is compared to a Kingdom for Sovereignty, to a Throne for
preheminency, to a Crown for state and majesty, to an Inheritance for
perpetuity, to a Marriage Feast for plenty, pleasure, and delicacy, and to
whatsoever else may set forth its excellency; though indeed in these
comparisons, there is little or no comparison, as I might show you in many
particulars, if I would be large: for instances in this case would be endless.

There death shall have no more dominion over us, Romans 6. 9. The Sun shall not
burn us by day, nor the Moon by night, Ps. 121. 6. There all tears shall be
wiped from our eyes, Rev. 7. 17. There shall be no sorrow, nor pain, nor
complaint, there is no malice to rise up against us; no misery to afflict us;
no hunger, thirst, wearisomness, temptation, to disquiet us, Mat. 6. 19, 20.
Heb. 9. 12. There is no death nor dearth, no pining nor repining, no fraud,
sorrow, nor sadness, neither tears nor fears, defect nor loathing, Rev. 7. 16,
17. and 21. 4. Heb. 9. 12. There, O there, one day is better than a thousand;
there is rest from our labors, peace from our enemies, freedom from our sins,
etc. John 3. 17. Heb. 4. 3. 9, 10, 11. Rev. 14. 13. Heb. 9. 12, 15.

Sect. 2. Unto which Negative Privileges, there are also added Positive of all
sorts, as I might plentifully prove, but I study brevity. Do we delight in good
company? What pleasure shall we take in the company of Saints and Angels? In
whom there is nothing but amiable, comfortable, delectable? Nothing in us that
may cool the fervor of our love and affection to them. And so of all other
enjoyments. As, Do thou desire beauty, riches, honor, pleasure, long life,
or whatever else can be named? No place so glorious by Creation, so beautiful
with delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation, nor so
durable for lasting, Heb. 12. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Romans 9. 3. and
8. 18. There are no Estates but Inheritances, no Inheritances but Kingdoms, no
Houses but Palaces, no Meals but Feasts, no Noise but Music, no Rods but
Scepters, no Garments but Robes, no Seats but Thrones, no Coverings for the
Head but Crowns, Romans 8. 17. Tit. 3. 7. Heb. 9. 15. Mat. 25. 31. 34. 2 Timothy 4.
8. Gal. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 9, 10. Mar. 10. 23, 24, 25. Rev. 7. 13, 14, 15. and 6.
11.

There we shall see the blessed face of God, which is the glory of all sights,
the sight of all glory. Yea, we our selves shall outshine the Sun in
brightness, Mat. 13. 43. For if the brightness of the body shall match the Sun,
what will the glory and splendor of the soul be? And yet such honor shall all
the Saints have. For when Christ, which is our head and life, shall appear,
then shall we also appear with him in glory. And he shall change our vile and
mortal body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, Col. 3. 4.
Phil. 3. 21.

Briefly, Our joy shall there be full, and none shall be able to take it from
us, or diminish it, John 15. 11. and 16. 22. There is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 26. Joys and pleasures never ebbing, but ever
flowing to all contentment. There we shall rejoice; for the pleasantness of the
place we possess, for the glory of our souls and bodies, which we have put on;
for the world which we have overcome; for hell which we have escaped; for the
joys of heaven which we have attained to. We shall have joy above us, by the
beatifical vision and sight of God; joy within us, by the peace of conscience,
even the joy of the holy Ghost; and joy round about us, by the blessed company
and fellowship of our associates, the holy Saints and Angels.

Sect. 3. And in reason, if a Christian-soul in this Tabernacle of the body,
wherein we see but as in a glass, be so delighted to see the face of God
manifested in Jesus Christ: If it so glads a Child of God, when he can but in
the least measure master his corruptions, or has occasion to manifest the
sincerity of his affectionate love to his Maker and Redeemer, and to serve his
brethren in love; How joyful will he be, when these graces shall be perfected,
and he freed from all grievances inward and outward? Yea, if the communion and
enjoyment of Gods Spirit, and Christ in his Gospel and Ordinances, be so sweet
here, that one day with us, is better than a thousand with the ungodly, Psalm.
84. 10. What will it be to enjoy the immediate presence, and glory of God our
Father? Christ our Redeemer and Elder-brother? The holy Ghost our Comforter?
The Angels and Saints our Comforts and Companions?

Our condition there will be so joyful, that look we outwardly, there is joy in
the society, Heb. 12. 22. if inward, there is joy in our own felicity, 1 Cor.
2. 9. Look we forward, there is joy in the eternity, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Mark 10. 30.
So that on every side we shall be even swallowed up of joy, Isai. 35. 10. and
51. 11. Mat. 25. 23. and 18. 10. Heb. 12. 2, 22. Psalm. 16. 11. As, oh the
multitude and fullness of these joys! so many, that only God can number them; so
great, that he only can estimate them; of such rarity and perfection, that this
world has nothing comparable to them, 2 Cor. 12. 24. As, oh the transcendency
of that Paradise of pleasure! where is joy without heaviness or interruption;
peace without perturbation; blessedness without misery; light without darkness;
health without sickness; beauty without blemish; abundance without want; ease
without labor; satiety without loathing; liberty without restraint; security
without fear; glory without ignominy; knowledge without ignorance; eyes without
tears; hearts without sorrow; souls without sin: where shall be no evil heard
of to affright us, nor good wanting to cheer us: for we shall have what we can
desire, and we shall desire nothing but what is good, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Isai. 66.
1. 1 Kings 8. 27. Mark 10. 21. Luke 18. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 10. John 4. 36, and 10.
28. Mat. 25. 46.

Sect. 4. While we are here, how many clouds of discontent have we to darken
the Sunshine of our Joy? When even complaint of evils past, sense of present,
and fear of future, have in a manner shared our lives among them. Here we love
and loath in an instant (like Amnon to his Sister Tamar) in heaven there is no
Object unlovely, nothing which is not exceeding amiable and attractive: and not
attractive only, but retentive also; for there we shall not be subject to
passion, nor can we possibly there misplace our affection. Here we have
knowledge mixed with ignorance, faith with doubting, peace with trouble, yea,
trouble of conscience. Or in case we have peace of conscience, alas, how often
is it interrupted with anguish of spirit? Now rejoice we with joy unspeakable
and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. but alas, anon it falls out that we need to pray
with David, Restore unto us the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 51. 12. but there
is peace, even full without want, pure without mixture, and perpetual without
all fear of foregoing, Dan. 2. 44.

There shall be no concupiscence to tempt, no flesh to lust against the spirit,
no law in our members to rebel against the law of our minds.

Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three now abide: but in heaven,
Vision succeeds in the place of Faith: attainment in the place of Hope, and
perfect fruition and delectation in the room of Charity. There Promises shall
end in performances, Faith in sight and clear vision, Hope in fruition and
possession: yea, time it self shall be swallowed up in Eternity: these are the
Souls dowries in heaven, where God shall be all in all to us! Now he is but as
it were something single; as righteousness in Abraham, temperance in Joseph,
strength in Sampson, meekness in Moses, wisdom in Solomon, patience in Job (for
it is rare to find all these graces completely to meet in any one subject) but
then and there he shall be omnia in omnibus; all these in every of his
servants! God shall be all in all, even the fullness of him that fills all in
all things, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1. 23. The only knowledge of God, shall
fill up our understandings; and the alone love of God, shall possess our
Affections. God shall be all in all to us; he will fill up our rational part
with the light of wisdom; our concupiscible part or appetite, with a spring of
righteousness; and the irascible part with perfect peace and tranquillity, as
Bernard expresses it. That is a blessed state perpetual and unchangeable.
There is eternal security, and secure Eternity, as Bernard speaks: or as Austin
has it, There is blessed Eternity, and everlasting Blessedness.

Let the end of our life then be, to come to a life whereof there is no end;
unto which the Lord in his good time bring us, that we who now sow in tears,
may then reap in joy, the which he will be sure to do, if we but for a short
time serve him here in righteousness and sincerity. But otherwise, look we not
for eternal happiness, but for everlasting misery: For it is an everlasting
Rule, No grace, no holiness here; no glory, no happiness hereafter.

To sum up all in a word; there is no joy here comparable to that in Heaven:
all our mirth here to that is but pensiveness: all our pleasure here to that,
but heaviness: all our sweetness here to that is but bitterness. Even Solomon
in all his glory and royalty, to that, was but as a spark in the chimney, to
the Sun in the firmament. Absaloms beauty, to that, is but deformity. Sampsons
strength, to that, is but infirmity. Methuselahs age, to theirs, is but
minority and mortality. Asahels speed, and swiftness, but a snails pace to
their celerity. Yea, how little, how nothing, are the poor and temporary
enjoyments of this life, to those we shall enjoy in the next? 1 Cor 2. 9. Yea,
Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, was but a wilderness, compared with this
Paradise. And indeed, if the gates of the City be of Pearl, and the streets of
Gold; what then are the inner rooms, the dining and lodging chambers? the
presence chamber of the great Monarch of Heaven and Earth? what then may we
think of the maker and builder thereof?

In fine (that I might darkly shadow it out, since the lively representation
thereof is merely impossible) this life everlasting is the perfection of all
good things. For fullness is the perfection of measure; and everlastingness the
perfection of Time; and infiniteness the perfection of number; and immutability
the perfection of State; and Immensity the perfection of Place, and Immortality
the perfection of Life, and God the perfection of All, who shall be All in All
to us, meat to our taste, beauty to our eyes, perfumes to our smell, music to
our ears. And what shall I say more? but as the Psalmist says, Glorious things
are spoken of thee, thou city of God, Psalm 87. 3. See Rev. 4. 2, 3. and 21.
10. to the end.

Sect. 5. The glory of Heaven, cannot be comprehended here; only God has
vouchsafed to give us some small glimpses in ^he Scripture, whereby we may
frame a conjecture, considerable enough to make us sell all we have to purchase
that Pearl of ^rice. It has pleased God, out of his fatherly condescension, to
^oop to our capacity, in representing Heavenly things under ^arthly types:
shadowing out the joys thereof, by whatsoever is precious and desirable in this
life; as Cities, Kingdoms, Crowns, Pearls, Jewels, Marriages, Feasts, etc.
which supereminent and superabundant felicity, St. Paul, that had been an only
witness, when he had been caught up in the third Heaven, not able to describe,
much less to amplify, sums up all in these words; A sure, most excellent,
exceeding and eternal weight of transcendent glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and 12. 2.
But alas, such is man's pravity, that he is as far from comprehending it, as his
arms are from compassing it, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Heaven shall receive us, we cannot
conceive Heaven. Do you ask what Heaven is? faith one: When I meet you there I
will tell you; For could this ear hear it, or this tongue utter it, or this
heart conceive it, it must needs follow, that they were translated already
thither, 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. Yea, who can utter the sweetness of that peace of
Conscience, and spiritual rejoicing in God, which himself has tasted? If then
the beginning and first fruits of it be so sweet, what shall the fullness of
that beatifical Vision of God be? If the earnest penny be so precious and
promising here; What shall the principal, and full crop and harvest of
happiness in Heaven be? So that a man may as well with a coal paint out the Sun
in all his splendour, as with his pen, or tongue express, or with his heart
(were it as deep as the Sea conceive the fullness of those Joys, and sweetness
of those Pleasures, which the Saints shall enjoy at Gods right hand for
evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right
hand are pleasures for evermore. For quality, they are pleasures; for quantity,
fullness; for dignity, at Gods right hand; for Eternity, for evermore. And
millions of years multiplied by millions, make not up one minute to this
Eternity, 2 Cor. 4. 18. John 10. 28.

The Eye sees much, the Ear hears more, the Heart conceives most; yet all short
of apprehension, much more of comprehension of those pleasures. Therefore it is
said, Enter thou into thy Masters joy; for it is too great to enter into thee,
Mat. 25. 23. Neither will I any further exercise my self in things too high for
me, Psalm. 131. 1. For as St. Paul tells us, The heart of man is not able to
conceive those joys; which being so, How should I be able to express them in
words?

And yet though we cannot comprehend this glory, this far most excellent,
exceeding, and eternal weight of transcendent glory; yet may and ought we to
admire the never enough to be admired bounty and goodness of God and our
Redeemer, in crying out, O the depth, etc. O the sweetness of his love, how
unsearchable are his thoughts, and intendments to man-ward? (once miserably
forlorn, lost and undone) and his ways past finding out, Romans 11. 33.

CHAP. XXI.
Sect. 1. BUt for the better confirming of this so important a truth, in these
Atheistical times, see some reasons to confirm it. As,

First, If the Sun, which is but a Creature, be so bright and glorious, that no
mortal eye can look upon the brightness of it, how glorious then is the Creator
himself? Or that light from whence it receives its light? if the frame of the
heavens and globe of the earth be so glorious, which is but the lower house, or
rather the footstool of the Almighty, as the holy Ghost phraseth it, Isa. 66.
1. Mat. 5. 35. Acts 7. 49. How glorious and wonderful is the Maker thereof, and
the City where he keeps his Court? Or if sinners, even the worst of wicked men,
and Gods enemies, have here in this earthly Pilgrimage, such variety of
enjoyments to please their very senses, as who can express the pleasurable
variety of Objects for the sight; of meats and drinks to satisfy and delight
the taste, of voices and melodious sounds, to recreate the hearing; of scents
and perfumes, provided to accommodate our very smellings, of recreations and
sports, to bewitch the whole man: And the like of honor and profit, which are
Idols that carnal men do mightily dote upon, and take pleasure in: (though
these earthly and bodily joys are but the body, or rather the dregs of true
joy) what think we must be the soul thereof, viz. those delights and pleasures,
that are reserved for the glorified Saints, and Gods dearest darlings in
heaven? Again,

Secondly, If natural men find such pleasure and sweetness in secular wisdom,
lip-learning, and brain-knowledge; For even mundane knowledge has such a show
of excellency in it, that it is highly affected both by the good and bad; As, O
the pleasure that rational men take therein! It being so fair a Virgin that
every clear eye is in love with her; so rich a Pearl, that none but Swine do
despise it: yea, among all the Trees in the Garden, none so takes with rational
men as the Tree of Knowledge (as Satan well knew, when he set upon our first
Parents) insomuch that Plato thinks, in case wisdom could but represent it self
unto the eyes, it would set the heart on fire with the love of it. And others
affirm, That there is no less difference between the Learned and the Ignorant,
than there is between the living and the dead, or between men and beasts. And
yet the pleasure which natural and moral men take in secular and mundane
knowledge and learning, is nothing comparable to that pleasure, that an
experimental Christian finds in the Divine and Supernatural knowledge of Gods
Word: Which makes David and Solomon prefer it before the honey and the honeycomb
for sweetness: and to value it above thousands of gold and silver; yea, before
pearls and all precious stones for worth. How sweet then shall our knowledge in
heaven be? For here we see but darkly, and as it were in a glass, or by
moonlight; but there we shall know, even as we are known, and see God and
Christ in the face, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

Thirdly, If mere Naturians have been so taken with the love of Virtue, that
they thought if a virtuous soul could but be seen with temporal eyes, it would
ravish all men with love and admiration thereof; yea, if the very worst of men,
drunkards, blasphemers, and the like; though they most spightfully scoff at,
and back-bite the people of God; yet when they know a man sincere, upright, and
honest, cannot choose but love, commend, and honor him in their hearts; as it
fared with Herod touching John, and King Agrippa touching Paul.

Sect. 2. Or rather if Gods own people are so ravished with the graces and
privileges which they enjoy upon earth, as the assurance of the pardon of sin,
the peace of a good conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost; which is but
glorification begun: What will they be, when they shall enjoy the perfection of
glory in heaven? As see but some instances of their present enjoyments here
below. First, if we were never to receive any reward for those small labors of
love, and duties we do to the glory of God, and profit of others, we might
think our selves sufficiently recompensed in this life, with the calm and
quietness of a good conscience, the honesty of a virtuous and holy life; That
we can do and suffer something for the love of Christ, who has done and
suffered so much to save us; That by our works the Majesty of God is magnified,
to whom all homage is due, and all service too little. For godliness in every
sickness is a Physician, in every contention an Advocate, in every doubt a
Schoolman, in all heaviness a Preacher, and a Comforter unto whatsoever estate
it comes, making the whole life as it were a perpetual Hallelujah. Yea, God so
sheds his love abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, that we are in heaven
before we come thither. Insomuch, that as the fire flies to his sphere, the
stone hastens to the center, the river to the sea, as to their end and rest,
and are violently detained in all other places; so are the hearts of Gods
people, without their Maker and Redeemer, their last end and eternal rest and
quietness, never at rest: like the Needle touched with the Loadstone, which
ever stands quivering and trembling until it enjoys the full and direct aspect
of the Northern Pole. But more particularly:

How does the assurance of the pardon of sin alone, clear and calm all storms
of the mind, making any condition comfortable, and the worst and greatest
misery to be no misery?

To be delivered of a child, is no small joy to the mother: but to be delivered
from sin, is a far greater joy to the soul. But to this we may add the joy of
the holy Ghost, and the peace of conscience, otherwise called the peace of God
which passes all understanding. These are privileges that make Paul happier
in his chain of iron, than Agrippa in his chain of gold: And Peter more merry
under stripes, than Caiaphas upon the Judgmentseat; and Stephen the like under
that shower of stones. Pleasures are ours, if we be Christ's: whence those
expressions of the holy Ghost, The Lord has done great things for us,
wherefore we rejoice. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout
for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Let all that put their trust in thee
rejoice, let them even shout for joy. Rejoice evermore; and again I say,
rejoice. Rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy
shall no man take from you, etc. So that it is a shame for the faithful, not to
be joyful; and they sin if they rejoice not, whatsoever their condition be. The
Eunuch no sooner felt the pardon of sin, upon his being baptized into the Faith
of Christ, but he went on his way rejoicing, Acts 8. 39. He then found more
solid Joy, than ever he had done in his riches, honors, and great places under
Candace, Queen of the Aethiopians. At the same time when the Disciples were
persecuted, they are said to be filled with joy, and with the holy Ghost, Acts
13. 52. And as their afflictions do abound, so their consolations do abound
also, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For these are comforts that will support and refresh a child
of God in the very midst of the flames, as the Martyrs found: for maugre all
their persecutors could do, their peace and joy did exceed their pain; as many
of them manifested to all that saw them suffer.

Sect. 3. Where observe, before we go any further, what Sots they are, that cry
out, It is in vain to serve God, and unprofitable to keep his Commandments, as
it is in Malachy 3. 14. For had these Fools but tasted the sweet comforts that
are in the very works of piety, and that Heaven upon Earth, the Feast of a good
Conscience, and joy of the inward man, they could not so speak. Yea, then would
they say, There is no life to the life of a Christian. For as the Priests of
Mercury, when they are their Figs and Honey, cried out, Oh how sweet is truth!
So if the worst of a Believers life in this world be so sweet, how sweet shall
his life be in that heavenly Jerusalem and holy City, where God himself
dwells, and where we shall reign with Christ our Bridegroom, and be the Lambs
wife? Which City is of pure gold, like unto clear glass; the walls of Jasper,
having twelve foundations garnished with all manner of precious stones; the
first foundation being Jasper, the second Saphir, the third a Calcedony, the
fourth an Emerald, the fifth a Sardonyx, the sixth a Sardius, the seventh a
Chrysolite, the eighth a Beryl, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasus,
the eleventh a Jacynth, the twelfth an Amethyst: Having twelve gates of twelve
pearls, the streets thereof of pure gold, as it were transparent glass: In the
midst of which City, is a pure River of the water of life, clear as Crystal,
and of either side the Tree of Life; which bears twelve manner of fruits,
yielding her fruit every month; the leaves whereof serve to heal the Nations:
Where is the Throne of God and of the Lamb; whom we his servants shall for ever
serve, and see his face, and have his Name written in our Foreheads. And there
shall be no night, neither is there need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it: for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. Into which nothing that defiles shall enter; but they alone which are
written in the Lambs Book of life; As is expressed, Rev. 21. and 22. Chap. The
holy Ghost speaking after the manner of men, and according to our slender
capacity, for otherwise no words can in any measure express the transcendency
of that place of pleasure. Only here we have a taste, or earnest-penny, one
drop of those divine dainties, of those spiritual, supernatural, and divine
pleasures, reserved for the Citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem; some small
smack whereof we have even in the barren desert of this perilous
peregrination. God letting out as it were, a certain kind of Manna, which in
some sort refreshes his thirsty people, in this Wilderness, as with most sweet
honey, or water distilled from out of the Rock. As what else are those Jubilees
of the heart; those secret and inward joys which proceed from a good
conscience, grounded upon a confident hope of future salvation? As what else do
these great clusters of grapes signify, but the fertility of the future Land
of Promise.

Sect. 4. True it is, none can know the spiritual joy and comfort of a
Christian, but he that lives the life of a Christian, John 7. 17. As none could
learn the Virgins Song, but them that sang it, Rev. 14. 3. No man can know the
peace of a good Conscience, but he that keeps a good Conscience. No man knows
the hid Manna, and white Stone, with a new name written in it, but they that
receive the same, Rev. 2. 17.

The world can see a Christians outside, but the raptures of his Soul, the
ravishing delights of the inward man, and joy of the Spirit for the remission
of his sins, and the infusion of grace, with such like spiritual Privileges
more glorious than the States of Kingdoms; are as a covered mess to men of the
World.

But I may appeal to any man's conscience, that has been softened with the
unction of grace, and truly tasted the powers of the World to come; To him that
has the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the holy Ghost; in whose Soul
the light of grace shines, whether his whole life be not a perpetual
Hallelujah, in comparison of his natural condition? Whether he finds not his
joy to be like to the joy of harvest? or as men rejoice when they divide a
spoil? Isa. 9. 3. Whether he finds not more joy in goodness, than worldlings
can do, when their wheat, wine, and oil abounds, Psalm 4. 7. and 53. 17. Yea,
he can speak it out of experience, that as in profane joy, even in laughter
the heart is sorrowful: so in godly sorrow, even in weeping, the heart is light
and cheerful. The face may be pale, yet the heart may be calm and quiet. So St.
Paul, as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Our cheeks may run down
with tears, and yet our mouth sing forth praises. And so on the contrary,

Where (O God) there wants thy grace,
Mirth is only in the Face,
2 Cor. 5. 12. Well may a careless worldling laugh more, as what will sooner
make a man laugh than a witty jest, but to hear of an Inheritance of an hundred
pounds a year, that is fallen to a man, will make him more solidly merry within.
Light is sown to the righteous, and joy for the upright, Psalm. 97. 11. My
servant, says God, shall sing and rejoice: but they shall weep, etc. Isai. 65.
14.

Indeed we are not merry enough, because we are not Christians enough, because
sin is a cooler of our joy, as water is of fire. And like the worm of Jonah his
gourd, bites the very root of our joy, and makes it wither: Yea, sin like a
damp, puts out all the lights of our pleasure, and deprives us of the light of
Gods countenance, as it did David, Psalm 51. 12. and 4. 6. So that the fault is
either; First, in the too much sensuality of a Christian, that will not forego
the pleasures of sin, or the more muddy joys and pleasures of this world,
which are poisons to the soul, and drown our joys, as Bees are drowned in
honey, but live in vinegar. Men would have spiritual joy, but withal they would
not part with their carnal joy: Yet this is an infallible Conclusion, There is
no enjoying a worldly Paradise here, and another hereafter.

Or secondly, The fault is in the taste, not in the meat; in the folly of the
judgment, not in the Pearl, when a Grain of Corn is preferred before it. To
taste spiritual joys, a man must be spiritual; for the Spirit relisheth the
things of the spirit; and like loves his like. Between a spiritual man, and
spiritual joys, there is as mighty an appetite and enjoying, as between
fleshly meat, and a carnal stomach. Therefore the want of this taste and
apprehension condemns the world to be carnal, but magnifies the joys
spiritual, as being above her carnal apprehension. Or,

Thirdly, Herein lies the fault; few feel these joys in this life; because
they will not crack the shell, to get the kernel: they will not pare the fruit,
to eat the pulp? nor till the ground, to reap the Harvest. They fly the Wars,
and thereby lose the glory of the Victory* They will not dig the craggy
Mountain to find the Mine of Gold: nor prune the Vine, therefore enjoy not the
fruit. They fly Mortification, and therefore attain not the sweet spiritual
Consolation, which ever attends the same. And so much for the Reasons. The Use
may be manifold.

CHAP. XXII.
Sect. 1. FIrst, Is it so, that the torments of Hell are so exquisite? even
worse than the pangs of death, or childbirth, scalding lead, drinks of gall
and wormwood, griping of chest-worms, fits of the stone, gout, strangury,
flames of fire and brimstone? Yea, are all these, and all other pains that can
be named put together, but shadows and fleabitings to it? And are they to be
endured everlastingly? And are all Fornicators, Idolaters, Thieves, Covetous,
Drunkards, Swearers, Raylers, Fearful and Unbelieving persons, Murderers,
Sorcerers, Liars, and all Unrighteous persons to have their part and portion in
that Lake? And withal lose their part and portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, as
the Word of God expressly tells us? Rev. 21. 7, 8. and 22. 14, 15. How is it
that we are not more affected therewith?

The only reason is, most men are so far from believing the Word of God in this
point, that they do not believe there is a God. The Fool, says David, has said
in his heart there is no God, Psalm 53. 1. They, meaning the wicked, think
always there is no God, Psalm 10. 4. to 14. And the reason follows, His ways
always prosper, Psalm 73. 3. to 21. And hence it is, that they live like
beasts, because they think they shall die like beasts, without any answer for
what they have either acted or left undone; and accordingly resolve, Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die, as the Holy Ghost has acquainted us
with their inmost thoughts, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Whereas if men did believe either
Heaven or Hell, they could never so carelessly hazard the losing of the one, or
the procuring of the other. As, oh the madness of these men! that cannot be
hired to hold their finger for one minute in the weak flame of a farthing
candle, and yet for trifles will plunge themselves body and soul into those
endless and infinitely scorching flames of Hellfire.

If a King but threatens a Malefactor to the Dungeon, to the Rack, to the
Wheel, his bones tremble, a terrible palsy runs through all his joints: but
let God threaten the unsufferable Torments of burning Tophet, we stand unmoved,
undaunted. And what makes the difference? the one we believe as present, the
other is, as they think, uncertain and long before it comes, if ever it do
come. Otherwise it could not be, since the soul of all sufferings are the
sufferings of the soul; since as painted fire is to material, such is material
to Hellfire.

Men may say, they believe there is an Hell, and a Heaven, but surely they
would never speak as they speak, think as they think, do as they do, if they
thought that their thoughts, words, and actions should ever come to Judgment.
If men believed that Heaven were so sweet, and Hell so intolerable as the Word
makes them, they would be more obedient upon Earth. The Voluptuous and Covetous
would not say, Take you Heaven, let us have Money, Pleasure, etc.

Sect. 2. True, there are none so confirmed in Atheism, but some great danger
will make them fly to the aid of a Divine Power, as Plato speaks, Extremity of
Distress, will send the prophanest to God: as the drowning Man stretches out
his hand to that Bough, which he comtemned whiles he stood safe on shore. Even
Sardanapalus, for all his bold denying of a God, at every hearing of a thunder,
was wont to hide his head in a hole.

Yea, in their greatest jollity, even the most secure heart in the world, has
some flashes of fear, that seize on them like an Arrest of Treason. At least on
their Deathbeds, had they as many Provinces as Ahashuerosh had, they would
give an hundred six and twenty of them, to be sure there were no Hell, though
all their life they supposed it but a fable. And this makes them fearful to
die, and to die fearfully. Yea, how often do those Russians that deny God at the
Tap-house, preach him at the Gallows? and confess that in sincerity of heart,
which they oppugned in wantonness? And certainly, if they did not at one time
or other believe a God, a day of Judgment, a Heaven and an Hell, they should be
in a worse condition than Felix or Belshazzar; yea, than the Devils themselves;
for they believe them, yea, quake and tremble to think of them, as being still
in a fearful expectation of further degrees of actual torments, Matthew. 8. 29.

However, admit their lethargized consciences be not awakened, until they come
into Hell, as God not seldom leaves them, to be confuted with fire and
brimstone, because nothing else will do it, yet in Hell they shall know, there
is a righteous Judge that will reward every man according to his deeds; and
confess that what they once vainly imagined was but imagined. There may be
Atheists on earth, there are none in hell. Vengeance
shall make them wise, whom sin has made and left foolish.

A Pope of Rome being upon his Deathbed, said to those about him, Now come
three things to trial, which all my life I made doubt of; Whether there be a
God, a Devil, and whether the Soul be immortal. 'Twas not long ere he was fully
resolved with a vengeance: and so shall you, O ye fools, when that hour comes,
though you flatter your selves for the present. When you feel it, you will
confess it; and when it is too late, you will like a Fool say, Alas I had not
thought. For this is the difference between a Fool and a Wise man, A wise man,
(says Solomon) foreseeth the evil (the evil of Hell, says Bernard) and
preventeth it; but fools go on and are punished, Prove. 22. 3. Acknowledge thy
self a Fool then, or bethink thy self now, and do thereafter, without delaying
one minute: For there is no Redemption from Hell, if once thou come there.
And there thou may be (for ought thou know) this very day; yea, before
thou can swallow thy spittle: Thy Pulse may leave beating, before thou can
fetch thy breath.

Sect. 3. But to speak this to the Sensualists, is labor in vain: For their
consciences are so blinded, that they (as they think) do believe an heaven and
an hell, yea, in God, and in Christ, as well as the precisest, Joh. 4. 38, 39,
46, 47. For it is hard for men to believe their own unbelief in this case. They
that are most dangerously sick, are least sensible of their being sick.

A very likely matter thou believe in Christ, and hopest to be saved by him,
when thou will neither imitate his actions, nor follow his precepts. How does
this hang together? Let me ask thee a question or two, that may convince thee
of thy unbelief: If a Physician should say to his Patient, Here stands a
Cordial, which if you take, will cure you; but touch not this other Vial, for
that is deadly poison; and he wittingly refuses the Cordial to take the
Poison, will not every one conclude, That either he believed not his Physician,
or preferred Death before Life. If Lots Sons in law had believed their Father,
when he told them the City should suddenly be destroyed with fire and
brimstone, and that by flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his
counsel. If the Old World had believed that God would indeed, and in good
earnest, bring such a flood upon them as he threatened, they would have entered
the Ark, and not have scoft at Noah for building it. So if you did firmly
believe what God in the Scriptures speaks of Hell, you would need no entreaties
to avoid the same.

Sect. 4. But alas, men of thy condition are so far from believing what God
threatens in his word against their sins, that they bless themselves in their
hearts, saying, We shall have peace although we walk according to the
stubbornness of our own will; so adding drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
Yea, they prefer their condition before others, who are so abstemious, and make
conscience of their ways, thinking that they delude themselves with needless
fears and scruples, 2 Kings 18. 22, 30, 33, 35.

Alas, if they did in good earnest believe, that there is either God or Devil,
Heaven or Hell, or that they have immortal souls, which shall everlastingly
live in bliss or woe, and receive according to what they have done in their
bodies, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10. They could not but live
thereafter, and make it their principal care how to be saved.

But alas, they believe that they see and feel, and know they believe the Laws
of the Land, and know that there are Stocks and Bridewels, and Goals, and
Dungeons, and Racks, and Gibbets, for Malefactors; and this makes them abstain
from murder, felony, and the like; but they believe not things invisible and
to come: For if they did, they would as well, yea much more fear him that has
power to cast both body and soul into hell, as they do the temporal Magistrate,
that has only power to kill the body; they would think it a very hard bargain,
to win the whole world, and lose heaven, and their own souls, Luke 9. 25.

Men fear a Gaol, more than they fear Hell; and stand more upon their silver or
sides smarting, than upon their souls; and regard more the blasts of men's
breath, than the fire of Gods wrath; and tremble more at the thought of a
Sergeant or Bailiff, than of Satan and everlasting perdition: Else they would
not be hired with all the worlds wealth, multiplied as many times as there be
sands on the Seashoar, to hazard, in the least, the loss of those everlasting
Joys before spoken of, or to purchase and plunge themselves into those easless
and everlasting flames of fire and brimstone in Hell, there to fry body and
soul, where shall be an innumerable company of Devils and damned Spirits to
affright and torment them, but not one to comfort or pity them. Confident I am,
thou would not endure hereto hold thy hand in a fiery crucible the space of a
day, or an hour, for all the worlds wealth and splendor: How then (if thou
bethinkest thy self) will thou hereafter endure that, and ten thousand thousand
time more for millions of millions of ages? Look Rev. 20. 10. and bethink thy
self, how thou will brook to be cast into a doleful disconsolate dungeon, to
lie in utter darkness in eternal chains of darkness, in a little ease, at no
ease for ever and ever. Can thou endure to dwell with the devouring fire,
with the everlasting burning.

Sect. 5. Wherefore let me, my Brethren, beseech you not to be such Atheists
and Fools as to fall into Hell before you will fear it, when by fearing it, you
may avoid it, and by neglecting it, you cannot but fall into it. What though it
be usual with men, to have no sense of their souls till they must leave their
bodies? yet do not you therefore leap into Hell to keep them company, but be
persuaded to bethink your selves now, rather than when it will be too late,
when the Drawbridge will be taken up, and when it will vex every vein of your
hearts, that you had no more care of your souls. Yet there is grace offered, if
we will not shut our hearts and wills against it, and refuse our own mercy: but
how long God will yet wait thy leisure, or how soon he will, in his so long
provoked Justice, pronounce thy irrevocable sentence, thou know not; nor
can thou promise thy self one minutes time.

Oh that men would believe the God of truth (that cannot lie) touching
spiritual and eternal things, but as they do these temporary and transitory? Oh
that thou who art the sacred Monarch of this mighty Frame, would give them
hearts to believe at least thus much, That things themselves are in the
invisible World, in the World visible, but their shadows only! And that
whatsoever wicked men enjoy here, it is but as in a dream; their plenty is but
like a drop of pleasure, before a River of sorrow and displeasure: And
whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery before a River of mercy and
glory. That though Thou, the great and just Judge of all the World, come
slowly to Judgment, yet Thou will come surely. As the Clock comes slowly and by
minutes to the stroke, yet it strikes at last. That those are only true Riches,
which being once had, can never be lost. That Heaven is a Treasure worthy our
hearts, a Purchase worthy our lives: That when all is done, how to be saved is
the best plot. That there is no mention of one in the whole Bible that ever
sinned without repentance, but he was punished without mercy. For then there
would not be a Fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for a portion of
meat sold his inheritance, Heb. 12. 16. Then they would not be of the number of
those, that so doted upon Purchases, and Farms, and Oxen, that they made light
of going to the Lords Supper, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. Nor of the Gadarens mind,
who preferred their Hogs before Christ. Then would they know it better to want
all things, than that one needful thing; whereas now they desire all other
things, and neglect that one thing which is so needful. They would hold it far
better, and in good sadness to be saved with a few, as Noah was in the Ark than
in good fellowship, with the multitude, to be drowned in sin, and damned for
company. Nor would they think it any disparagement to their wisdoms, to change
their minds, and be of another judgment to what they are.

CHAP. XXIII.
Sect. 2. SEcondly, Are the Joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious? How
then should we admire the love and bounty of God, and bless his Name, who for
the performance of so small a work, has proposed so great a Reward? And for
the obtaining of such an happy state, has imposed such an easy Task. Yea
more, is Heaven so unspeakably sweet and delectable, is Hell so unutterably
doleful? Then let nothing be thought too much that we can either do or suffer
for Christ, who has freed us from the one, and purchased for us the other.
Though indeed, nothing that we are able to do or suffer here, can be compared
with those woes we have deserved in Hell, or those joys we are reserved to in
Heaven. And indeed, that we are now out of Hell, there to fry in flames of fire
and brimstone, never to be freed; that we have the free offer of Grace here,
and everlasting glory hereafter in Heaven, we are only beholding to him. We are
all by nature, as Traitors, condemned to suffer eternal torments in Hellfire,
being only reprieved for a time: But from this extremity, and eternity of
torment, Jesus has freed and delivered us.

O think then! yea, be ever thinking of it, how rich the mercy of our Redeemer
was in freeing us; and that by laying down his own life to redeem us. Yea, how
can we be thankful enough for so great a blessing? It was a mercy bestowed, and
a way found out, that may astonish all the sons of men on Earth, and Angels in
Heaven. Which being so, let us study to be as thankful as we can. Has Christ
done so much for us, and shall we deny him any thing he requires of us? Nor
can any one in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not study and
strive for an answerable and thankful demeanor. If a Friend had given us but a
thousandth part of what God and Christ has, we should heartily love him all
our lives, and think no thanks sufficient: What price then should we set upon
Jesus Christ, who is the Life of our lives, and the Soul of our Souls? Do we
then for Christ's sake, what we would do for a Friends sake. Yea, let us abhor
our selves for our former unthankfulness, and our wonderful provoking of him.
Hearken we unto Christ's voice, in all that he says unto us, without being
swayed one way or another, as the most are? Let us whom Christ has redeemed,
express our thankfulness, by obeying all that he says unto us, whatever it
costs us, since nothing can be too much to endure for those pleasures which
shall endure for ever. As, Who would not obtain Heaven at any rate, at any cost
or trouble whatsoever?

In Heaven is a Crown laid up for all such as suffer for Righteousness, even a
Crown without cares, without rivals, without envy, without end; And is not this
reward enough for all that Men or Devils can do against us? Who would not serve
a short Apprenticeship in Gods service here, to be made for ever free in glory?
Yea, who would not be a Philpot for a month, or a Lazarus for a day, or a
Stephen for an hour, that he might be in Abraham's bosom for ever? Nothing can
be too much to endure, for those pleasures that endure for ever. Yea, what pain
can we think too much to suffer? What little enough to do, to obtain eternity?
For this incorruptible Crown of Glory in Heaven? 1 Pet. 5. 4. where we shall
have all tears wiped from our eyes; where we shall cease to sorrow, cease to
suffer, cease to sin, where God shall turn all the water of our afflictions,
into the pure wine of endless and unexpressible comfort.

You shall sometimes see an hired servant, venture his life for his new Master,
that will scarce pay him his wages at the years end; and can we suffer too much
for our Lord and Master, who gives every one that serves him, not Fields and
Vineyards, as Saul pretended, 1 Samuel 22. 7. etc. nor Towns and Cities, as
Cicero is pleased to boast of Caesar, but even an hundredfold more than we
part withal here in this life, and eternal Mansions in Heaven hereafter, John
14. 2.

St. Paul says, Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes us a
far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Where note
the incomparable and infinite difference, between the Work and the Wages; light
affliction, receiving a weight of Glory; and momentany affliction eternal
glory. Suitable to the reward of the wicked, whose empty delights live and die
in a moment; but their unsufferable punishment is interminable and endless.
Their pleasure is short, their pain everlasting; our Pain is short, our Joy
eternal. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of life, James 1. 12.

^ folly is it then, or rather madness, for the small pleasure of some base
lust, some paltry profit, or fleeting vanity (which passes away in the very
act, at the taste of a pleasant drink dies so soon as it is down) to bring
upon our selves in another world, torments without end, and beyond all compass
of conceit?

Fourthly, Is it so? that God has set before us life and death, heaven and
hell, as a reward of good and evil; leaving us as it were to our choice,
Whether we will be completely and everlastingly happy or miserable: with what
resolution and zeal should we strive, to make our calling and election sure?
not making our greatest business, our least and last care. I know well, thou
had rather when thou die, go to reign with Christ in his Kingdom for
evermore, than be confined to a perpetual prison or Furnace of fire and
brimstone, there to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels: If so, provoke
not the Lord, who is great and terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and of
infinite purity: and who has equally promised salvation unto those which keep
his Commandments, and threatened eternal death and dest^uction to those who
break them. For as he is to all repentant sinners a most merciful God, Exodus
34. 6. so to all wilful and impenitent sinners, he is a consuming fire, and a
jeaious God, Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4. 24.

There was a King, who having no Issue to succeed him, espied one day a well
favored and towardly Youth, he took him to the Court, and committed him to
Tutors to instruct him, providing by his Will, that if he proved sit for
Government, he should be Crowned King; if not, he should be kept in Chains, and
he made a Galley slave. The Youth was misled, and neglected both his Tutors
good Counsel, and his Book, so as his Master corrected him, and said, O that
thou knew what honor is prepared for thee! and what thou art like to lose
by this thy idle and loose carriage! Well, thou will afterward, When it is too
late, sorely rue this. And when he grew to years, the King died, whose Council
and Executors perceiving him to be utterly unfit for State Government, called
him before them, and declared the Kings will and pleasure, which was
accordingly performed; for they caused him to be fettered, and committed to the
Galleys, there to toil, and tug at the Oar perpetually, where he was whipped and
lasht, if he remitted his stroke never so little; where he had leisure to
consider with himself, that now he was chained, who might have walked at
liberty; now he was a slave, who might, if he would, have been a King; now he
was over-ruied by Turks, who might have ruled over Christians. The thought
whereof could not but double his misery, and make him bewail his sorrow with
tears of blood. Now this hereafter will be the case of all careless persons,
save that this comes as short of that, as Earth comes short of Heaven, and
temporary misery of eternal. Wherefore if thou would have this this to become
thy very case, go on in thy wilful and perverse impenitency; but if not,
bethink thy self, and do thereafter, and that without delaying one minute: For
there is no redemption from Hell, if once thou come there: And there thou
may be (for ought thou know) this very day, yea before thou can swallow
thy spittle, if thou die this day in thy natural condition.

Many men take liberty to sin, and continue in a trade of sin, because God is
merciful: but they will one day find that he is just as well as merciful. There
is mercy with God (says the Psalmist) that he may be feared, not that he may
be despised, blasphemed, etc. Psalm 130. 4. Yea, know this, and write it in the
Table book of thy memory, and upon the table of thy heart. That if Gods
bountifulness and long suffering toward thee; does not lead thee to
repentance, it will double thy doom, and increase the pile of thy torments. And
that every day which does not abate of thy reckoning, will increase it: And
that thou by thy hardness and impenitency, shall but treasure up unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, and the Declaration of the just judgment of
God, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6.

Now this Judge has told us, that we must give an account for every idle word
we speak, Mat. 12. 36. much more then for our wicked actions; therefore beware
what thou do against him.

Men may dream of too much strictness in holy courses, but they do not consider
the power, the purity, and strictness of the Judge. He who brings even idle
words to judgment, and forgets not a thought of disobedience, how will he spare
our gross negligence and presumption? how our formality and irreverence in his
service, much more our flagitious wickedness, Heb. 12. 29.

Sect. 3. Wherefore, as you ever expect or hope for Heaven and Salvation, as
you would escape the tormenting flames of Hellfire, cease to do evil, learn to
do well. For Sanctification is the way to Glorification, Holiness to eternal
happiness. If we would have God to glorify our bodies in Heaven, we also must
glorify God in our bodies here on Earth.

And now for conclusion: Are the Joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious?
the torments of Hell so woeful and dolorous? Then it behooves all Parents and
Governors of Families, to see to their Childrens and Servants souls, and that
they miscarry not through their neglect. As tell me, Will not their blood be
required at your hands, if they perish through your neglect? Will it not be sad
to have Children and Servants rise up in judgment against you, and to bring in
Evidence at the great Tribunal of Christ? saying, Lord, my Father never minded
me, my Master never regarded me; I might sin, he never reproved me; I might go
to Hell, it was all one to him. Will not this be sad?

Secondly, If it be so, let Children and Servants consider, that it is better to
have lust restrained, than satisfied: it is better to be held in, and restrained
from sin, than to have a wicked liberty. Be not angry with those who will not
see you damn your souls, and let you alone: they are your best Friends. Fear
the strokes of Gods anger, be they spiritual or eternal, more than the strokes
of men. What Is a Fetter to a Dungeon? a Gallows to Hellfire?

Give not way to imaginary, speculative, heart-sins: Murder in the heart,
uncleanness in the eye, and thoughts given way to, will come to actual murder,
and bodily uncleanness at last. Keep Satan at a Distance; if he get but in, he
will be too hard for you. And let so much serve to have been s^oken of Heaven
and Hell.

Upon the one I have stood the longer, that so I might, if God so please, be a
means to save some with fear, plucking them out of the fire of Gods wrath,
under which, without repentance, they must lie everlastingly.

And for the other, I have, like the Searchers of Canaan, brought you a cluster
of Grapes, to give the Reader a taste thereby, of the plentiful vintage we may
expect, and look for in the heavenly Canaan.

Now if any would truly know themselves, and how it ^ill fare with them in the
end, let them read the whole Book, out of which this is taken, viz. The whole
duty of a Christian. Which Book is Licensed by John Dewname and Thomas Gataker.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed at the Charge of Christs-Hospital, according to the Will of
the Donor, 1677.


