The Prevention of Poverty, Together with the Cure of Melancholy, Alias
Discontent.

Or the best and surest way to Wealth and Happiness: being Subjects very
seasonable for these Times; wherein all are Poor, or not pleased, or both; when
they need be neither.

By Rich. Young, of Roxwel in Essex, Florilegus.

Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.

LONDON (...)nted by R. and W. Leybourn, and are to be sold by James Crumpe, a
Book-binder in Little Bartholomews Well-yard, 1655.

Of the Prevention of Poverty:
By R. Y.
Virtue is distributive, and loves not to bury benefits, but to pleasure all
she can: And happy is he, that leaves such a president; for which both the
present and future Ages shall praise him, and praise God for him. It was no
small comfort (I suppose) to Cuthemberg, Anaximenes, Triptolemus, Columbus, and
other the like; whose happiness it was to find out Printing, the Dial, the
Plough, to enrich the World with the best of Metals, with the Loadstone, and a
thousand the like: But had they smothered their conceptions, as so many lights
under a bushel; and not communicated the same for the public, it had argued in
them a great dearth of charity; whereas now (to the glory of God,) all men are
the better for them.

Nor is any employment so honorable, as for a man to serve his generation, and
be profitable to many: When like the Moon, we bestow the benefits received from
God; to the profit and commodity of others. It is the Suns excellency, that his
bright rays and beamns, are dispersed into every corner of the Universe.

The Tragic, Buskin (as they say) would fit all, that should put it on: Here
is that will much benefit thee, (being made use of) be thy condition good or
bad, rich or poor, learned or unlearned, mental or manual. The which to
conceal, would argue in the Author, either too much lucre, or too little love.
Even the Physician, that has a sovereigne Receipt, and dies unrevealing it:
robs the world of many blessings, which might multiply after his death: leaving
to all survivers this collection, that he once did good to others, but to do
himself a greater.

C. E.

The Prevention of POVERTY, Together with the Cure of MELANCHOLY, Alias
DISCONTENT. Or the best and surest way to Wealth and Happiness: Being Subjects
very seasonable for these Times, wherein all are Poor, or not pleased, or both,
when they need be neither.
THE PREFACE.
SECT. 1.
WHen a Gentleman in Athens had his plate taken away by Ahashucrus as he was at
dinner, he smiled upon his friends, saying, I thank God that his Higness has
left me any thing. So whatever befalls us, this should be our meditation: It is
of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, Lam. 3. 22. Or this, He that
has afflicted me for a time, could have held me longer; he that has touched
me in part, could have stricken me in whole; he that has laid this upon my
name, or estate, has power to lay a greater rod both upon my body and soul,
without doing me the least wrong. And indeed if we but think of our deliverance
from the fire of Hell, or that our names are writ in Heaven, it is enough to
make us both patient and thankful, though the trifles, we delight in, be taken
from us.

But most men are so far from this, that if God does not answer their desires
in every thing, they will take pleasure in nothing; they will slight all his
present mercies and former favors, because in one thing he crosses them. Like
Ahab, they are more displeased for one thing they want (or rather fain and
pretend they want, or at least have no right unto) than they are thankful for
a thousand things they enjoy; though the least mercy they enjoy is beyond their
best merit. They are ready to receive all, while they return nothing but sin
and disobedience, wherein they more than abound; for they have done more
against God in one week, than they have done for him ever since they were born:
Yea, such sotts they are, that if another displease them, they will be revenged
on themselves, grow melancholy and discontent, like foolish Children, who will
forbear their meat, and grow sick of the sullens, if never so little crossed.
Yea, though men have all their hearts can wish, and might (if they would, and
had but the wit and grace) be as happy as any men alive, yet some small trifle
shall make them weary of themselves and every thing else, as it fared with
foolish Haman, Esther 5. 13. More particularly, if their purses grow light,
their hearts grow heavy; yea, as if men did delight to vex themselves; how many
are there, that of happy make themselves miserable? or more miserable than they
need, by looking upon miseries in multiplying glasses: the opinion only of
being poor, or fear that they may be so when they are old, makes them never
enjoy a merry day, when they neither want, nor are like to do; and every man
is so miserable as he thinks himself. The taste of goods or evils does greatly
depend on the opinion we have of them.

SECT. 2.
Thus millions are miserable, melancholy, discontent, by their own conceit;
when thousands would think themselves happy, had they but a piece of their
happiness. Which discontent or melancholy occasions more murmuring amongsts us,
than ever there was among those Israelites in the wilderness; an unthankfulness
able to make or keep them poor and miserable, and that everlastingly.

Indeed, because judgment is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8. 11. they think
it no sin at all, such is their ignorance, Otherwise they might know, that as
the Israelites was, so their murmuring is, against even the holy One of Israel;
as Isaiah affirmed of Senuacherib, 2 King. 19. 22. And David of Goliath, a Sam.
17. 36, 45. The Lord (says Moses to the people, when they grumbled for want of
bread, and also to Datban and Abiram) hears your murmuring against him, and
what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord, Exodus
16. 8. Numb. 16. 15, 21. Only this is the difference, multitudes of them were
destroyed suddenly (even fourteen thousand and seven hundred at a clap) yea,
they had all been consumed in a moment for their murmuring, had not Moses stood
up in the gap, and interceded for them, Numb. 16. 41. to 50. and 32. 10. to 14.
and 26. 64, 65, and 11. 12, 33. and 14. 12, 22, 23. and 21. 5, 6. Whereas
millions among us do the like, and are not stung with fiery Serpents as they
were: because they are reserved without repentance, to a fiery Serpent in Hell.
Nor stricken with death temporal, because reserved to death eternal. But God
is the same God still, and as just now as ever, though now under the Gospel,
instead of corporal judgments he inflicts many times spiritual, as blindness
of mind, hardness of heart, and final impenitency, the forerunner of eternal
destruction of body and soul in that burning lake, Revel. 19 20. For why is
their ruin recorded? but for our learning and warning, 1 Cor. 10, 11. Neither
is forbearance any acquittance; yea, to be let go on in a continual repeating
of so great a sin (under such means of light and grace) uncontrouled, is the
greatest unhappiness, the heaviest curse, because such seldom rest, until they
come to that evil, from which there is no redemption. God owes that man a
grievous payment, whom he suffers to run on so long unquestioned, and his
punishment shall be greater, when he comes to reckon with him for all his
faults together. O that men would but seriously consider this, before it proves
too late! and before the drawbridge be taken up; for favors bestowed, and
deliverances from dangers bind to gratitude; or else the more bonds of duty,
the more plagues for neglect. The contribution of blessings require retribution
of obedience, or will bring distribution of judgments.

Yea, argue with all the world, and they will conclude, that there is no vice
like ingratitude; and mere ingratitude returns nothing for good, but these
return evil for good, yea, the greatest evil for the greatest good, being
more ungrateful to God and Christ, than can be expressed by the best Orator
alive. Our Redeemer has done and suffered more, or would do (did we not so
daily provoke him, for which read Gods goodness and Englands unthankfulness)
more for us, than either can be expressed, or conceived by any heart, were it as
deep as the Sea.

Yea, God has removed so many evils from us, and conferred so many good things
upon us, that they are beyond thought or imagination. And were the whole Heaven
turned into a Book, and all the Angels deputed Writers therein, they could not
set down all the good which Gods love in Christ has done us. As consider, if
we are so bound to bless God for his external, temporal, inferior, earthly,
perishing benefits (as food, raiment, friends. fire, air, water, health,
wealth, life, limbs, liberty, senses, and a thousand the like) what praise do
we owe him for the lasting fruits of his eternal love and mercy? and how
thankful should we strive to be? And as much do we owe unto God, for the
dangers from which he delivers us; as for the great and many mercies he has
bestowed upon us. Neither could we possibly be unthankful, if we seriously
thought upon what God gives, and what he forgives. Besides (which would also be
thought upon) what should we have if we did truly love and serve Christ? who
has done all this for his enemies, neglecting and dishounouring him.

SECT. 3.
Now can any one in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not study
and strive for an answerable thankful demeanor: yet, as if all that Christ
has done for us were nothing to move us, we are so far from being thankful,
that our whole life, language and religion is naught else but one continued act
of muttering and murmuring! this is the case, and it is the case of almost who
not.

And is this a small matter? Is it Gods unspeakable mercy, that we are not at
this present frying in Hell flames, never to be freed, and do we complain for
want of a trifle? O that we might, as we ought, lay this to heart! and that
Gods Heralds would be often, and ever minding men of this their sordid and base
condition, and their grievous provoking the Lord, who is even a consuming fire,
Heb. 12. 29. For to me it is a wonder, that of all other sins, this is the
least preached against. And me thinks it should cut the very hearts of those,
that have felt the love of Christ, to hear him so dishonored, who is the life
of their lives, and soul of their souls, and that by those who profess
themselves Christians. Nor do I think I could have pitched upon a Subject more
serious, public and profitable, whether we consider the generally of the
disease, or the necessity, commodity and common good that I hope, and is likely
to come by the cure.

As tell me, will it be any desertlesse office, to find out a way to help all
this? and to make the most poor and melancholy the richest and happiest men
alive? for that is my drift; it is a Theme that perhaps has not hitherto been
thought of, at least not handled. but you will grant it as profitable a
Project, when once it is effected, as was Columbus his discovery of the West
Indies, yea, and I hope will extend it self to as many; for like a cunning
Angler, I have baited my hook with that, at which every fish will be sure to
bite. As who, or where, is the man that desires not to be rich and happy? I
dare say, if the Great Cham, who is said to have a tree full of pearls hanging
by clusters, should but make proclamation, that whoever would repair to him
should have plenty of gold, he might drive such a trade, as would soon make him
a Bankerupt: For as the Prophet observes, every one, even from the least unto
the greatest, is given unto covetousness, Jerem. 6. 13. All gape after gain,
and how to get is each man's thought from sun to sun, insomuch that it is to be
feared, nineteen parts of all the men in Christendom are worshippers of the
golden Calf. And let this serve by way of Preface, least the porch or entry
prove too big for the house: Or least it should be said of me (as once
Nebuchadnezar objected to the Inchanters and Astrologians) that I do but while
away the time, because I cannot tell them this thing, they so much expect and
long for, Dan. 2. 8.

SECT. 4.
As what will some Momus say? Here are great words, but no security; Its well
if all prove not like the Indian Fig Tree, whose leaves are as broad as a
target, when the fruit is no bigger than a bean. Many an Alchymist in
projecting the Philosophers stone, have been so confident to find that which
should do all the world good, that they have distilled away great estates of
their own and other men's, to whom they have promised beforehand gold in whole
scuttles, but at length their glasses have broken together with themselves and
all their adherents.

Answer: I know it is no unusual thing with Projectors, to list up Expectation
so high, that she not seldom over-thinks the birth: But I had rather men should
find more than they expect, than look for more than they shall find. Nor do I
ask any more, than that you will hear all before you censure, which is no
unreasonable request; for so far as we see, we dare believe a suspected or
discredited person; and there are some dishes that we may eat, even from
sluttish hands. Neither shall thou after the perusal of it (in case I should
fall short of what I pretend) have occasion, as many buyers, to cry out with
him in the Comedy, pol ego and oleum, and operam perdidi.

Yea, these two things I will peremptorily promise thee:

First, That whosoever can show thee the way better, yet none can show thee a
better way to grow rich and happy.

The second is, that if thou be not wanting to thy self, if thou will but
observe those rules and directions which I shall produce from the mouth of God,
(who never yet deceived the trust of any, that had the wit or grace to confide
in him, and obey his Precepts, thou shall become of poor and melancholy, both
rich and: happy. Wherefore be at leisure to hear what I shall say, and call
your best thoughts to counsel touching this great business.

CHAP. I.
NOw for the better discharge of what I have undertaken, you may please to take
notice, that a poor and melancholy man is like a City infested with too Enemies
(the one foreign, the other domestic) which can never enjoy peace and safety,
unless the one be kept out, and the other cast out, or which is better, both
subdued. The domestic, or inbred enemy to be cast out is Melancholy; the
foreign foe to be kept out, is Poverty: of these two I will choose to set upon
the last first, and the rather, for that this being kept out, or vanquished, the
other will the sooner yield, or with more ease be overcome.

Touching Poverty, (for that error in practice proceeds many times, originally
and dangerously from error in judgment; and because a sound mind, and a right
understanding of things will much advantage a man in the obtaining and enjoying
of a good and happy estate (for the one lays the foundation, as the other
raises the walls and roof) and lastly, because this discourse may enrich the
soul, settle the heart, and with Gods blessing change the will as well as
increase wealth (an ignorant rich man, being no better than a sheep with a
golden fleece) that so God in all may have the glory; I will first show what it
is, and what it is not, to be rich, and then acquaint you how of poor you may
become rich. As touching the first of these, it is to be observed, that most
men are much mistaken in judging who are poor, and who are rich: as strongly
persuading themselves, that a man is so much the happier, by how much the more
he is wealthier, which is as gross a delusion as possibly can be; for there are
some cases, wherein men are never the better for their wealth, and others
again, wherein they are much the worse, as thus.

God gives to every man a stock or portion of this worlds goods (as well as of
grace and wisdom) more or less to occupy withal; yea, I persuade my self
there are few men, that have not once in their life a golden opportunity
offered them, whereby, if they neglect it not, they may live comfortably all
their days; and to him who is thankful, and uses the same well, viz. to Gods
glory, and profit of himself and others, he gives more, as to the servant
which used his tallents well, he doubled them; but to such as are unthankful,
and abuse the same to their own hurt and Gods dishonor, or distrustfully hoord
it up, he either takes from them that which he had formerly given, as he took
away the od talent from the servant, which had but one, and did not well employ
the same, Luke 19. 24. Or else, which is worse, he gives them all outward
blessings, without his blessing upon them, and then they were better mist than
had, and will do them more hurt than good, Eccles. 5: 13, Or thirdly, which is
worst of all, he bestows riches upon them in wrath, as he gave a King to the
Israelites and Quails: of these severally and in order*

Only it will be necessary, that I first give you an account in brief, how
sordldly and ingratefully they deal with God, that so you may the better see
how God again requites and pays them back in their own coin, without the least
tincture of injustice or severity.

CHAP. II.
GOD has bestowed more blessings upon many men, than they have hairs on their
heads, yea, God has given them far larger portions of this worlds wealth, than
he has done to millions of their brethren; they so grow and increase in
substance, as if they had found out the Philosophers stone, and had the art to
turn copper into gold; or as if with Thales they had the faculty to foresee
what commodities will be cheap, and what dear: and the more God has bestowed
upon them, the greater is their debt of thankfulness, and the greater their
duty of obedience: But alas, They are like the hog, that acornes feed upon,
But never look up from what tree they come:
Or they more regard the gift than the giver; as Martia, Catoes daughter, found
it to fare with her Suitors, who being asked why she did not marry, made
answer, that she could not meet with a man that would love her more than hers.

Perhaps they will profess they love God, and afford him a kind of verbal
thanks; so resembling the Elder-tree, whose slour is more worth than all the
tree besides. Or Nazianzons Country of Ozizala, which abounded with gay
flowers, but was barren of corn; for their thanks is a meet complement, and
their lip-love no other than self-love, as any one may see by these few signs.
As observe but how easily they are moved at their own injuries, how patient at
Gods: let their own credits or riches be troubled, they rage like Lions, let
Gods honor be questioned, they are as tame as Lambs: If the aspersion of
scandal lights upon their names, there is suit upon suit, from Court to Court,
all to beggar the raiser of it, let the Lords dreadful name be blasphemed, they
are so far from spending a penny, that they will not spare a syllable: like
Jonah they are more moved for the loss of their gourd, than for all Nineveh;
which could not be if they did in the least love God, or were thankful, as they
say they do and are.

Yea, it were well If this were the worst, if they were only negative, if they
did return nothing for all the loving kindness of God, and good they have
received from him for they return evil; as may not God say to these, I mean
all unholy and unmerciful rich men, as Sarah spoke to Abraham concerning Hagar,
I have given thee mine handmaid, and How I am despised in thine eyes; And
commonly this is the return that rich men make to God; for as oftentimes he who
lends money unto his friend, loses both money and friend too, as Seneca
observes; so fares it between God and the ungrateful. As our stomachs are
usually worst in summer, so are our appetites to grace-wards: weakest in time
of prosperity and peace. And as the Moon, when she is fuller of light, is still
farthest from the Sun, so the more wealth men have, the farther commonly they
are from God. Too much rankness lays the corn, and trees overladen with fruit
are their own ruin. God has thrown away a little white and red earth upon
thee, and thou art like some vain Whiffler, that is proud of his borrowed
chain. It had been happy for many a man, if God had permitted them to be poor
still; for as Saul was changed to another man presently upon his aneynting, so
are men commonly upon their advancement, and according to our ordinary proverb,
their good and their blood rises together: As if you observe, what ever they
were before, if they be now but a little crossed, they will swell like the Sea
in a storm, and be more troubled at an affront from their inferior or equal,
than for death or hell.

Yea, how many with their greatness have such great thoughts of themselves,
that God himself must not displease them: for if an unseasonable shower does
but cross their recreations, they are ready to fall out with heaven, and to
quarrel with God himself (like Mrs. Minkes riding to Ware) as if they were
wronged, because he did not take his times, when to rain, and when to shine,
resembling therein the Horse, that being overmuch pampered will grow sierce,
and kick, and not abide his rider. Or the Mules Fool, who when she has sucked
her fill, and has enough of her damms milk, casts up her heels and kicks
unkindly. But he is a very quarrellous curr, that barks at every horse, and In
the silent night the very moonshine opens his clamourous throat. Now how do we
not then wonder and bless our selves, that such men enjoy so much, something,
any thing! yet hear all, and you will confess that others are more beholding to
God, whom he denies, and keeps short of these bewitching baits of wealth and
greatness.

But I have not told you one half of their base ingratitude, for commonly when
they have been fatted with Gods blessings, they not only spurn at his
precepts, but as if they studied to be superlative in their provoking of him;
they return the greatest and most malicious evil for the greatest and most
admired love, even hating God and his people, John 15. 24, 25. yea, they most
spightfully and maliciously fight on Satan's and sins side against Christ, and
persecute his members, and the truth, with all their might, persuading, and as
far as they can, enforcing others to do the same; and all this against
knowledge and conscience, as I have upon another occasion made it plainly
appear, though the Devil so blinds them, that there is no convincing them
thereof.

Thus these sin is many degrees beyond ingratitude it self; it is a wickedness
of that nature, that there is no name significant enough to express it. Yea, to
receive so many, such good things at the hands of God, and return such, and so
much evil, is a desperate wickedness not to be endured.

CHAP. III.
BUt observe what they get by it, and how God (even here) pays them again in
their own coin; whereof I will give you several instances, for God does not
deal alike with all in this case, but is various in these kinds of retaliation.
If I be large upon this point, consider of what consequence and concernment it
is, and you will not blame me for prolixity: yea, admit it should be supposed a
digression, yet would I hope to have thanks for it.

First, How many are there, to whom God gives abundance of wealth, and after
some few years (for their abusing the same, and their great unthankfulness)
takes from them again, even that which he had formerly given them? Yea, how
many hundreds are there every year, even in this City, reputed good men, yea,
formerly known to be so, which all on a sudden have shut up their shop windows,
and broke for thousands. Neither was the talent only taken from him in the
Gospel, that evil servant was but a type of many, that should have their
talents taken away.

The Hind in the Fable (O that it were but a fable) being hunted by the Dogs,
hid her self under a vine, whose broad leaves covered her, where perceiving
many sweet grapes, she in requital began to eat them, but by her breaking and
pulling them, she made such a noise and shaking of the leaves, that she was
soon perceived by the hunts-men, and so taken and devoured by the Dogs; such is
the gain of unthankfulness. The ungrateful man forfe its all Gods favors even
what he has, and what he might further expect, merely for want of paying that
small quit-rent of thankfulness.

Strabo reports in his 8. Book, that the Sea, raised by an earthquake,
overflowed the City of Helice, distant twelve furlongs from it, and drowned all
the Inhabitants thereof for their inhospitallity to the Ionians.

The Lords impost for all his blessings is our thankfulness, if we neglect to
pay this impost, the commodity is forfeit, and God will take it back, our
returns are expected according to our receipts.

So that it is hard to determine, whether the ungrateful person be more
wicked, or simple; for what man is so mad, as to purchase barren lands that
will bring forth nothing but weeds, briars and thorns? Or who will not be
willing to sow plentifully, where he shall reap plentifully?

The best means to get more, is to be thankful for what we have, God loves to
sow much where he reapes much. Thankfulness for one benefit inviteth another,
but to do good to an unthankful body, is to sow corn on the sand, and such
speed thereafter. For the earth, which drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, and briugeth forth herbs, meet for him by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God; but that which bears thorns and briars is
reproved, and is near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 7, 8.
Whence arises this conclusion, that want of piety is the conviction of folly.
But

CHAP. IIII.
SEcondly, admit God is pleased to continue or increase the unthankful and
unmercifull man's means, yet he denies to add his blessing withal, and then he
had as good be without it; for no outward blessing proves a blessing, without
Gods blessing upon it, Mal. 2. 2. The wealth of Croesus, were it to he given,
Were not thanks-worthy, if un-blest by Heaven.


That Gods blessing upon all we have or do is all in all, and that without it
all is nothing, is easy to prove. The diligent hand, says Solomon, makes
rich, Prove. 10. 4. but withal, the blessing of God makes rich, says the same
Solomon, ver. 22. not diligence without Gods blessing, for without it all the
earning of great wages, is but putting money into a bag with holes: Haggai 1,
6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have not enough, ye
drink, but ye are not filled with drink, ye cloth you, but there is no
warmness, and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with
holes; and a great deal of the like in verse the ninth: and why all this? they
were all for themselves, and sought not the glory of God, and therefore he did
blow upon it, and blast all their blessings, as the whole book shows. And the
same we daily see; for have not many men great sees, great offices, great
revenues, great gettings, and yet they can scarce keep themselves out of debt?
Yea, who more needy, and who run more in debt than those, that have hundreds
and thousands a year? whereas others that have very little, but small means,
and yet maintain themselves and their families well, yea, and help their poor
friends and neighbors also. Only the word that proceeds out of Gods mouth,
makes the difference, his blessing sets forward the one, which he justly with
holds from the other for their wicked unthankfulness.

Though Labau changed Jacobs wages ten times, yet he could not one time change
that blessing of God which was always with him. A little thing which the
rightoeus injoyeth is better than great riches to the wicked, Prove. 16. 8.
Meat, though it have a virtue to nourish, Medicine, though it have a virtue to
heal, raiment, though it can both adorn and defend the body against the injury
of air and cold, wealth, though it can make rich, yet man lives not by bread,
physic, raiment, etc. only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God does a man live, as our Savior speaks, Math. 4. 4.

Nay, without Gods blessing the very use of their meat is taken away, for it
shall not satisfy, as it fell out with them, Hosea 4. 10. And the like of
other things, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it, except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain. It is in vain
for you to rise early, and to lie down late, and eat the bread of carefulness,
Psalm 127. 1, 2. And again, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it is God
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. as in temporal, so in spiritual food,
it is not the Teacher, but the divine operation of Gods Spirit working with the
word, which converteth the soul; and for want of this blessing, and divine
operation from God, even the best of outward blessings, as health, strength,
riches, honors, beauty, wit, learning, etc. prove but the bane of the owners;
as Absaloms hair proved his halter. And nothing so sovereign, which (being
abused by sin) may not of a blessing become a curse.

God, when he pleases, can make wine infatuate, not exhillerate. He can rot
the groin in the ground, blast it in the ear, wither it in the blade, rot it
with unseasonable showers, when it is ripe cause vermin to devour it in the
barn, yea, when it has past the flayl, the mill, the oven, he can make it gall
in the mouth, in the stomach poison. He can either give a man meat and no
stomach, or a stomach and no meat. And the same God, that can break the staff
of bread, Ezekiel. 4. 16. can also break the staff of friends, riches, promotion,
wit, learning, and all other means that we trust to, or put our confidence in,
as he did the staff of Physic to Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12, 13. as he restrained
the fire from burning, Dan. 3. 27. and the water from drowning, Exodus 14. 21,
^2. and the Lions from devouring, Dan. 6. 22. Whereas if he please to give his
blessing, a man shall be happy, have he any thing or nothing.

Even a word out of his mouth can either sustain us without bread, as it did
Moses and Elias; or with a miraculous bread, as it did Israel with Manna; or
send ordinary means after a miraculous manner, as food to the Prophet by the
Ravens; or multiply ordinary means miraculously, as that meal and oil to the
Sareptane widow; or make a little means go a great way, and perform much, as
those two mean meals of the Prophet, when in the strength thereof he traveled
forty days 1 King. 19. 5. to 9. Unto which we may refer the strength of Moses,
who being one hundred and twenty years old, had not his natural strength
abated, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. and the like of Caleb, Joshua 14. 10, 11. All things are
sustained by his almighty word, how else should the whole Globe of the earth
and sea hang in the middle of the air, and have no other supporter?

The only means for grass, and herbs, and trees, and fruit to grow by, is
rain, yet God provided for Adam all these things before ever it had rained on
the earth. The usual means of light is the sun, howbeit God provided light
before he made the sun, light the first day, the sun the fourth day, he only
said, let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1. 3.

There is no reason in the world, that seven leaves, and a few little fishes,
in the Gospel, should feed four thousand, much less, that five loaves and two
fishes should feed five thousand, means very insufficient to natural reason;
yet God speaking the word to them, they did it. The like whereof we may read 2
King. 4. 43, 44. So for the apparel of the Israelites, which they had when
they were young and children in Egypt, to serve them till they were grown men,
even forty years together in the wilderness, without being worn out, Deuteronomy. 29
5. and the like of that water and pulse, which with Gods blessing made Daniel,
and his companions, fatter and fairer than all the children, which did eat the
portion of the Kings meat, Dan. 1. 15.

We live by food, but not by any virtue that is in it without God; yea, without
the concurence of his providence bread would rather choke than nourish us: if
he withdraw his word and blessing from his creatures, in their greatrst
abundance we perish. A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from
heaven, John 3. 27. All which should teach us confidenlty to trust in God, what
ever our extremeties be; for if God needs not his own lawful, much less thy
unlawful moanes. Again, if no moanes will serve the turn, or do us any good,
without the blessing of God upon it, let us not forfeit his blessing by our
vile ingratitude, but rather desire his blessing, though we want the means.

Thirdly, If it be the blessing of God that makes rich, and not anything that
we can do, let us take heed of ascribing the same to our wit and industry, of
sacrificing to our net, and burning incense to our yarne, as the Prophet
speaks, Hab. ^. 16

Fourthly and lastly, say not as many do, O that I were so rich, that I had but
so much as such a man! then should I be happy: but rather desire God, that he
will bless and sanctify unto thee what thou have, that he may have glory, thy
self and others good by the same: or else God may give thee thy desire, yea,
more than thy heart can wish, as the Psalmisi speaks of the wicked, Psalm. 7 3.
7, 9. but it shall be to thy grief and sorrow: as it was said to Neroes Mother
about her sons being Emperor: or as Bacchus granted the request of Midas,
whose desire was, that whatsoever he touched might instantly be converted into
gold; which was little to his comfort, when even his bread, wine, the feathers
of his bed, his shirt garments, and every thing else turned into that hard
metal, as Fulgentius delivers it: he had his desire, but so, as he would
gladly now have unpray'd his prayers. Alas, how often does riches, without
Gods blessing upon them, prove or become the owners ruin? Many a young Heir
has a great and fair estate left him, and is cried up as happy, but it proves
to him within a while, even like the Ark to the Philistines, which did them
more hurt than good; and so fares it with all that forget God, and are
unthankful to him for what they have. Neither is this all: For,

CHAP. V.
THirdly, there are abundance of men that God does not only withdraw his
blessing from them, but sends his curse with the riches he bestows.

As suppose a man grows never so rich by indirect means, as some care nor
how, but what and how much they get; for to get one scruple of gold, they will
make no scruple of conscience; they care not to make many poor to make
themselves rich: for they have consciences like a barn door, as loving money
better than themselves: yea, they care not, so they may get silver if they
loose their souls. Now God not seldom suffers such to grow very rich, but
together with their riches, they have the curse of God, whereby they become the
worse, and not the better, for them.

There is an evil sickness, sales Solomon, that I have seen under the sun, to
wit, riches reserved to the owners thereof for their hurt, Eccles. 5. 13. To
which accords that of the Prophet Malachy, If ye will not hear it, nor consider
it in your heart, to give glory to my name, says the Lord of hosts, I will
even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blesings; yea, I have cursed
them already, because ye do not consider it in your hearts, Mal. ^. 2. Their
riches are seeming benefits, very curses, even gifts given in wrath, as a King
unto Israel. I gave them a King in my wrath, says the Lord, Hosea ^3. 11. And
so of their Quaeiles, He gave them their desire, but he sent leanness into
their souls, Psalm. 106. 15. They did eat and were well filled, yet turned they
not from their lusts; but the flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was
chewed, even the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord
smote the people with an exceeding great plague, Numb. 11. 33. Psalm. 78: 29,
30, 31. And in another place, Let their table be a suare unto them, and their
prosperity their ruin, Psalm. 69. 22. They had better have had no meat, then
such sauce withal.

The covetous Cormorant, and unthankful wretch, deals with God, as a dog does
with his master, who devoureth by and by whatever he can catch, and gapeth
continually after more: and it were a marvel, that God should answer him with
such abundance, and as it were, be still pouring water into that vessel which
already runs over, considering his monstrous unthankfulness; were it not to rot
the hoops and chines, that so the whole cask may break in pieces, were there
not poison mixed with it, I mean Gods secret curse, as I shall suddenly show.

We well know, that a Ship may be so laden, as that her very freight may be the
cause of her sinking. Demonioa having betrayed Ephesus (where all her friends
and kindred were) to Brennus of Seuona for the love of gain, was brought to a
great heap of gold, and loaded so heavy therewith, that she dyed under the
burden. Tarpeia for the desire she had of all the gold bracelets which the
Sabines wore about their left arms, when they went to besiege Room, sold the
Fort or Castle of the City (wherein there was a great Garrison, of which her
Father Tarpeius was Captain) to the Sabines; and asking for reward of her
treason, Fatius the Sabines General, according to his promise, when she had
opened them a gaete in the night and let them in, commanded his whole Army to
do as he did, who taking the bracelet which himself wore on his left arm, and
his target, did hang them about her neck, and so all the rest, until she being
bowed down to the ground with the weight of them, was pressed to death under
the burden. And much after this manner does God deal with unmerciful misers,
and all wicked and ungrateful men. As see the sad condition of a man, to whom
God gives riches in wrath; it is so well worth your knowledge and observation,
that David was very inquisitive with the Lord about it, Psalm. 73. 3. to 13 and
likewise the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 12. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I speak
with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments; wherefore does the way
of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea, they have taken root, they grow,
yea, they bring sorth fruit; thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins, ver. 1, 2, 3. Yea, it is admirable to consider, how the tabernacles of
robbers do prosper, how secure they are that provoke God, and how abundantly
God gives into their hands, Job 12. 6. They increase in riches, wax fat and
shine, Jerem. 5. 28. They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they
plagued like other men; their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than
heart can wish, yea, there are no bands in their death, Psalm 73. and many the
like places: But hear all, and ye will never envy their prosperity, neither
will your teeth water after their dainties: as what is ever the conclusion?
their felicity and happiness is no sooner mentioned, but it follows: And thou
did set them in slippery places, thou castedst them down into destruction,
they are brought into desolation, in a moment they are utterly consumed with
terrors, Psalm 73. 18. to the 21. verse. Pull them out like sheep for the
slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter, Ierem. 12. 3. They spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down into hell, Job 21. 13.
Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God, Psalm. 55. 19. But no
greater judgment, then thus to be free from judgments. Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone, says God, Hosea 4. 17. And the like: I will not visit
your daughters when they are harlots, nor your Spouses when they are whores,
ver. 14. and hereupon all they do is well.

But think it not an argument of Gods favor or dispensation, that thou and
thousands more do prosper in their wickedness, that some eminent judgment is
not executed speedily upon them, while they are contriving their deep and
divelish plots: For though prosperous wickedness is one of the devils
strongest chains, yet there cannot be a greater unhappiness, an heavier curse,
than to prosper in ill designs and ungracious courses. Such a man's preservation
is but a reservation, as it fared with Sodom and her sisters, which were
preserved from the slaughter of the four Kings, that God might rain down hell
from heaven upon them. And Sennacherib, who escaped the stroke of the
destroying Angel, that he might fall by the sword of his own Sons, Isai. 37.
37, 38.

Wicked men are not wise enough to cosinder, that usually God does most afflict
those whom he best affects; dealing with his children, as the good husband
deals with his trees, those in the garden he is ever and anon meddling with
them, either lopping off the superfluous branches, or scraping off the moss, or
paring of the root, or digging and dunging about them, so using all good means
to make them fruitful; whereas he lets them alone which grow in the hedge-row
or sorrest, till at the length he comes with his Axe and cuts them down for the
fire. Fatted ware, you know, is but fitted for the shambles. God puts money
indeed into these earthen boxes, that have only one chink to let in, but none
to let out, with purpose to break them when they are full. What was Haman the
better for all he had, when the King frowned upon him? or the happier for being
lift up the ladder, when he was to come down again with a rope? And for ought
thou know, this very night thou may loose both thy gold, thy life, and
thy soul too. And therefore what ever thou make choice of, let me rather beg
with innocent Lazarus, then abound with unjust Ahab, or unmerciful Dives, so
shall my turn be soon over, whilst theirs is to come and continue everlastingly.

But my purpose is not so much to show you, what will be the end of unmerciful
and ungrateful men, as how their riches proves a curse to them here. That they
had better be without their wealth, than that God should give it them upon such
terms as he does, I shall demonstrate in these ten particulars. I pray mind
them.

CHAP VI.
FIrst, How many are there, that by an intolerable care, and pains, and grief,
and sting of conscience, and loss of credit, and undergoing many perils, get
great estates, and when they have obtained all that heart can wish, by a just
judgment of God, they have not power to partake of what they have, or be a
farthing the better for all. As observe but what wise Solomon speaks Eccles. 6.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men;
a man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires; yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof, ver. 1, 2. And again, There is one alone, and there is not a
second, yea, he has neither child nor brother, yet is there no end of all his
labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he, for whom do
I labor and bereave my soul of good: this is also vanity, yea, this is a sore
travel, Eccles. 4. 8.

Yea, how many such could I nominate, that are baser by being wealthier, that
are no other than rich beggars, or beggars in the midst of their riches (as
Cain was a vagabond upon his own land) upon whose estates there is set a spell,
insomuch that their wealth says to them in effect, touch not, taste not, handle
not.

It is the misers curse, want in the midst of abundance, hunger in the midst of
plenty, he freezes by the fires side, and is like an unhappy boy, that has a
great trusse of points to play with, and but one at his breeches to tie them
together, or rather he resembles a dog in a wheel, that toils all day to roast
meat for others eating, as the wise man shows, Eccles. 6. 1. 2.

The coverous Miser covers without end, but all to no end; he only feeds his
eyes with that which should feed his belly, and cloth his back. Like him that
Horace tells of in Room, called (...), who was so rich, that he might measure
his gold by the bushel, and yet went almost stark naked, and never would fill
himself half full of meat. They are like Tautalus, who stands up to the chin in
water, and has all kinds of fruits hanging over his head, but is not suffered
to taste of the one, nor drink of the other: Or like an Ass, that is laden with
gold, or dainty cates, but feeds upon thistles: Or like the Indians, who though
they have all the gold amongst them, yet are the most beggarly and naked people
alive.

For as if they were such fools, as not to know that their money will buy them
all necessaries of meat, drink, apparel, and the like, they scarce wear a good
garment, or eat a liberal meal, or take a quiet sleep, but are ever tormenting
themselves to get that, for getting whereof they shall be tormenter. Like a
true Chemist, he turns every thing into gold, both what he should eat, and
what he should wear. He is like a man robbed, hurt and bound, who though he has
means to relieve himself, yet has not liberty to go where he may be releived.

As a proud man is ignorant in the midst of his knowledge, so is the covetous
man poor, and needy, in the midst of his wealth: Yea a poor beggar is in better
estate than a rich miser, for whereas the poor beggar wants many things, the
rich miser wants every thing.

Crates threw his money into the Sea, resolving to drown it, least it should
drown him. The drunkard casts his money into a deluge of drink, both drowning it
and himself with it: wherein the Miser and the Rioter are opposites, the one so
loves money, that he will not afford himself good drink, the other so loves
good drink, that he scorns money. But in several respects, the Misers case is
worse than the Prodigals, for the prodigal shall have nothing hereafter, but
the covetous man has nothing here, not shall hereafter.

Riches, says Seneca, are the wise man's servant, but the fools master: and
the miser makes himself a slave to his servant. Riches are good when the party
that possesses them can tell how to use them; but as instruments are of no use
unto them that are ignorant of music, so are riches of no use to the covetous.
So that in my judgment, that rich fool in the Gospel was far wiser than these
blocks, for he having attained his purpose, got a great estate, could after all
afford himself the comfort of it; for these are his words to himself, Thou have
much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink and take thy
pastime, Luke 12. 19.

Nay, to abound with all things, and to be never the better for them, not to
partake of them, what fool or mad man has been known so senseless? yea, not to
flatter his pretended prudence, no beast will starve in a fat pasture; if then
a man shall pinch his guts when God has afforded him affluence; the Ass is
not so very an Ass as he. Nor do I know any beast like him, save Pharaohs
seven lean and evil favored kine, and to them he is very like: For when his
large and greedy conscience has devoured or eaten up many Customers or Clients
estates, as they did the seven fat and well favored kine, yet it cannot be
known by any real amendment, that he has eaten them, but in his food,
raiment, satisfaction of his mind, etc. he is as ill favored as at the
beginning. He does not more lock up his goods from the these than from himself:
So that I cannot more fitly compare him to any thing, than to an Idol, for as
an Idol has eyes but sees not, so he has a reasonable soul, but understands
not. And most just it is, that he who is unjust to all others, should be most
unjust to himself. And as a covetous man is good to no body, so he is worst of
all to himself.

It is the depth of misery to fall under the curse of Cham, a servant of
servants, divitis servi, maxim servi, no thraldom to the inward and outward
bondage too. So that if there be any creature miserable, it is the miserable
miserly muck-worm; and yet he is least to be pitied, because he makes himself
thus miserable.

Now this may move wonder to astonishment! that they should take such care and
pains, and cast away their souls to heap up riches, and when they have done,
to be never a penny the better for them. Yea, what can any wise man think of
them, are they not stark mad? are they not fools in folio? What, take so much
care and pains, endure so much grief, sting of conscience, loss of credit,
deprive themselves of heaven, damn their own souls, to get wealth, and when
they have got it, not to be the better for it: yea, they are less satisfied
and contented than before, meanlier accommodated than mean men; and could this
possible be so, if God did not give them their riches in wrath? nor would he
otherwise deny them the use of their own; for the wise man has given it as a
rule, That to whom God has given riches as a blessing, he also gives him to
eat, and drink, and to take pleasure, and delight his soul with the profit of
his labors, wherein he travelleth under the sun: for which see Ecces. 2. 24.
and 3. 12, 13. and 5. 17, 18, 19. and 8. 15. And so you have one particular to
prove what I promised. But

CHAP. VII.
SEcondly, To this is added as another judgment, let the ungrateful merciless
miser have never so much, he is never the more, but the less contented: As how
many have mighty estates, their houses full, their shops and warehouses full,
their coffers full, their purses full, and their pastures full, and yet as if
their hearts were bottomless, that is, still as lank and empty through an
excessive desire of more, as if they did indeed want all things. The Cormorants
desires are rather sharpened by enjoying, and augmented by possession. For
wishing still, his wishes never cease,
But as his wealth, his wishes still increase.


To show that covetous men belong to hell after they dye, they are like hell
while they live: Hell is never filled, and they are never satisfied, covetous
men drink brine, which increases thirst rather than quenches it. And though
the devil should say to them as he said to our Savior, touching the whole
world, and glory thereof, all these will I give thee, (though he needs not
offer them all, for they will serve him for less) yet all would not content
them, no more than heaven it self contented Lucifer: For as the rich glutton in
hell desired a drop of water, and yet a river would not have satisfied him; for
if his desire had been granted in the first, he would have required more, and
then more to that, never ceasing to ask, never having enough, nor being the
better when he had it: so it fares with the covetous man, his abundance no more
quenches his lust, than fuel does the flame. For as oil kindles the fire,
which it seems to quench, so riches come as though they would make him
contented, but they make him more covetous. And is not this thy very case that
art covetous? No man more happy, in respect of outward things, then thy self,
could thou but see it; thou have all things that heart can wish, and
should thou but come to want what thou now injoyest, and think not worth
thanks; when it were past thou would say, thou wast most happy, and after a
little miss, wish withal thine heart, thou hadest the same again: yea, a
world for such a condition and content withal. Only the devil (by Gods just
permission) bewitches thee to think, that thou have not enough, when thou have
too much, and more than thou need, or know what to do withal.

Nor is it possible for a worldling to be contented: for whereas natural
desires are soon satisfied, those that are unnatural are infinite. Hunger is
soon apeased with meat, and thirst allayed with drink: but in burning Fevers,
quo plus sunt potae plus sitiuntur aquae, they still love, amore concupi
scentiae, never amore complacentiae. If covetous, or ambitious men ever feel
content in these transitory things, it is no otherwise then as itching soars do
in clawing and scratching fingers. And indeed how should intemperate desires be
satisfied with increase, according as they are replenished, when these
appetites are not capable of satiety?

Men in this case, are like poisoned Rats, which when they have tasted of their
bane, cannot rest until they drink, and then can much less rest till they
drink again, swell and burst. Covetousness is like the disease called the
Woolf, which is always eating, and yet keeps the body lean. A moderate water
makes the Mill go merrily, but too much will not suffer it to go at all.

Secondly, another reason is, Nothing can fill the heart of man, but he that
made it: The heart shall be satisfied with gold, when the body shall be
contented with wind. The whole world is circular, the heart of man is
triangular; and we know a circle cannot fill a triangle. Yea if it be not
filled with the three persons in Trinity, it will be filled with the world, the
flesh, and the devil. The heart is the seat or receptacle of spiritual things;
and the things of the world are corporal and carnal: Now carnal and corporal
things, can no more fill our hearts, then spiritual things can fill our
Coffers. Visible light will not clear the invisible understanding; nor will
corporal food feed the soul. Blessed are they, says our Savior, who thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, Mat. 5. 6. not they that
thirst after riches, or honor, or pleasure; for instead of being satisfied,
they thirst more. Yea these Mammonists are so infinite in desiring, that could
such a one swallow the whole earth that swallows all, and will swallow him ere
long, it might choke him, but not satisfy him, as abundance of examples that I
could give you, sufficiently prove: namely Alexander, and Crassus, and
Licinius, and Marcus Crassus, and Ahab, and Haman, etc. But,

CHAP. VIII.
THirdly, to this is added as a further judgment, that as the more he has the
more he coveteth, so the nearer he is to his journeys end, the more provision
he makes for it. Other vices are weakened with age and continuance, only
covetousness (and that odious sin of drunkenness) grows stronger. As the
covetous wretch increases in years, so he increases in covetousness. What
Pline writes of the Crocodile, is fitly appliable to the miserly muckworm:
other creatures grow up to their height, and then decay and dye, only the
Crocodile grows to her last day. The aged worldling, though he have one foot in
the grave, yet his appetite to, and persute of gain, are but new born. Yea,
though he has outlived all the teeth in his gums, the hairs of his head, the
sight of his eyes, the taste of his palate; have he never so much, yet he has
not enough, and therefore would live to get more, and covets, as if he had a
thousand generations to provide for. He so lives, as if he were never to dye;
and so dies, as if he were never to live again. He fears all things, like a
mortal man, says Seneca, but he desires all things, as if he were immortal.
Had it not been for sin, death had never entered into the world: and were it
not for death, sin (especially the Misers. sin) would never go out of the
world. Lust is commonly the disease of youth, ambition of middle age,
covetousness of old age: And Plautus makes it a wonder to see an old man
beneficent. But what says By as, covetousness in old men is most monstrous:
for what can be more foolish and ridiculous, then to provide more money and
victuals for our journey, when we are almost at our journyes end?

Wherefore remember thou, O old man, yea O remember! that your Spring is past,
your Summer over-past, and you are arrived at the fall of the leaf; yea winter
colors have already stained your head with gray and hoary hairs. Remember
also, that if God in justice did not leave you, and the Prince of darkness did
not blind you, and your own heart did not grossly deceive you; you could not
possible be so senceless as you are in these three last mentioned miseries.

Thus three of the covetous man's woes are past, but behold more are coming; for
God inflicts more plagues upon him, then ever he did upon Pharaoh. I Will
acquaint you only with seven more.

CHAP. IX.
FOurthly, his thoughts are so taken up with what he wants (or rather desires,
for he wants nothing but wit, and a good heart) that he not once minds or
cares for what he has, as you may see in Abab, 1Kings 21. 4. and Haman, Hester
5. 13. and Micha, Judges 18. 24.

What the covetons man has, he sees not; his eyes are so taken up with what he
wants; yea the very desire of what he cannot get torments him, and it is an
heartbreaking to him, not to add every day somewhat to his estate: besides,
not to improve it so many hundreds every year, will disparage his wisdom more
to the world, then any thing else he can do, as I have heard such an one
allege, when I have told him my thoughts, about perplexing himself.

But see the difference between him, and one that has either wit or grace:
whose manner it is, even in case of the greatest losses, to look both to what
he has lost, and to what he has left; and instead of repining, to be thankful
that he has lost no more, having so much left that he might have been deprived
of. But sottish sensualists have a duller feeling of many good turns, then of
one ill: they have not so sensible a feeling of their whole bodies health, as
they have of their fingers aching; nor are they so thankful for twenty years
jollity, as displeased for one days misery. Whereas an humble and good man,
will see matter of thankfulness there, where the proud and ungrateful find
matter of murmuring. And so much of the fourth particular, only let me add as
a sure rule, He that in prosperity is unthankful, will in adversity be
unfaithful.

CHAP. X.
Fifthly, the Devil, by Gods just permission, prevails by his temptations, to
make them think that the forbidden fruit is the sweetest of all fruits, as he
did our first parents. Nor will any other content him; each thing pleases him
better that is not his own. And as Publius observes, other men's goods are far
more esteemed by him.

Plines Woolf is a true emblem of this avaritious beast: whose nature it is
when he is eating his prey, though never so hungry, if he sees another beast
feeding, to forsake that which he is about, to take the prey from the other.
Ahab was such a Wolf, who could not content himself with his own, though he
enjoyed a whole kingdom, but he must wrest Naboths inheritance from him. The
commandment is express, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall
not covet thy neighbors wife, servant, Ox, Ass, nor any thing that is thy
neighbors, Exodus 20. 17. and all that fear God observe it; but nothing more
cross to the grain of a wicked man's heart, to whom stolen waters are most sweet,
and hid bread the most pleasant, Prove. 9. 17. For one so insatiably covets
after another man's estate or office, that he is never the better for his own
Another so loves his neighbors wife, that he even loathes and contemnes his own.
Thy neighbors wife to thee, to him thines fairest, says the Poet. Hence has
that cursed speech issued from one too great to name, That he could love his
wife above any other, if she were not his wife, a word sufficient to rot out
the tongue that spoke it.

Solomon was a wise man, and had tried all things. Oh that men would be so wise
as to take his counsel, and enjoy their own with joy and gladness of heart;
drink waters out of their own Cistern, and rejoice with the wife of their
youth, so as her breasts may satisfy them at all times, and they be ravished
always with her love, rather then deprive themselves of that happiness, by
inbracing the bosom of a stranger, and coveting that which is another, Prove.
5. 15. to 21. Oh that thou would be convinced, that thy present condition
what ever it is, is the best for thee, had thou but the wit to see it; and
that only good use gives praise to earthly possessions: that there are no
riches comparable to content (for this is the gift of God) then surely thou will not much remember the days of thy life, because God answers the joy of
thine heart, Eceles. 5. 17, 18, 19.

But no matter, they love misery (lose the comfort of their own breast, and all
outward blessings, together with the tuition of God) and they shall have it;
for he that makes his fire with hay, has much smoke, and but a little heat,
which leads me to the sixth particular.

CHAP. XI.
SIxthly, another sore judgment which God inflicts upon the merciless
mnckworm, for his monstrous unthankfulness, is, he injoyes not a merry day, no
not a pleasant hour in seven years, ye if you observe it, he resembles
Agelaustus, Grandfather to Crassus, who never laughed in all his life, save
once when he saw a mare eating of thistles: or rather Anaxagorus Clazoenius,
who was never seen to laugh or smile from the day of his birth. Joys never so
much as look in at the door of his heart; worldly delights to him, are but like
delicate meats to him that has lost his taste.

But O the cares, fears, anxieties, sighs, sorrows, suspicions, sad thoughts,
restless desires, the horrors, troubles, tortures, torments, vexations,
distractions, griefs, girdes, gripes, grudgings, repinings, doubts, dolors,
desperation, that are the ordinary companions of the covetous. How is he
hurried with desires to get, distracted with getting, vexed for what he cannot
get, tortured for what he loses, or another gains, troubled with fear of
losing what he has already gained? yea his labor to gather riches is restless,
his care to keep them boundless, his sorrow if he chance to lose them endless,
and his fear lest he should hereafter lack cureless.

Of all plagues sent into Egypt, that of the Flies was one of the most
troublesome, for they never suffered men to rest, for the more they were beaten
off, the more they came upon them: so of all miseries and vexations that God
lays upon worldlings; this is not the least, to be continually vexed and
tormented with cares, which they neither can (nor indeed would) beat off by any
means they are able to devise; for they rush in upon them in the morning so
soon as they awake, accompany them in the day, forsake them not at night, they
follow them to bed, and will not suffer them to sleep: their thoughts will not
permit them to sleep, nor their sleep permit them to rest. They afflict them in
their dreams, as giving them no quiet either by day, or night, as God
threatens to wicked men by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 6. I could give you a
large bill of particulars; but fear of cloying is always at hand to curb me:
wherefore take these few for a taste. Want does not break so many sleeps for
provision the next day, as abundance does for increase. His nights are as
troublesome and unquiet as his days; and his days as the days of Babylons
downfall. Never is more watchfulness, then where is most purpose of wickedness:
see Micha 2. 1. Luke 16. 8. Psalm. 36. 4. Eccles. 5. 12. It Was Chilons sentence,
Misery and Usury go commonly together.

If his plot be crossed, and his hand cannot act that wickedness by day, which
his head has devised by night, he is taken with a fit of of melancholy, sick
of the sullens, as was Ahab. He thinks it a death, that he cannot be suffered
to dye; it is a hell to him, that the gates of hell are shut against him.

Having engrossed a commodity, if he cannot have his expected price for it, or
prevail not in his suit, or cannot recover what he expected, or if any one
breaks in his debt, or if he hear of a Tax, or some unavoidable payment, and
an hundred the like, every of them adds to the care and grief of his heart,
which was ready to burst with care and grief before; for he had rather be
damned, then damnified; and in case he cannot have his will of another, he will
be revenged of himself, like Nanplius King of Euboea, who when he could not
revenge his sons death upon Ulysses, cast himself into the Sea. Yea in case he
sustain any great loss, he is ready to make himself away: as Menippus of
Phenicia did, who having lost his goods, strangled himself. Or like Dinarcus
Phidon, who at a certain loss, cut his own throat, to save the charge of a
cord. At least he feels more sorrow in losing his money, then ever he found
pleasure in getting it: nor will any condition content him; for the lightness
of his purse, gives him an heavy heart, which yet filled, does fill him with
more care. His medicin is his malady. These rich men, are no less troubled with
that they possess (lest they should lose it) then poor men are for that they
want. In the day time, he dares not go abroad for fear of robbing; nor stay at
home for fear of killing. His thoughts are so troubled with fear of thieves,
that he cannot, that he dares not sleep: yea he fears a thief worse then the
devil, therefore will he be beholding to the devil for a spell to save him from
the thief; which once obtained, a little Opium may rock his cares asleep, and
help him to a golden dream; for all his mind and heart is to get money; if
waking, he talks of nothing but earth, if sleeping, he dreams of it. Lastly, as
if all his delight were to vex himself, he pines himself away with distrustful
fear of want, and projecting how he shall live hereafter, and when he is old:
resembling Ventidius the Poet, who would not be persuaded but he should dye a
beggar. And Apicius the Roman, who when he cast up his accounts, and found but
an hundred thousand crowns left, murdered himself for fear he should be
famished to death.

CHAP. XII.
SEventhly, To the former miseries which a cruel Miser is justly plagued
withal, this may be added; the dolefulness of his conscience; for the sin of
oppression lies upon the soul as heavy as lead; yea as the shadow does ever
follow the body, so fear and desperation in all places, and at all times, do
wait upon an evil conscience. Sin arms a man against himself, and our peace
ever ends with our innocence. A Pithagorean bought a pair of shoos upon trust,
the Shoemaker dies, he is glad, thinks them gained, but a while after his
conscience twitches him, and becomes a continual chider; he hereupon repairs to
the house of the dead, casts in his money with these words, There take thy due,
thou live to me, though dead to all beside. Micha stole from his mother
eleven hundred shekels of silver, but his complaining conscience made him to
accuse himself and restore it again, Judge. 17. Il gotten goods lie upon the
conscience, as raw meat upon a sick stomach, which will never let a man be
well, or at ease, until he has cast it up again by restitution.

Means ill gotten, is to the getter, as the Angels book was to Saint John, When
he eat it, it was in his mouth as sweet as honey, but when he had eaten it, it
became in his stomach as bitter as gall, Rev. 10. 10. The which is notably
illustrated Job 20. 12. to 20. which together with the whole Chapter, is
mavelous good for cruel and unmerciful men to read; for I may not stand here
to repeat it. Sweetness is promised in the bread of deceit, but men find it as
gravel, crashing between their teeth.

Nor will his troubled conscience suffer him to steal a sound sleep: yea he
sleeps as unquietly, as if his pillow were stuffed with Lawyers per-knives.

I may give ye a hint of these things from the word, but only God and he can
tell, how the remembrance of his forepast cozenages and oppression, occasions
his guilty conscience many secret wrings and pinches, and gives his heart many
a sore lash, to increase the fear and horror of his soul every time he calls
the same to remembrance, which is not seldom: As, O poor wretches! what do they
endure? how are they immerged in the horrors of a vulned conscience? there is
more ease in a nest of Hornets, then under the sting of such a tormenting
conscience. He that has this plague, is like a man in debt, who suspecteth
that every bush he sees, is a Sergant to arest and carry him away to prison. It
was Gods curse upon Cain, when he had slain his brother Abel, to suspect and
fear, that every one he met would kill him: yea it makes him so afraid of every
thing, that a very Maulking frights him, and it is much, that he dares trust
his Barber to shave him. Dionysius was so troubled with fear and horror of
conscience, that not daring to trust his best friends with a razor, he used to
findge his beard with burning coals, as Cicero records. He is much like a
Malefactor in prison, who though he fare well, yet is tormented with the
thought of ensuing judgment. It is the handwriting on the wall, that prints
bloody characters in Belshazzars heart.

So that if any should deem a man the better, or happier, for being the richer,
he is very shallow; as many looking on the outer face of things, or see but the
one side (as they used to paint Antigonus, that they might conceal his
deformity on the other side) see not how they smart in secret, how their
consciences gripe them. Nor does any one know, how the shoo wrings the foot,
but he that wears the same.

Or admit the best that can come, as suppose they can stop consciences mouth
for a time, or with the music of their money play it asleep for the present;
yet when they lie upon their deathbeds, it will sting them to the quick. For
when death hesiegeth the body, Satan will not fail to beleagure the soul; yea
then he will be sure to lay on load; for as all corrupt humors, run to the
diseased and bruised part of the body; so when conscience is once awakened, all
former sins, and present crosses join together to make the bruise or sore more
painful. As every Creditor falls upon the poor man, when he is once arested. Or
let it be granted that his con^cience never troubles him on his sick bed, and
that he have no bonds in his death, as the Psalmist speaks Psalm. 73. -- but
departs like a Lamb, which is not only possible but probable; for more by many
thousands go to hell like Naball, then like Judas; more dye like sots in
security, then in despair of conscience: yet all this is nothing, for the sting
of conscience here, though it be intolerable, is but a flea-biting to that he
shall endure hereafter, where the worm of conscience dies not, and where the
fire never goes out.

This is part of sins wages, and Satan's reward: We have sinned, therefore our
hearts are heavy, Isa. 59. 11, 12. The sorrows of them that offer to another
God (as do the covetous) shall be multiplied, says holy David, Psalm. 16. 4. Yea
Seneca an heathen could say, that an evil life causes an unquiet mind; so
that Satan's government, is rather a bondage then a government, unto which
Christ gives up those that shake off his own.

What his government is, you may partly guess at by the servile slaveries he
puts his subjects upon. As O the many hard services which Satan puts his
servants upon, and what a bad Master is he: when we read that Origin at his
only appointment, made himself an Eunuch. Democritus put out his own eyes,
Crates cast his money into the Sea, Thracius cut down all the Vines, whereas
David did none of these; Ahaz made his son to pass through the fire, Jephta
sacrificed his only daughter, as the text seems to import. Wicked men think
they do God good service in putting his children to death: but where do we
find any Religious Israelite, or servant of God, at such cost? or when did God
require this of his servants? The Prophets and Apostles never whipped nor lanced
themselves, but Baals Priests did this and more. And so of the Papists, those
hypocrites of late years, and the Pharisees of old. How many sleepless nights,
and restless days, and wretched shifts, treacherous and bloody plots and
practices, does covetousness and ambition cost men? which the humble and
contented Christian is unacquainted with. How does the covetous man's heart
droop wish his Mammon? How does he turmoile and vex his spirit, torment his
conscience, and make himself a very map of misery, and a sink of calamity? it
is nothing so with Christ's servants.

CHAP. XIII.
I Have much more to enlarge of the miseries of unmerciful and ingrate full
Misers, but before I speak of them, I will give you the reasons and uses of
these already dispatched, wherein I will be as brief as may be.

You see that God may give men riches in wrath; and so as they shall be never
the better for them, but the worse. Now that you may not think it any strange
thing, observe the reasons why, and how justly they are so served.

The first Reason is, the unmerciful Misers monstrous unthankfulness, for those
millions of mercies he has received from God (of which I shall give you an
account in the second part) this causes God either not at all to give him, or
in giving him riches, to add this you have heard as a curse withal. He is
unthankful for what he has, therefore have he never so much, it shall not be
worth thanks. He is cruel to the poor, therefore he shall be as cruel to
himself. The poor shall have no comfort of what he has, therefore himself
shall have as little.

The covetous are cozen Germans to the nine leapers, thankless persons. They
are so much for receiving, that they never mind what they have received. He
deals with God, as a dog does with his master, who as Austine observes,
devoureth by and by whatever he can catch, and gapeth continually for more. Nor
has covetousness any thing so proper to it, as to be ungrateful. A greedy man
is never but shamefully unthankful; for unless he have all, he has nothing. He
must have his will, or God shall not have a good look from him; yea, as the
Mill, if it go empty, makes an unpleasant and odious noise, so the covetous
man, if the Lord does not satisfy his desires in every thing, he will most
wickedly murmur and blaspheme his providence; and if ever he sustaines loss,
he will never forget it. He writes benefits received in water, but what he
accounts injuries in marble. And for this his great ingratitude, God gives him
riches, but withdraws his blessing. For as Jacob gave Ruben a blessing, but
added, thou shall not be excellent, Genesis 49. 4. so God gives the worldling
riches, but says, thou shall not be satisfied. He that loves silver, shall
not be satisfied with silver, Eccl. 5. 10. Yea no man more unsatisfied; for let
him have what his heart can wish, he is not yet pleased, like the Israelites,
who murmured as much when they had Mannah, as when they had none.

Secondly, the merciless Miser, never sued or sought to God for his riches;
neither does he acknowledge them as sent of God, but ascribes the increase of
his means to his wit and industry. Nay he dares not pray the Lords prayer,
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, left he call for a curse upon
himself. Nay if he be (as probably he is) an Usuerer, then in respect of other
men, he has no need to pray at all, for as one observes, Each man to heaven
his hands for blessing reares;
Only the Us'rer needs not say his prayers.
Blow the wind East or West, plenty or dearth,
Sickness or health, sit on the face of earth,
He cares not, time will bring his money in,
Each day augments his treasure, and his sin.


Or admit he ever calls upon God, his prayer is that some one may dye, that he
may have his office, or break his day, that the beloved forfeiture may be
obtained. His morning exercise being only to peruse his bonds, look over his
baggs, and to worship them, as Marcus Cato worshipped his grounds, desiring
them to bring forth in abundance, and to keep his Cattle safe.

And as touching hereafter, if he shall find in his heart to pray, God will
not hear him, Prove. 1. The sacrifice of the wicked, is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 21. 27. What hope has the hypocrite says Job, when he has heaped
up riches; will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Job 27. 8, 9.
When you shall stretch out your hands, says God to such, I will hide mine eyes
from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear, Isa. 1. 15. God
will turn him off to his gold and silver for help, as he did Jehoram to the
Prophets of his Father, and the Prophets of his Mother, 2 Kings 3. 13. And it
is but just and equal, that those which we have made the comfort and stay of
our peace, should be the relief and comfort of our extremity. If our prosperity
has made the world our God: how worthily shall our deathbed be choked with
such an exprobration?

If God do answer such an ones prayers, it is as Archelaus answered the request
of a covetous Courtier, who being importuned by him for a cup of gold, wherein
he drank; gave it unto Euripides that stood by, saying, Thou art worthy to ask
and be denied, but Euripides is worthy of gifts, although he ask not. And
indeed good men many times receive gifts from God, that they never dreamt of,
nor durst presume to beg, which others extremely strive after and go without.
As it is feigned of Pan, that it was his good hap to find out Ceres, as he was
hunting, little thinking of it, which none of the other gods could do, though
they did nothing else but seek her, and that most industriously.

Now, if he neither prays to God for what he would have, nor gives him thanks
for what he gives, nor desires a blessing upon what he receives, viz. that he
may be content, and satisfied therewith, How should God bestow this great
blessing of contentation upon him, and a true use of his riches?

Thirdly, he cares not for grace but for gold, therefore God gives him gold
without grace. He longs not after righteousness, but riches, therefore he shall
neither be satisfied nor blessed; whereas both are their portion that thirst
after the former, Mat. 5. 6. He desires riches without Gods blessing, he shall
have it with a curse; he loves gold more then God, and desires it rather then
his blessing upon it or grace, therefore he shall have it and want the other.
Whereas if he did first seek the kingdom of heaven, all things else should be
added thereunto, Mat. 6. 33. But this worldlings appetite stands not toward
the things of a better life; he finds no taste in heavens treasure; let him but
glut himself on the filthy garbage of ill-gotten goods, he cares not for Manna.
He sings the song of Curio, vincat utilitas, let gain prevail, he had rather be
a sinner then a beggar. The Apostle Saint Peter said, silver and gold have I
none, Act. 3. 6. The devil says, all these are mine, Luke 4. 6. The Rich man, I
have much goods laid up for many years, Luke 12. 19. Now ask the covetous
muckworm, whether had you rather lack with those Saints, or abound with the
devil and the rich man? his heart will answer, give me money, which will do any
thing, all things, Eccles. 10. 19.

Now if he prefers gold, before either God, grace, or glory, no marvail if God
grant him his desires to his hurt, as he did a King and Quails to the
Israelites.

CHAP. XIIII.
FOurthly, he puts his trust in his riches, and not in God, loves and serves
Satan more then God; therefore he shall have his comfort, and reward from them
and not from God. Yea Satan shall have more service of him for an ounce of
gold, then God shall have for the Kingdom of heaven, because he prefers a
little base pelf before God and his own salvation. He loves God well, but his
money better, for that is his summum bonum: yea he thinks him a fool that does
otherwise. What part with a certainty for an uncertainty? if he can keep both,
well and good, if not, what ever betides he will keep his Mammon, his money,
though he lose himself, his soul. And yet the Lord gives far better things for
nothing, then Satan will sell us for our souls; had we the wit to consider it,
as we may see, Isa. 55. 1, 2.

Again he loves his children better then the Lord, oppressing Gods children to
enrich his own, for so his young ones be warm in their nest, let Christ's
members shake with cold, he cares not. He loves the Lord, as Laban loved Jacob,
only to get riches by him, or as Saul loved Samuel, to get honor by him. He
will walk with God, so long as plenty, or the like does walk with him, but no
longer; he will leave Gods service rather then lose by it.

That the Mammonist loves not God, is evident; for if any man love the world,
the love of God is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. yea the two poles shall sooner
meet, then the love of God and the love of money.

Nor is this all, for he not only loves Mammon more then God, but he makes it
his god, shrines it in his coffer, yea in his breast, and sacrifices his heart
to it; he puts his trust, and places his confidence in his riches, makes it
his hope, attributing and ascribing all his successes thereunto, which is to
deny God that is above, as we may plainly see Job 31. 24, 28. Nor ought
covetous men to be admitted into Christian society. We have a great charge to
separate from the covetous, Eat not with him, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
and also wise Solomon, Prove. 23. 7.

Covetousness is flat idolatry, which makes it out of measure sinful, and more
hanious then any other sin, as appears, Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5. 5. Job 31. 24, 28.
Jer. 17. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. Fornication is a foul sin; but nothing to this,
that pollutes the body, but covetousness defiles the soul; and the like of
other sins. Yea, it is such a sordid and damnable sin, that it ought not once
to be named among Christians, but with detestation, Ephesians. 5. 3.

It is a sound Conclusion in Divinity, That is our God, which we love best and
esteem most; as gold is the covetous man's god, and bellychear, the voluptuous
man's god, and honor the ambitious man's god: and for these they will do more,
then they will for God. Yea all wicked men make the devil their god; for why
does Saint Paul call the devil the god of this world? but because wordly men do
believe him, trust him, and obey him above God, and against God; and do love
his ways and commandments better then the ways and laws of God.

We all say, that we serve the Lord, but as the Psalmist speaks, other Lords
rule us, and not the Lord of heaven and earth. The covetous Mammonist does
insatiably thirst after riches, placing all his joys, hopes, and delights
thereon; does he not then make them his God? yea God says, lend, clothe, feed,
harbor; The devil and Mammon, say, take, gather, extort, oppress, spoil;
whether of these are our gods? but they that are most obeyed? Know ye not,
says, Saint Paul, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey,
his servants ye are to whom ye obey, Romans 6. 16. the case is plain enough, that
every wilful sinner makes the devil his god; he cannot deny it. I wish men
would well weigh it. The goods of a worldling are his gods, Ye have taken away
my gods, says Micha, and what have I more to lose, Jud. 18. 24. He makes Idols
of his coin, as the Egyptians did of their treasure: They have turned the truth
of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature, forsaking the
Creator, which is blessed for ever, Amen, Romans 1. 25.

The greedy Wolf, Mole, or Muckworm, who had rather be damned then damnified,
has his Mammon in the place of God, loving it with all his heart, with all his
soul, with all his mind, making gold his hope, and saying to the wedge of
gold, Thou art my confidence; and yet of all men alive, he is least contented
when he has his hearts desire, yea more then he knows what to do withal; the
issue of a secret curse. For in outward appearance they are as happy as the
world can make them, they have large possessions, goodly houses, beautiful
spouses, hopeful children, full purses; yet their life is never the sweeter,
nor their hearts ever the lighter, nor their meals the heartier, nor their
nights the quieter, nor their cares the fewer; yea none more full of complaints
among men. Oh cursed Ciatifs, how does the devil bewitch them! Generally, the
poorer the merryer, because having food and raiment, they are therewith
content, 1 Timothy 6. 8. They obey the rule, Heb. 13, 5. and God gives his
blessing. But for those that make gold their god, how should not God either
deny them riches, or deny his blessing upon them; and instead thereof, blast
his blessings with a curse, and give them their riches in wrath, so that they
had better be without them.

If we put our trust and confidence in God, he has promised not to fail nor
forsake us, Heb. 13, 5. But this is the man that took not God for his strength;
but trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his
malice, Psalm. 52. 7. Yea he says in his heart, God has forgotten; he hides
away his face and will never see, Psalm. 10. 11. He puts his certain trust in
uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. And not for want of ignorance, for to trust to
God, and not to any creature or carnal policy is the greatest safty. A lesson
yet to be learned of many, that do in a good measure trust in God (which this
muckworme not so much as minds) But shall we trust God with our jewels, our
souls, and not with the box, Mat. 6. 30? Take we heed, lest whiles he does
grant us that wherein we do not trust him (worldly riches) he take away that
wherein we do trust him (everlasting joy and happiness.)

Fifthly and lastly, let a graceless and ungrateful cormorant, an unmerciful
miser have never so much. he neither intends to glorify God, nor do good to
others with his riches: he will not change a piece without profit, scarce let
another light a torch at his candle. He will not lose a groat to gain a man's
life, nor speak a syllable for God were it to save a soul. And God cares for
none, that care for none but themselves, making themselves the center of all
their actions and aims. Whereas he is abundantly bountiful to public spirits,
that aim at his glory, and others good. And so ye have the Reasons, the Uses
for the present, and in this place, shall be only

CHAP. XV.
Three 1. Of Information, 2. Of Exhortation. 3. Of Consolation.

ANd of these but a word. First for Information; let the premises teach us
this lesson, That whatsoever is given to any one, if Christ and a sanctified
use thereof be not given withal, it can be no good thing to him. Did the
stalled Ox know that his Master fatted him for the slaughter, he would not
think his great plenty an argument of his masters greater love to him. The
Physician sets that sick person have what he will, of whose recovery he
despaireth; but he restrains him of many things, of whom he has hope. We use
to clip, and cut shorter the feathers of Birds or other foul, when they begin
to fly too high, or too far: So does God diminish the riches and honors of his
children, and makes our condition so various, that we may not pass our bounds,
or glory too much in these transitory things. As if we well observe it.

First, some have the world and not God, as Nabal, who possessed a world of
wealth, not a dram of grace or comfort.

Secondly, some have God and not the world, as Lazarus: his heart was full of
grace, and divine comfort, whiles his body lacked crumbes.

Thirdly, some have neither God nor the world, nothing but misery here, nothing
but torment her easter; for the poorest are not seldom the wickedest.

Fourthly, some have both God and the world, as Abraham, who was rich while he
lived on earth, and dying was glorious in Heaven. Yea oftentimes they that are
dearest to God, do with great difficulty work out those blessings, which even
fall into the mouths of the careless.

That wise disposer of all things, knows it fit many times, to hold us short of
those favors which we sue for, and would not benefit, but hurt us. Unlovely
features, have more libertty to be good, because freer from Solicitors; and
though it be not a curse, yet it is many times an unhappiness to be fair (as well
as to be strong and witty) Helena, daughter to Jupiter and Leda, for her
excellent beauty, was ravished at the age of nine years, by Theseus; and once
again by Paris, which caused the wars, and utter ruin of Troy.

Plutarch observes, that Lisander did more hurt the Lacedaemonians, in sending
them store of riches and precious movables, then Sylla did the Romans in
consuming the reveneues of their treasure. And as Sylvius relates, the
liberallity of Princes, and especially of Metilda a Duchess of Italy, who at
her death made the Pope her heir, begat ambition in the Bishops of Rome, and
ambition destroyed Religion. These things are such as the possessors mind,
Good if well used, if ill, them ill we find.


For even evil things work together for the good of the good; and even good
things work together to the evil of the evil.

Lucian feigneth, that riches being sent by Jupiter from heaven, come softly
and slowly, but from the infernal god comes flying apace. And the other Poets
feign Pluto to be the god of riches and of hell, as if hell and riches had both
one master. And indeed he that resolves to be evil, making no conscience how he
comes by it, may soon be rich, but the blessings of God in our ill getting, or
unworthy carriage in their use, prove but the aggravations of sin, and
additions to judgment. And let this serve for the first use.

Secondly, Let what has been delivered touching the miseries of an unmerciful,
miserly, muckworme, serve to make us take heed and beware of all sin, but
especially of the sin of covetousness; yea let us look to it, lest while we
hunt after the worlds venison with Esau; we lose our Fathers blessing. Can we
not warm us at the Sun, but we must make an Idol of it to worship? must we
needs either hide our faces, or bow our knees; either renounce all profits and
pleasures, or be their slaves. This is a second use.

Thirdly, this, if we seriously consider it, may serve for a use of great
comfort to the godly and conscientious: For if worldlings are so many ways
perplexed and distracted with cares and fears, about getting, and keeping, and
losing their riches and great estates: how happy are the servants of God, that
are not acquainted with any of them? No man, says the Apostle, that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, because he would please him
that has chosen him to be a soldier, 2 Timothy 2. 4. They cast their care upon
God, and he cares for them, who will see that they shall never want what is
good and fit for them, Mat. 6. 25, 30. But in the transgression of an evil man
is his snare, says wise Solomon, Prove. 29 6.

But of this by the way only, for there are other plagues yet behind, which
God usually inflicts upon the merciless miser: nor would one of them be left
unconsidered.

CHAP. XVI.
THe eighth is the loss of his credit and good name, which he seldom or never
scapes, which is not a light punishment, however he esteems it. The memorial of
the just shall be blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot, says Solomon,
Prove. 10. 7. Yea the cruel, and unmerciful man's name stinks worse then a new
opened grave, His evil actions have been so many and notorious, that (like
Vitellius) as he waxes daily more mighty, so he grows daily more odious, so
that in a few years, his credit proves a banckrupt with all men; for as the
Eagle by losing a feather at every flight, has never an one left by that she
is old; so it fares with him touching his credit; When he dies, he always goes
away in a stink, as is usually reported of the devil.

Nor will this his infamy dye with him, for says the Lord by his Prophet to
such, I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame that
shall never be forgotten, Jer 23. 40. It has been proverbially spoken of him
that would suddenly be rich, he must have much greedins, much diligence, little
credit, and less conscience, blame enough he cannot miss of. For as shame is
the fruit of sin, Romans 6. 21. and distrust the just gain of unfaithfulness; so
it is the just judgment of God, that this cruel and hardhearted wretch should
be marked as it were with the letter law, or Cains mark, to make him hateful.
That as the fig tree, because it had no fruit, was spoiled of his leaves: so
thev who have made shipwreck of honesty, shall make shipwreck of credit too:
that that which he seems to have, should be taken from him. His name shall go
with a brand upon it, like Cain the murderer, Simon the sorcerer, Judas the
traitor. Thus Demas had for his title, Demas that embraced this present world.
Thus Esau was called Edom, which signifies red, to keep his wickedness in
remembrance, because he had sold his birth right for a mess of red pottage. And
thus an extortioner shall not only be dishonest and hardhearted, but known to
be so: like a rogue that is burned in the hand, or has lost his ears; and he
shall not be able to disguise himself so with the soberness of his countenance
and smooth tongue, but as though his life were writ in his forehead, whereas he
scarce thought he had been known to God, every one shall point at him as he
goes in the street.

And not seldom, does some of his infamous actions stand upon reeord to
posterity: for as Christ promised that Mary's good work, should be spoken of to
the worlds end; so he has caused Judasses evil work, and Achans evil work, and
Absaloms evil work, and Jeroboams evil work, to be spoken of to the worlds end
too.

Yea sin and shame is so inseparable; and God is so severe in this case, that
though a man has repented him of the sin, yet some blemish sticks to his name,
even as a scar still remains after the wound is healed. Matthew will ever be
called, Matthew the publican, and Rahab, Rahab the harlot; Mary Magdalen will
not longer be mentioned, then the devils which were cast out of her will be
mentioned with her; and the like of others. How carefully then should we avoid
those actions which may ever stain us?

But all this he values not, for like that wretched worldling in Horace, he
cares not what the people say, so his baggs be full. He drowns the noise of the
peoples curses, with the music of his money; as the Italians in a great
thunder, ringe their bells, and shoot off their Canons. Nor has pride so great
power over him as covetousness: He is not like Simon in Lucian, who having got
a little wealth changed his name from Simon to Simonides, for that there were
so many beggars of his kin, and set the house on fire wherein he was born,
because no body should point at it.

Nevertheless, though he prefers gain before an honest reputation; yet the
word of God informs us, that gain got with an ill name is great loss; and
certainly that man cannot be sparing in any thing that is commendable, who is
prodigal of his reputation. But herein lies the difference, gracious and tender
hearts are galled with that, which the carnally-minded slight, and make nothing
of.

Secondly, they are not wise enough to know what a singular blessing it is to
have a name spotless, a report unreprovable, and a fame for honesty and
goodness, as it fared with Joseph, and Ruth, and David, and Samuel, and Ester,
and Solomon, and our Savior, and Cornelius, and those wortbies mentioned in
the eleventh to the Hebrews, who all obtained a good report, which proceeds of
the Lord, and is bestowed as a great blessing upon such as he will honor, Genesis
39. 21. Zeph. 3. 19, 20. Act. 10. 22. Romans 16. 19. Ruth 2. and 3. Chapters;
which makes wise Solomon say, that a good name is better then a good ointment;
and to be chosen above great riches, Prove. 22. 1.

I know well, that this miserly muckworm (this sor did pinchgut, the very
basest of creatures that look upwards) does keep up his credit with some base
and ignoble persons, some blind Moales like himself, as being able to discern
nothing but the bark or dregs of things. For they account of men, as we do of
baggs of money, prize them best, that weigh heaviest; and measure out their
love and respect by the Subsidy Book, for only by their wealth they value
themselves, and only by their wealth (as Camels by their burdens) be they
valued. If he have goods enough, he both thinks himself, and others think him
good enough; they think he is best that has most, and repute him most worthy
that is most wealthy, and naught is he be needy; accounting poverty the
greatest dishonesty. Yea as if credit and reputation were only intailed on the
rich, credit grows just as fast as wealth here in the City, and in the country,
reputation is measured by the Aker; and the words weigh according to the purse.

But others that are able to distinguish between good and evil, know, that
either these are fools, or Solomon was not wise. Nor does he think himself more
honorable, then wise and good men think him base. And certainly, if such
muckworms were as odious to the rest as they are to me, they would appear in
the street like Owls in the day time, with whom no honest man would converse.
And why should I prefer him before a piece of copper, that prefers a piece of
gold before his Maker?

God commanded in the old Law, that whatsoever did go with his breast upon the
ground, should be abomination to us: how much more should we abominate the man
who is endued with reason and a soul, that has glued his heart and soul unto a
piece of earth? But of this enough.

CHAP. XVII:
NInthly, the next is, That as the unmerciful Miser is all for sparing, so his
heir shall be all for wasting. He lives poorly and penuriously all his life,
that he may dye rich. He walks in a shadow (says the Psalmist) and
disquieteth himself in vain, heaping up riches, not knowing who shall gather
them, Psalm. 39. 6. As he has reapt that which another sowed, so another shall
thrash that which he has reaped. He hordes up, not knowing who shall enjoy it;
and commonly they enjoy it who lay it out as fast. He takes only the bitter,
and leaves the sweet for others, perhaps those that wish him hanged, upon
condition they had his means the sooner.

Or possible it is he may have children; which if he have, he loves them so
much better then himself, that he will voluntarily be miserable here and
hereafter, that they may be happy. He is willing to go in a thredbare coat, to
starve his body, lose his credit, wound his conscience, torment his heart and
mind with fears and cares; yea he can find in his heart to damn his own soul
and go to hell, that he may raise his house, leave his heir a great estate, as
thinking his house and habitation shall continue for ever, even from generation
to generation and call their lands by his name, as the Psalmist shows, Psalm
49. 11. He is careful to provide his children portions, while he provides no
portion of comfort for his own welfare, either here or hereafter. He provides
for his childrens bodies, not for their souls, to show that he begat not their
souls but their bodies. He leaves a fair estate for the worser part, nothing
for the estate of the better part. He desires to leave his children great
rather then good, and is more ambitious to have his sons Lords on earth, then
Kings in heaven. But as he that provides not for their temporal estate, is
worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. So he that provides not for their eternal
estate, is little better then a devil, which yet is the case of nine parts of
the parents throughout the Land.

But observe how his children requite him again, and how God requites him in
his children; for commonly they are such, as never give him thanks, nor in the
least lament his loss; perhaps they mourn at his funeral, yet not for that he
is dead, but because he died no sooner. Nor is it any rare thing for men to
mourn for him dead, whom they would by no means have still to be alive. Yea for
the most part, it is but a fashionable sorrow, which the son makes show of at
his fathers death; as having many a day wished for that hour. A sorrow in show
only, like that of Jacobs sons when they had sold their brother Joseph, who
professed a great deal of grief for his loss, when inwardly they rejoiced. Have
ye not heard of a prodigal young heir? that encouraged his companions, with
come let us drink, revel, throw the house out at windows; the man in Scarlet
will pay for all; meaning his father who was a Judge, but he adjudged the
patrimony from him to one of his younger sons more obedient; And good reason he
had for it, for to give riches to the ryotous, is all one as to pour precious
liquor into a seeve, that will hold no liquid substance; which occasioned the
Rhodians, and Lydians, to enact several laws; that those sons which followed
not their fathers in their virtues, but lived viciously, should be
disinherited, and their lands given to the most virtuous of that race, not
admiting any impious heir whatsoever, to inherit, as Varro well notes. But it
is otherwise in this case, for (in regard of Gods curse upon this unmerciful
Muckworm) if he have more sons then one, the eldest proves a prodigal, and he
inherits.

Every man's own experience can tell him, that for the most part a scatterer
succeeds a gatherer; one that wastes virtues faster then riches, and riches
faster then any virtues can get them; one that is as excessive in spending, as
the other was in scraping; for as the father choseth to fill his chests, so the
son is given to satisfy his lusts. Nor could the one be more cunning at the
rake, then the other will be at the pitchfork. The moneys which were formerly
chested like caged birds, will wing it merrily when the young heir sets them
flying. And as Cicero speaks, he roituously spends that which the father had
wickedly gotten. The one would have all to keep, the other will keep nothing at
all; the former gets and spends not, the latter spends and gets not. Yea the
son being as greedy of expense, as the father was in scraping; he reddeth that
with a fork in one year, which was not gathered with a rake in twenty. Yea how
often is that spent upon one Christmas revelling by the son, which was forty
years a getting by the Father? Which Diogenes well considered, for whereas he
would ask of a frugal Citizen but a penny, of a Prodigal he would beg a talent,
and when the party asked him what he meant, to desire so much of him and so
little of others, his answer should be, Quoniam tu habes, illi habebunt;
because thou have, and they will have. I shall beg of thee but once, thy
estate will so soon vanish, of them often, yea give me now a talent, I may live
to give thee a groat. And at another time, hearing that the house of a certain
Prodigal was offered to sale, he said, I knew well that house was so accustomed
to surfeting, and drunkenness, that ere long it would spue out the master.

Nay in all likelihood he foresees it himself; and therefore as he makes short
work with his estate, so not long with his life, as knowing, that if he should
live long, he must be a beggar.

As seldom but he shortens his days some way; for he gives himself to all
manner of vice, gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, pride,
riot, contention, etc. He even banishes civility, and gives himself over to
sensuality; and such a life seldom lasts long.

They may rightly be called spend-alls, for they not only spend all they have,
but themselves also; instead of quenching their thirsts, they drown both their
bodies, souls and estates in drink. They will call drawer give us an Ocean, and
then leave their wits rather then the wine behind them. One cries to his
fellow do me reason; but the drink answers, I will leave thee no reason, no not
so much as a beast has; for these Nabals cannot abound, but they must be drunk
and surfeit They have not only cast off Religion that should make them good
men; but even reason that should make them men; And saving only on the Sea,
they live without all compass; as a ship on the water, so they on the land reel
too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, Psalm. 107. 27.

All their felicity is in a Tavern, or brothell house, where harlots and
sicophants rifle their estates, and then send them to rob, or teach them how
to cheat or borrow, which is all one, for to pay they never mean, and
prodigallity drives them to repair their too great lavishness in one thing, by
too great covetousness and injustice in another. The greatest mispenders for
the most part, are constrained to be as great misgetters, that they may feed
one vice with another.

Now as if they had been bred among Bears, they know no other dialect then
roaring, swearing and banning. It is the tongue or language of hell they speak;
as men learn before hand the language of that Country whether they mean to
travel.

By wine and surfetings they pour out their whole estates into their bellies.
The father went to the devil one way, and the son will follow him another; and
because he has chosen the smoother way, he makes the more have. The father
cannot find in his heart to put a good morsel into his belly, but lives on
roots, that his prodigal heir may feed on Phesants; he drinks water, that his
son may drink wine, and that to drunkenness. The one dares not eat an egg,
least he should lose a chicken, and goes to hell with whay and carrots, the
other follows after with Canary, Partridges, and Potatoes.

These are Epicures indeed, placing Paradise in their throats, and heaven in
their guts; their shrine is their Kitchen, their Priest is their Cook, their
Altar is their table, and their belly is their God. By wine and surfeiting,
they pour out their whole estates into their bellies; yet nevertheless complain
against nature for making their necks so short.

Aristippus gave to the value of sixteen shillings for a Patridge; his clownish
neighbor told him, he held it too dear at two pence. Why, quoth Aristippus, I
esteem less of a pound, then thou do of a penny: the same in effect says the
prodigal son, to his penurious father; for how else could he so soon bring a
noble to nine pence, an inheritance of a thousand pounds per annum, to an
annuity of five hundred shillings? besides, the one obtains a thousand pounds
with more ease, then the other did a thousand pence; and by how much the less
he esteems of money, by so much the more noble and better man he esteems
himself, and his father the more base; and hereupon he scorns any calling, and
must go apparelled like a Prince.

God has inacted it as a perpetual law, In the sweat of thy face (beit brow or
brain) shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the earth, Genesis 3. 19. And for
the best Gentleman to despise honest callings (mental or manual) is a pride
without wit or grace. Even gallant Absalom was a great sheepmaster: the bravery
and magnificence of a Courtier, must be built upon the ground of frugality.
Besides, exercise is not more wholesome for the body, then it is for the mind
and soul; but this vain glorious Coxcombe is all for sports and pleasure, and
seldom ceases hunting after sports (as Esau for venison) until he has lost
the blessing. But he should (O that he would) consider, that medicines are no
meat to live by.

Then for his pride in apparel, you may know that by this; he is like the
Cinnamon tree, whose bark is of more worth then his body; or like the Estridge
or Bird of Paradise, whose feathers are more worth then her flesh: Or some
Vermin, whose case is better then her carcass. And yet this swells him so, and
makes him look as big, as if the river of his blood could not be bancked within
his veins; and shift his attire he must, like the Islanders of Foolianna the
ficle; or that King of Mexico, who was wont to change his cloths four times a
day, and never wear them again, employing his leavings and cast suits, for his
continual liberalities and rewards, and who would also have neither pot nor
dish, nor any implement in his Citchen, or on his table, be brought twice
before him.

Indeed he cannot shift himself out of the Mercers books, until he has sold
the other Lordship; perhaps a dinner or supper at some Tavern, may cost him ten
pounds or more; for he must pay the whole reckoning, that he may be counted the
best man. Yea when the shot comes to be paid, for any man to draw in his
company, is a just quarrel; and use has made it unpleasant to him not to
spend, and yet a bare head in the streets, does him more good, then a meals
meat. He has the Wolf of vain glory, and that he feeds until himself
becomes the food. Nor can it be long first, for an excessive and successive
impairing, always imports a final dissolution. Nor has he ever the wit to
think upon sparing, till he comes to the bottom of the purse, resembling
Plautus that famous comical Poet, born in Umbria, who having spent all he had
on plaiers apparel, was forced for his living, to serve a Baker in turning a
handmill. Like an hourglass turned up, he never leaves running till all be
out; He never looks to the bottom of his patrimony, till it be quite
unravelled; and then (too late) complains that the stock of his wealth ran
coarse at the fag end.

His father had too good an opinion of the world, and he too much disdaines it:
only herein he speeds (as he thinks) a little the better, for that those who
barked at his father like curs, faune upon him, and lick his hand like
spaniels. He bestows upon his inferiors liberal gifts, thinking it good gain to
receive for it good words, and your Worship. Thus by the frequent use of
substracting pounds out of hundreds, shillings out of pounds, and pence out of
shillings, the end of his account proves all Cifers.

Ideness is the Coach, that brings, a man to Needam; prodigality the pasthorse.
His father was no man's friend but his own, and he (says the proverb) is no
man's foe else; be he never so old, he never attaines to the years of
discretion; And in case providence do not take him ward, his heirs shall never
be sought after. His Vessel has three leaks, a lascivoious eye, a gaming hand,
a deified belly, and to content these, he can neither rule his heart, his
tongue, nor his purse. He never proves his own man, till he has no other, and
then perhaps when want, or good counsel, or time has made him see as much as
his father did, at last he sues for a Room in an Almeshouse, that his father
built; else when he feels want (for till then he never sees it) he complains of
greatness for ingratitude; that he was not thought of when promotions were a
dealing. Yet seeing there is no remedy but patience, when his last Acre lies in
his purse, he projects strange things, and builds houses in the air, having
sold those on the ground.

Not that he is a man of parts, for he is only witty to wrong and undo
himself, Ease, says, Solomon, slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools
destroys them, Prove. 1. 32.

CHAP. XVIII.
MAny an one has his father unfeathered to warm him, but pride, drunkenness,
gamming, etc. plucks them away again so fast, that he soon becomes naked and
bare. He is like a barren plot of ground, for let him receive never so much
seed and manuring, Sun and showers, he remains ever dry and fruitless, and no
marvail, when not only his lewd and vicious courses bring Gods curse upon all
he has or takes in hand; but when he and what he has, is also cursed for his
fathers sake. For whereas the Holy Ghost says of the just man, His seed shall
be mighty upon earth, his generation shall be blessed, etc. Psalm. 112. 2. and
many the like, Psalm. 103. where God has promised to bless and reward the
children; yea, the childrens children for their fathers goodness, verse. 17.
Isa. 58, 10, 11. 12. Psalm. 37. 25, 26, and 112. 2. to 6. Of which I might give
you examples, not a few. The children of Noah were preserved from drowning for
their fathers sake, Gen 7. ^. Mephibosheth fares the better for his fathers
goodness, the Kenites for Jetbroes, 1 Samuel 15. 6. and that some hundreds of
years after, their Ancester was dead; Phineas his seed for his sake, Numb. 25.
11, 12, 13. Solomon for his father David's sake, 2 Samuel 1. 2. Ishmael for
Abraham's sake, Genesis ^7. 20. And all Israel fared the better for Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacobs sake, Deuteronomy. 4 37. 1 Kings 11. 12. The loving kindness of the Lord,
says the Psalmist, indureth for ever, and ever, upon them that fear him, and
his righteousness upon childrens children, Psalm. 103. 17. Exodus 20. 6.

And as God usually blesses, and rewards the children for their fathers
goodness, so on the contrary, Exodus 20 5. Eternal payments God uses to require
of the persons only, temporary oftentimes of succession; as we sue the Heirs
and Executors of our Debtors. God has peremtorily told us, that he will visit
the iniquity of ungodly parents, upon their children, unto the third and fourth
generation, Exodus 20. 5. As for the sin of Haman. his ten sons were hanged,
Hester 9. 13, 14. And so for Saul's sin, his seven sons were likewise hanged, 2 Samuel 21. 6. and thus for Achans sin, all his sons and daughters were stoned to
death, and burned with fire by the Commandment of Moses, who was in Gods stead,
Josh. 7. Yea God has peremtorily threatened, Psalm. 109. that the children of a
cruel and unmercifully man, shall be Vagabonds and beg their bread, and that
none shall extend mercy or favor unto them, ver. 7. to 17. God will make those
children beggars, for whose sakes the fathers have made so many beggars; this
is a truth which the father will not believe, but as sure as God is just, the
Son shall feel. As what common and daily experience have we thereof, had men
but the wit to observe it? for hence it is, that riches ill got, shift masters
so often. As rare it is, if the wealth of an Oppressor does last to the fourth
generation, seldom to the second; for commonly in this case, as the father was
the first that raised his house, by his extreme getting and saving, so the son
proves the last, in overthrowing his house, by excessive spending and
lavishing; as Tullius Cicero answered a Prodigal that told him he came of
beggarly parents; for no man when his means is gone, will ever after trust him
with a stock to begin the world again; the case standing with him, as it did
with the unjust Steward* who having wasted his masters goods for the time past,
could not be trusted with the like for the time to come; and whereas hitherto
he has with Esau, rejected the blessing of prosperity, it will be denied him
hereafter, though he should seek it with tears, and which is worse then all, if
death find him (as is much to be feared) as banquerout of spiritual, a, of
worldly goods, it will send him to an eternal (...): for what can we think of
them, that do not only lose crusts and crummes, which our Savior would have
carefully gathered up, John 6. 12. but even lavish and wherle away whole
patrimonies; yea, most wickedly spend them in riot, and upon Dice, Drabs,
Drunkenness? Oh the fearful account which these unthrifty Baylifs will one day
have to give up, to our great Lord and Master, when he shall call them to a
strict reckoning of their talents! he was condemned that increased not the sum
concredited to him, what then shall become of him that lawlessely and lavishly
spends and impaires it? bringing in such a reckoning as this; Item, spent upon
my lusts, pleasures, and pride, forty years, and five hundred or ten thousand
pounds, etc. let them be in their right senses, they cannot think that God will
take this for a good discharge of their Steward-ships, though the devil may
and will make them believe, that Christ will quit all scores between him, the
father, and them.

And thus I have made it plain, that want and beggary is the heir apparent to
riot and prodigality, and that he who when he should not, spends too much,
shall, when he would not, have too little to spend, a good lesson for young
gulls. I have likewise shown, that what the covetous has basely gotten, is as
ill bestowed, and worse employed, a good item for old Curmudgens to take notice
of, that so they may not starve their bodies, and damn their souls, for their
sons, to so little purpose.

As O that the covetous Moule, who is now digging a house in the earth for his
posterity, did but foresee how his prodigal son will consume what he with so
much care and industry has scraped together; for should he have leave
hereafter to come out of hell for an hour, and see it, he would curse this his
folly, yea, if possible, it would double the pain of his insernall torment, as
it fares with Gnipho the Usurer, who (as Lucian seigneth) lying in hell,
lamenteth his miserable estate, that one Rodochares, an incestuous Prodigal, on
earth consumed his goods wastfully, which he by unjust means had scraped
together so carefully; the which seems to have some affinity with the word of
truth; why else is Dives being in hell torments, said to lift up his eyes, and
to see Abraham a far off and Lazarus in his bosom, parlying so seriously
about his brethren, whom he had left behind him? Luke 16. 23, etc. Why else
does our Savior say, that the wicked shall gnash their teeth for vexation,
when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, and
themselves thrust out of doors, Luke 13. 28.

But that thou may the better foresee, or at lest fore-think what will
follow, I will show thee thy case in sundry other persons.

Clodius, son to Esophus the Tragedian, spent marvelous great wealth which his
father left him. Epicharmus the Athenian, having a large patrimony left him by
his parents, consumed it in six days, and all his life time after lived a
beggar. Apicius, in banqueting, spent great revenues, left him by his
parsimonious father, and then because he would not lead a miserable life,
hanged himself. Pericles, Callias, and Nicius, by prodigal lavishing and
palpable sensuallity, spent in a shorttime very great patrimonies, left them by
their parents, and when all their means was gone, they drank each of them a
poisoned potion one to another, and dyed in the place.

Again, we read that Caligula, in one year of his reign, spent prodigally,
sixty seven millions of gold, which Tiberius his Predecessor had gathered
together, as Tacitus tells us, and where as John the 22. left behind him, (as
Petrarch reports) two hundred and fifty tun of gold; insomuch that an odd
fellow made this jest of him, Erat Pontifex maximus si non virtute pecunia
tamen maximus. Pope Sixtus Quintus, (called of Englishmen, a by word, for
selling our Kingdom to Philip of Spain, Six Cinque,) through his intolerable
covetousness, left in his Exchequer five millions; but his successor Gregory
the fourteenth, wasted four of them in ten months and less, besides his
ordinary revenues, in riot and prodigality; and many the like which I could
tire you with; insomuch that the curse of Epimenides is daily fulfilled, which
was, that all the treasure whorded up by the covetous, should be wasted by the
prodigal; for, for the most part the Misers means lights into the hands of
some such dingthrifty dearth-maker, as out of a laborious Silkworm, rises a
painted Butter-flye.

CHAP. XIX.
AND so much of the ninth judgment which God usually inflicts upon the
merciless Miser. I will add but one more, nor needs he any more to make him
completely miserable; for though the former were woeful enough, yet this last
is worse then all the rest, as I shall clearly demonstrate in the ensuing
pages. For,

Tenthly, does covetousness reign in a man? is he bewitched with the love of
money? is his heart rivited to the earth? and is he once inslaved to this sin?
if so, there is no probability, hardly any possibility, that ever he should be
converted or saved; nor is it to any more end to admonish him, then to knock at
a deaf man's door, or a dead man's grave.

Covetousness is not more the root of all evil, as the Apostle fitly styles
it, then it is the rot of all good, as is easy to prove; it is the root of all
evil, the mother and metropolis of all sins that can be named; for there is no
sin whatsoever, but it has sprung from this cursed root, whether it be lying,
or swearing, or cursing, or slandering, or Sabbath-breaking, or drunkenness, or
adultery, or bawdery; whether theft, murder, treason, cozening in bargains,
breaking of promises, perfideous underminings, contempt of God and all
goodness, persecuting the truth, opposing the Gospel, hatred of Gods
Messengers, sleighting of his Ordinances, unbelief, idolatry, witchcraft,
ante-Cristanism, sacrilege, soul-murther, etc. For whence spring all these,
and what else can be named, but from covetousness? There is no evil that a
covetous man will not put in practice, so goods may come of it; you cannot name
the sin, but the Auaritions will swallow it, in the sweet broth of commodity.

He that is greedy of gain, will sell the truth, sell his friend, his father,
his master, his Prince, his Country, his conscience; yea, with Ahab he will
sell himself for money, as I might instance in a world of examples; yea, daily
experience has taught us, since our Civil Wars, that many to advantage
themselves five shillings, will indamage another five hundred pounds; and to
gain five pounds, will endanger the losing of three whole Kingdoms; yea, when
once men are bewitched with the love of money, as Judas was, a small matter
would hire them to sell Christ himself, were he now on the earth to be sold.

A resolution to be rich, is the fountain of infinite evils; yea, Covetousness
is the Index, or Epitomy of, or rather a Commentary upon all sin and
wickedness. Name but covetousness, and that includes all the rest, as being a
sin made up of many such bitter ingredients. All vices rule, where gold reigns,
at least that heart which has once inslaved it self to this sin, may be
wrought by Satan to any thing.

Justice is the mistress of all virtues, and the truest trial of a good man,
but the covetous heart, is a very mint of fraud, and can readily coin
falsehoods for advantage, upon all occasions.

And as it is the root or cause of all evil, so it is the rot or main hinderer
of all good; Covetousness is the grave of all goodness, it eats out the very
heart of grace, by eating grace out of the heart, Romans 1. 29. When Avarice once
gets admission into the heart, it turns all grace quite out of doors; as where
salt grows, it makes the ground so barren of all other things, that nothing
else will breed therein; this is the cursed devil that mars all, Covetousness.

No such impediment to conversion and salvation as it; as for instance,
Ministers wonder that their Sermons take no better, that among so many arrows
none should hit the mark: but God tells us the reason, Ezekiel. 33. they sit
before thee, and hear thy words, but their hearts go after their covetousness,
ver. 31. Whence is is, that you may see swearers, drunkards, adulterers, etc.
weep at a sermon, where as you never saw the covetous shed a tear, be the
Doctrine never so dreadful.

Oh this golden devil, this Diana of the Ephesians, does a world of mischief,
it destroys more souls then all other sins put together, as the Apostle
intimates, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Whence it is, that we shall sooner hear of an hundred
Malefactors contrition at the gallows, then of one covetous Misers in his bed.

The Children of Israel would not believe Samuel, that they had sinned in
asking a King, before they saw a miracle from Heaven, even thunder and rain in
wheat harvest, which was contrary to the nature of that Climate, and then they
could confess it, and repent, 1 Samuel 12. 17, 18, 19. But the covetous are in
Pharaohes case, whom neither miracles nor judgments could prevail withal, and
of whom God speaks to Moses in this manner, See that thou speak all the words,
and do all the wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand; but I
will harden his heart, and he shall not let the people go, Exodus 7. 1, 2, 3, 4.
And certainly, they of all others are the men to whom these ensuing Scriptures
are applyable; Go, and say unto these people, ye shall hear indeed, but you
shall not understand, ye shall plainly see and not perceive; make the heart of
this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and
convert, and he heal them, Isa. 6. 9, 10. They would none of me, nor hear my
voice, so I gave them up unto the hardness of their heart, and they walked in
their own counsels, Psa. 81. 11, 12. Go up unto Gilead, and take balm, O Uirgin
daughter of Egypt, in vain shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall have
none health, Jerem. 46. 11.

The precious stone Diacletes, though it have many excellent soverainties in
it, yet it loses them all, if put into a dead man's mouth; so are all means
ineffectuall that are used for the recovery of the covetous, as is well
employed in those words of Abraham, to the rich Glutton, Luke 16. 29, 30, 31.
our Savior expressly affirms, that it is easter for a Camel to go through the
ey of a needle, then for a rich man (that is, a covetous rich man) to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 18. 25. and the Apostle, That no covetous man
can look for any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5. 5. 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10.

Such an ones doom is set down, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. That man that will do
presumptuously, not hearkening unto the Priest that stands before the Lord to
minister there, that man shall dye, says the Lord.

And again, Prove. 29. 1. He that hardens his neck when he is reproved, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, implying that there is no hope
of such a man; and indeed, he that despises Moses law, dies without mercy, as
the Apostle concludes, Heb. 10. 28. A covetous man, is like a sick patient that
cannot spit, whom nothing will cure, or like a cracked Bell, for which there is
no other remedy then the fire, or like one that has the plague tokens, who (as
is conceived) is past all hope, and for whom all that can be performed, is to
say, Lord have mercy upon him, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Pro. 1. Heb. 10. 28. which makes
Musculus say, that Divines shall reform this vice, when Phisicians cure the
gout, which is incurable. Our Mithologists tell us of many strange
metamorphoses, of men turned into beasts, by Circe. Our Poets tell of Licaon,
turned into a Wolf, but when a ravenous Oppressor repents, and turns pious and
merciful, there is a Wolf turned into a man, yea, a Devil turned into a Saint;
Whence the Holy Ghost (speaking of Zacheus, and his conversion) brings it in
with an ecce, behold, as if it were a wonder that Zacheus a covetous man should
be converted; as let me refer it to the experience of the spiritual Reader,
Did ye ever know, or hear, of three such covetous extortioners as Zacheus was,
that repented and made restitution as he did? no, for if you should, it were as
great and as rare a miracle, as if at this day the Turk, Pope, and K. of Spain,
ware at once persuaded to forsake their Idolatry and Superstition.

CHAP. XX.
AND yet it is no wonder, if we consider the reasons. For, First, the coverous
man is an Atheist, one that (like David's fool) says in his heart there is no
God; the Mamonist is like Leo the tenth, Hildebrand the Magician, Alexander the
sixth, and Julius the second, who were all mere Atheists, who thought
whatsoever was said of Christ, Heaven, Hell, the day of judgment, the
immortallity of the soul, etc. to be but fables, and mere impostures, dreams,
toys, and old wives fables; and being Atheists that believe not a Heaven, Hell,
or day of judgment, when every man shall be rewarded according to his deeds,
be they good or evil; what hope is there of their conversion or salvation? or
how should they not prefer temporal things, before celestial and eternal?

As, what is the reason that there are few rich men that will not rather offend
the Divine Majesty, then the Temporal Authority? and few poor men that resemble
not the poor Swedes in their serving of God, who always break the Sabbath,
saying, it is only for rich men and Gentlemen, that have means, to keep that
day; yea, that almost all men, rich and poor, are for matter of Religion, like
Sir John Kennede, who in choosing of his wife, would have her well born and
educated, fair, rich, wise, kind, with the like accomodations, but quite forgot
to wish her good and vertous, and was accordingly blessed in his choice; as King
James (who made many such Matches) used the matter: the main reason of all is,
men believe not a God, or a day of judgemert. Whence it is, that amongst all
the desired privileges of this life, men commonly leave out holiness, which
sufficiently argues their infidelity, which in these times is much propagated
and strengthened; for the plurality of faiths among many, has brought a
nullity of faith in the most.

Worldly minds, mind nothing but worldly things, their business is thought upon,
not God, nor their salvation, for they make that no part of their business;
their business gives them no leave, or leisure, to think of their consciences,
nor do they go to Church to serve God, but the State, which they use not as a
means to save their souls, but charges. There is no Religion in them but the
love of money; most men have their souls as it were wrapped up in the port-mantua
of their senses, and to them all spiritual, celestial, and eternal things seem
incredible, because they are invisible. Machiavil thought all piety and
religion, to be nothing but policy, Pharaoh imputed men's worshipping of God, to
idleness; They be idle, says he, therefore they cry, let us go offer sacrifice
unto our God, Exodus 5. 8. It is a foolish thing, says Cato, to hope for life
by another death; Seneca jeered the Jews for casting away a seventh part of
their time upon a weekly Sabbath; and of their minds are the most among us, if
they would speak out their thoughts. Let the word or Minister tell them, (that
prefer profit before honesty) that godliness is great gain, as having the
promises of this life, and of that which is to come; yet their conclusion is,
they cannot live unless they deceive, they cannot please unless they flatter,
they cannot be believed unless they swear, as Demetrius thought he should beg,
unless he might sell Images, Act. 19. 27.

Nothing will sink into their heads, that cannot be seen with their eyes, or
felt with their fingers: We hate the Turks for selling Christians for slaves,
what do we think of those Christians that sell themselves, and how odious are
they? the poorest cheat's soul (if ever he be saved) cost Christ's precious
blood, yet half a crown, yea six pence sometimes, will make him sell it, by
forswearing himself.

CHAP. XXI.
SEcondly, another reason is, if a covetous man do repent, he must restore what
he has wrongfully gotten, which perhaps may amount to half, or it may be three
parts of his Estate at a clap: which to him is as hard, and harsh an
injunction, as that of God to Abraham, Genesis 22. 2. Sacrifise thy son, thine
only son Isaac. Or as that of our Saviors to the young man, Luke 18. 22. Sell
all that ever thou have, and distribute unto the poor: And is there any hope of
his yielding? No, Covetousness is idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5.

And Gold is the covetous man's god, and will he part with his God, a certainty
for an uncertainty? No, a godly man is content to be poor in outward things,
because his purchase is all inward; but nothing except the assurance of
heavenly things, can make us willing to part with earthly things; neither can
he contemn this life, that knows not the other, and so long as he keeps the
weapon (evil-gotten goods) in his wound, and resolves not to pluck it out by
restoring) how is it possible he should be cured?

Besides, as there are no colors so contrary as white and black, no elements
so disagreeing as fire and water, so there is nothing so opposite to grace and
conversion, as covetousness; and as nothing so alienates a man's love from his
virtuous spouse, as his inordinate affection to a filthy strumpet; so nothing
does so far separate and diminish a man's love to God, and heavenly things, as
our inordinate affection to the world and earthly things; yea, there is an
absolute contrariety between the love of God, and the love of money: no
servant, says our Savior, can serve two masters, for either he shall hate the
one, and love the other, or else he shall lean to the one and despise the
other, ye cannot serve God and riches, Luke 16. 13. Here we see, there is an
absolute impossibility, and in the fourteenth Chapter and elsewhere, we have
examples to confirm it, All those that doted upon purchases, and farms, and
oxen, and wives, with one consent made light of it, when they were bid to the
Lords Supper, Luke 14, 15. to 23. The Gadarenes that so highly prised their
hoggs, would not admit Christ within their borders, Luke 8. Judas that was
covetous, and loved money, could not love his Master, and therefore sold him.

When Demas began to embrace this present world, he soon forsook Paul, and his
soul-saving Sermons, 2 Timothy 4. 10. and how should it be otherwise with these
Misers? for they love and serve Mammon, they put their trust, and place their
confidence in their riches; they make gold their hope, they set their hearts
upon it, and do homage thereunto, attributing and ascribing all their successes
thereunto; which is, to deny the God that is above, as we may plainly see, Job
31. 24, 28. and as for his love and regard to the Word of God, I will refer
it to his own conscience to determine, whether he finds any more taste in it,
then in the white of an egg, yea, whether it be not as distasteful to him, as
dead beer after a banquet of sweetmeats. Nor is it only distasteful to his
palate, for his affections being but a little lukewarm water, it makes his
religion even stomack-sick: Let him go to the Assemblies, (which he does more
for fear of the Law, then for love of the Gospel, and more out of custom then
conscience, as Cain offered his sacrifice, and so will God accept of it:) he
sits down as it were at Table, but he has no stomach to eat; his ears are at
Church, but his heart is at home; and though he hear the Ministers words, yet
he resolves not to do them; for his heart goes after his covetousnes, as the
Lord tells Ezekiel touching his Auditors, Ezekiel. 33. 30. to 33.

And as is his hearing, such is his praying, for that also is to serve his own
turn; he may afford God his voice, but his heart is rooted and rivited to the
earth; They have not cried unto me, says God, with their hearts, when they
howled upon their beds, and when they assembled themselves, it was but for corn
and wine, for they continue to rebel against me, Hosea 7. 14. O that God had
but the same place in men's affections, that riches, honors, pleasures, and
their friends have! but that is seldom seen, the more shame, folly, and
madness, and the greater and juster their condemnation; whence that terrible
Text in Jeremiah, Chapter 17. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the
Lord, verse. 5. And that exhortation, 1 Timothy 6. Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high-minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us abundantly all things to enjoy,
verse. 17. And well does that man deserve to perish, that so loves the creature,
as that he leaves the Creator.

CHAP. XXII.
FOurthly, another reason, (were there no other) why it is so impossible to
prevail with the covetous, is, they will never hear any thing that speaks
against covetousness, (and their refusing to hear it, shows them to be such,
for flight argues guiltiness always) Covetous men will never hear Sermons, or
read Books that press to good Works, or wherein the necessity of restitution is
urged; neither had Satan any brains, if he should suffer them so to do. A
Faulkner ye know, will carry diverse Hawks hooded quietly, which he could not
do, had they the use of their sight.

Such I say, will not vouchsafe to hear reason, lest it should awake their
consciences, and convince their judgments; resembling him that would not have
his Physician remove the thirst which he felt in his ague: because he would not
lose the pleasure he took in quenching the same with often drinking; they had
rather have their lusts satisfied, then enstinguished.

Now we know, that hearing is the only ordinary means of life and salvation; if
then the soul refuse the means of life, it cannot live. If Caesar had not
delayed the reading of his Letter, given him by Artemidorus, as he went to the
Senate, wherein notice was given him of all the conspiracy of his murderers;
he might with ease have prevented his death, but his not regarding it, made the
same inevitable: which together with the rest of this Chapter, gives me a just
and fair occasion (now I have obtain my purpose) to acquaint the ingenuous
Reader, why I rather call my Book, The prevention of Poverty, and best way to
become Rich and Happy, then The arraignment and conviction of Covetousness; for
by this means, many a covetous wretch may out of lucre, be touled one to read
it, to the saving of their souls; who otherwise would never have been
acquainted with a thousand part of their wretchedness, and so not capable of
amendment. But

Fifthly, suppose he should be prevailed withal to hear me, alls one; even an
ounce of gold with him, will weigh down whatsoever can be aledged from the
Word, for though with that rich man, Luke 10. he may have a good mind to heaven
in reversion, yet for all that, he will not hear of parting with his heaven,
whereof he has present possession. He can like Canaan well enough so he may
enjoy his fleshpots also, and could love the blessing, but he will not lose
his pottage; and in case he cannot gain by being religious, his care shall be
not to loose by it; and that Religion shall like him best, that is best cheap,
and will cost him least; any Doctrine is welcome to him, but that which beats
upon good works: Nor will he stick with the Sages, to fall down and worship
Christ, but he cannot abide to present him with his gold; No, if another will
be at the charges to serve God, he will cry out, why is this waste? as Judas
did when Mary bestowed that precious ointment upon her Savior, which otherwise
might have been sold, and so put into his bag. The love of money, and commings
in of gain, is dearer and sweeter to the Muck-worm, then the saving of his
soul, what possibility then of his being prevailed withal?

To other sins Satan tempts a man often, but Covetousness is a fine and
recovery upon the purchase, then he is sure of him; as when a Jailer has lock
up his prisoners safe in a Dungeon, he may go play.

Covetous men are blind to all dangers, deaft to all good instructions; they
are besotted with the love of money, as Birds are with their bain; yea, they
resolve against their own conversion. The Scribes and Pharisees, who were
covetous, shut their eyes, stopped their ears, and barriocadoed their hearts
against all our Savior did or said; yea, they scoft at his preaching, Luke 16.
14. and of all sorts of finners that Christ preached unto, he was never
scorned, and mocked, but by them, when he preached against covetousness.
Christianum dogma, vertitur in scomma, and what is the reason but this? rich
worldlings think themselves so much the wiser, as they are the richer.

These things considered, no wonder that our Savior expressly affirms, that
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man (that is a covetous rich man) to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; as well
knowing, that no Physic can be found strong enough to purg out this humor.
Well may they gnaw their tongues for sorrow, when they shall be tormented with
fire, and boil with great heat, and blaspheme the God of Heaven for their
pains, and for their soars, but repent of their works they will not, as it is
Revel. 16. 8. to 12. only others may make some good use of that evil they see
in them, at least learn to beware of covetousness.

I grant, that to God (who has commanded us to use the means) all things are
possible, for he is able, even of stones, to raise up children unto Abraham,
Mat. 3. 9. but in respect of ordinary means, it is no more possible for a
covetous miserly muck-worm to be converted, then it is for a dead man to be
raised. And therefore, though I had rather be a Toade then a Drunkard, yet had
I rather be a Drunkard then a covetous Miser, and should somewhat the more hope
to go to Heaven, Mat. 21. 31, 32.

CHAP. XXIII.
AND so much of the tenth plague which God inflicts upon the miserly muck-worm;
I might give you many more, for almost every thing becomes a deadly snare to
such men, even every thing they see or hear of, each thought that comes into
their minds, yea the very Word of God, the mercy of God, and the merits of
Christ, become their bain, and shall inhanse their damnation; for as all things
shall turn together for the best, to those that love God, so all things shall
turn together for the worst, unto them that hate God, as they do, John 15. 24.
Romans 1. 30. But enough has been faid (as I suppose) to make good what I
promised, and to prove that the cruel and unmercifull Miser is never the
better for his riches, but the worse, and how God bestows these outward
blessings upon him, rather in wrath then in love, with the reasons thereof; but
as you have heard what it is, not to be Rich and Happy: so in the next place
hear what it is to be so.

For to clear men's judgments, and for the further and fuller discharge of what
I promised in the beginning, that also is to be discovered, which when I have
disparcht, I shall honestly acquaint you, how of poor, melancholy, and
miserable, you may become rich, happy, and comfortable; now as touching the
former of these, you are to know: That a competency of earthly things, is
indeed and really the best estate in the world, if we had but the wit to know
when we are well; which makes Agur pray, Give me neither poverty nor riches,
but feed we with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say,
Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain, Pro. 30. 8, 9. He prays against riches, as well as poverty, and that
which we are to pray against, we may not desire; and what is it our Savior
teaches us to pray? but Give us this day our daily bread, Mat. 6. 11. We are
never so happily fed, as when we wait upon God for our daily bread, and are
therewith content; and lest our Saviovrs words should not be enough, he
teaches us this lesson no less by his own practice, then by precept; for
though he was owner of all things in the universe, yet he would have no more
then just what he needed, as when he wanted money to pay tribute, he sent for
no more then he was to disburse presently, Mattb. 17. 27. he might have
commanded twenty pounds as well as twenty pence, but he would not, to show that
we should desire no more then will serve our turn.

A competent measure of wealth to retain an honest reputation in the world, so
that we neither need to flatter nor borrow, is sufficient: He is rich enough
says Jerome, that lacks not bread, and high enough in dignity that is not
forced to serve. I would says another, desire neither more nor less then
enough, I may as well dye of a surfeit as of hunger. This worlds wealth that
men so much desire,
May well be likened to a burning fire;
Whereof a little can do little harm
But profit much, our bodies well to warm.
But take too much, and surely thou shall burn,
So too much wealth, to too much woe does turn.


It is a great skill to know what is enough, and greater wisdom to care for
no more; if I have meat, drink, and apparel, I will learn therewith to be
content; if I had the world full of wealth beside, I could enjoy no more then I
use, the rest could please me no otherwise then by looking upon, as wise
Solomon shows, Eccles. 5. 11. and why can I not thus solace my self while it is
another? It was a dainty disposition of one that followed a great Lord, who
was often heard to say, I bless God, I have as much in effect as my Lord
himself, though I am owner of little or nothing, for I have the use of his
Gardens and Galleries to walk in, I hear his Music with as many ears, I hunt
with him in his Parks, eat and drink of the same with him, though a little
after, and so of other delights which my Lord enjoys. And indeed, what great
difference is there, save in the pride and covetousness of a man's mind? for my
part, (let me speak it to Gods glory, and out of thankfulness) I have no share
with either of them in these delights; I enjoy neither curious gardens, nor
delicious music, nor sumputous fare, my body will scarce permit me a cup of
strong drink, I do not know that I have been free from getting cold in my head
(more or less) one whole day this thirty years, my means will not afford me to
keep either horse or man, except with the unjust Steward, I should cozen my
master, yet I would not change my condition either with him or his Lord, and I
doubt not but there are thousands of my mind, as preferring a retired life,
spent in conversing with Authors, before all the honors, pleasures, and profits
that others enjoy; This is the gift of God, (Eccl. 5. 15. to the end,) and not
unmeet to be spoken in the great Congregation, Psalm. 35. 18, and 119. 46.
Riches and Poverty are more in the heart then in the hand; we may be as happy
and as warm in Country russet, as in Tissue; he is wealthy that is contented,
and he poor that is not, were he as rich as Croesus, he only is rich and happy,
in regard of outward things, who thinks himself so, and only the covetous and
uncontented are poor and miserable. The contented man in coveting nothing,
enjoyes all things, though he have nothing; even as Adam was warm, though he
had no clothes. The eyes quiet, the thoughts medicine, and the minds Mitridate,
is content, it is a sweet sauce to every dish, and adds pleasantness to all we
do; how many miserly muck-worms macerate themselves with perplexing thoughts,
cares, and fears of want, when they want nothing but a thankful heart? these
are miserably poor and unhappy, but it is in opinion only, for otherwise were
they but contented, they might be the richest and happiest men a live, not by
adding to, or heaping up goods upon goods, but by diminishing and taking away
from their greedy and covetous desire of having more. The shortest cut to
riches, is by their contempt; it is great riches not to desire riches, and he
has most that covets least, says Socrates, and also Seneca.

CHAP. XXIV.
TRue, this so transeends the condition, or indeed, the capacity of a Miser or
Muck-worm, that he will count these but words, and mere bravadoes; but that
those lovers of wisdom, were so contented with a little, that they desired no
more, their practice did sufficiently prove For when Alexander bad Diogenes ask
what he would, his answer was, Stand aside, and let the Sun shine upon me, take
not that away which thou art not able to give; further avouching, that he was
richer then himself; for I, quoth he, desire no more then what I enjoy, whereas
thou, O Emperor, can not content thy self with all the world, but daily
hazardest thy life and fortunes, to augment thy Possessions. Now all that this
Heathen possessed, was a Tub to dwell in, the peoples charity to maintain him,
and a Dish to take up water in, the which (when he saw a boy take up with his
hand to drink) he threw away, saying, I knew not that nature had provided every
thing needful, so little did he desire superfluities. Abdolomenes, a poor
Gardener, refused a great City offered him by Alexander. Fabricius, a noble
Roman, refused a great sum of money, sent him by Pirrhus; albeit, he was so
poor, that when he dyed, his daughtets were married at the common charge of the
City. Apollonius Tianeas, having diverse rich gifts sent him by Vespasian,
refused the^, saying, They were for covetous-minded men, and for those that had
need of them, which he had not. Socrates being sent for by Archelaus to come to
receive store of gold; sent him word, that a measure of flower was sold in
Athens for a penny, and that water cost him nothing. Themistocles finding rich
bracelets of Pearl and precious stones lie in his path: bade another take them
up, saying, Thou art not Themistocles. Anacreon the Philosopher, having
received from Policrates a great reward, of ten thousand Ducats; soon after
repented himself: for he entered into such thoughts, and was so vexed with fear,
care and watching for three days and three nights; that he sent it back again,
saying, It was not worth the pains, he had already taken about it.

Democritus the Philosopher of Abdera, having learned of the Chaldeans
Astronomy, and of the Persians Geometry: returned to Athens, where he gave
infinite wealth to the City, reserving only a little Garden to himself. Crates,
to the end that he might more quietly study Philosophy; threw his goods into
the Sea. Crates the Thebane, delivered a stock of money to a friend of his,
upon condition; that if it should happen his children proved Fools, he should
deliver it unto them: but if they became learned, and Philosophers; then to
distribute it to the Common people, because said he, Philosophers have no need
of wealth. Which examples I could parallel with many mentioned in the Word, as
Jacob, Genesis 28. 20. and Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 3. and Job Chap. 31. 24, 28. Moses,
Numb. 16. and 15. Jer. 15. and 10. Agar, Prove. 30. 8. Abraham, who would not
receive so much as a shoe-latchet of the King of Sodom: Genesis 14. 21, 22, 23.
David, who refused to have the threshing-floor of Araunah, except he might pay
to the full for it; and whose longing was not after the increase of corn, wine
and oil; but for the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. 6. 7. Yea, he more
valued Gods Word, then thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 19. 10. and 119. 14,
127. Elisha refused Naamans rich present of gold and costly garments; though so
freely offered, and so well deserved, 2 Kings 5. 16. Saint Paul in his greatest
need, was as well content, as when he had the most plenty: and rather chose to
work at his trade, then he would be chargeable to any, Phil. 4. 11. He coveted
no man's silver, nor gold, Acts 20. 33. it was only the saving of souls, that he
thirsted after, 2 Cor. 12. 14. Zaccheus, when he was once become a Christian,
was so far from desiring more, that he was all for dimishing what he had: for
he gave one half to the poor, and with the other he made fourfold restitution,
Luke 19. 8. And the like might be shown of all the Apostles, and lastly, of
our Savior Christ.

To all which I might add examples of many in this age, and of that that went
before it; As Sir Thomas Moore, Sir Julius Caesar, The Lord Harrington, Bishop
Hooper, Mr. Bradford Martyr, Reverend Mr. Fox that wrote the Book of Martyrs,
Master Wheatley, Minister of Banbury, Doctor Tailor; and others that are yet
living: were it fit to name them, that have but a small portion, a poor
pittance of these earthly enjoyments (in comparison of what others have, and
are not pleased with all) even just enough to make even at the years end,
living frugally: yet are they so contented, that they desire no more, nor would
they change their private and mean condition, with any men alive, be they never
so rich, never so great. Nor would thou think it probable, their hearts
should deceive them, if thou knew what offers they have refused. And I
doubtnot, but there are many such in the land.

Nor can it be thought strange, that Gods children (whose affections are set
upon heavenly things) should be so content with a little; that they desire no
more; when we read of one Esau, that could say, I have enough my brother, keep
that thou have to thy self, Genesis 33. 9. Yea, if it fared so with the Heathen,
for the love of that wisdom and virtue, which shall have no reward, because
they wanted faith and saving knowledge, how much more should Christians? (who
have a more sure word of promise, then they had, 2 Pet. 1. 19. with Mary make
choice of that better part, which shall never be taken from them, Luke 10. 41,
42.

True worldly minds think, no man can be of any other then their own diet; and
because they find the respects of self-love, and private profit, so strongly
prevail with themselves: they cannot conceive, how these should be capable of a
repulse from others. Nature thinks it impossible, to contemn honor and wealth:
and because so many souls are thus taken, cannot believe that any would escape.
But let carnal hearts know there are those, that can spit the world in the
face, and say, Thy gold and silver perish with thee, Acts 8. 20. That had
rather be masters of themselves, then of the Indies: and that in comparison of
a good conscience, can tread under foot with disdain, the worlds best proffers,
like shadows as they are; and that can do as Balaam said, If Balack would give
me his house-full of silver and gold; I cannot go beyond the commandment of
the Lord, Numb. 24. 13.

Elisha and Gehazi, looked not with the same eyes upon the Syrian treasure; but
one with the eye of contempt, the other with the eye of admiration and covetous
desire. Two men see a Mass together, one is transported with admiration and
delight, the other looks upon it with indignation and scorn; one thinks it
heavenly, the other knows it blasphemy.

CHAP. XXV.
NOw why are godly Christians so content with a little? that they desire no
more: certainly they could be as rich as the richest, and as wise for earthly
things, as they are for heavenly. (As when Thales was upbraided, that all his
wisdom could not make him rich: setting but his mind to it, he saw by study,
that there would be a great scarcity of oil, which in the time of plenty he
took up upon credit, and when the want came, by his store he became exceeding
rich as Laertius relates:) but they are better pleased with a competency then
to trouble themselves to get, or indeed to desire an opulency. The Christians
reasons are these.

First, they consider, that as a shoe fit is better then one either too big, or
too little; (for one too big sets the foot awry; and one too little hinders
the going) so a mean estate is best. Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith, Prove. 15. 16. A ship of great
burden, and heavy laden, comes with great labor and difficulty, and with much
a do is brought in; if it want ballast and lading, there is great danger of
overturning; but a light Pinace indifferently freight, comes along swiftly, and
is brought to the harbor with much ease.

Nor do the godly wise, desire more then they can wield, in which they resemble
Aristippus, who when a servant in journeying with him, was ty red with the
weight of the money which he carried; bid him cast out that which was too heavy
and carry the rest: whereas the covetous man is like Arthipertus King of the
Lombards; who flying from Asprandus his enemy, and being to swim over the River
Tesino, to save his life, took so much gold with him, that he both drowned it,
and himself with it.

Secondly, the poor and mean, have a deeper sense of Gods fatherly care and
providence, in replenishing them, at all times of need, (even beyond
imagination or expression) then others have, that know not what it is sometimes
to want: whiles wicked minds have their full scope, they never look up above
themselves: but when once God crosses them in their projects, their want of
success, teaches them to give God his own.

We should forget at whose cost we live, if we wanted nothing: And doubtless,
one bit from the month of the Raven, was more pleasing to Elijah; then a whole
Table full of Ahabs dainties. Nothing is more comfortable to Gods children,
then to see the sensible demonstrations of the divine care and providence, as
is promised, Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct
thy ways. The godly man wearies not himself with cares and fears, have he but
from hand to mouth: (never so little) for he knows he lives not at his own
cost. He considers what Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 5. Cast your care upon the
Lord, for he cares for you, verse 7. He remembers what our Savior says,
Matthew. 6. observes the same, and never doubts of the performance; so he takes
no thought for to morrow, what he shall eat, or what he shall drink, or
wherewith he shall be clothed: but applauds his own happiness, knowing that he
who feeds the fowls of the Air, and arrayeth the Lillies of the field, will
be sure to feed and clothe them that are his sons and household servants, Matthew.
6. 25, to the end, Luke 12. 22, to 33. Levit. 26. 3, to 14. Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet.
5. 7. Psalm. 55. 22.

Besides, as there are intercourses of sleeping and waking, of night and day,
of fair weather and foul, of war and peace, of labor and recreation; that each
may set off the other, so God finds it meet, by a sense of want to humble us;
and by supplying our wants to fill us with joy and thankfulness.

Ptolomie King of Egypt, going a hunting lost his way, and could get no better
fare, then a course brown loaf in a Shepherds house: but this he said seemed
sweeter and better to him; then all the delights that ever he ate or met with
before. Content in want, is plenty with an overplus.

The giver of all things knows how to dispense his favors so, as that every
one may have cause both of thankfulness and humiliation: whiles there is none
that has all, nor any one but has some.

Thirdly, God in mercy not seldom keeps his children from riches and
abundance: lest they should choke and wound them; for they are snares and
thorns, Matthew. 13. 22.

Indeed riches are a blessing, if we can so possess them; that they possess not
us: There can be no danger, much benefit in abundance, all the good or ill, of
wealth or poverty; is in the mind, in the use. But this is the misery, Plenty
of goods, commonly occasions plenty of evils. How many had been good? had they
not been great. Diverse have changed their minds with their means, neither has
God worse servants in the world, then are rich men of the world: if adversity
has slain her thousands, prosperity has slain her ten thousand. Commonly
where is no want, is much wantonness: and as we grow rich in temporals, we grow
poor in spirituals. Usually so much the more proud, secure, wanton, scornful,
impenitent, etc. by how much the more we are enriched, advanced, and blessed.
They spend their days in wealth, therefore they say unto God, Depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; and what is the Almighty that we
should fear him? Job 11. 13, 14, 15.

CHAP. XXVI.
FOurthly, men in a middle condition are mostly more merry and contented then
others, that surfeit with abundance. Who so melancholy as the rich worldling?
and who more merry then they? that are poorest. I have read of a rich
Landlord, that envied his poor tenant, because he heard him sing every day at
his labor, yet had scarce bread for his family; while himself wanting nothing,
was full of discontent: One advised him to convey cunningly into his Cottage, a
bag of money; he did so, the tenant finding this mass, so great in his
imagination, left off his singing, and fell to carking and caring how to
increase it. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam: The Landlord fetches back his
money, the Tenant is as merry as ever he was. Which shows, that there is no
riches comparable to a contented mind, as Plutarch is of opinion, That there
are poor Kings, and rich Cobblers, as wise Solon seemed to insinuate to the
King, when he was vaunting of his greatness: For it was Iris a poor beggar,
that he told Croesus was the happiest man in his Dominions. And when King Agis
requested the Oracle of Apollo to tell him, who was the happiest man in the
world? expecting to hear himself nominated: the answer was Aglaion, who was a
poor Gardener in Arcadia, that at sixty years of age, had never gone from home,
but kept himself and his family with their labor, in a fruitful plot or
garden, as Livius relates. Pyrrhus opened himself to his friend Cineas, that he
first intended a war upon Italy, and what then said Cineas? then we will
attempt Cicile, and what then? then we may conquer Carthage and Africa; and
what then said Cineas? Why, then quoth Pyrrhus, we may rest, and feast, and
sacrifice, and make merry with our friends: to which Cineas replied, (as every
servant of God would do in the like case) and may we not enjoy all this,
sweetness now? and that without all this ado. But natural men are mad men. Yea,
were great men, though good men, but asked the question; their consciences
could not but acquaint us, if they would speak out; that true contentment
seldom dwells high, whiles meaner men of humble spirits, enjoy both earth and
heaven. However not a few of them have freely acknowledged it, as I have
largely related in my second Part of Philarguromastix. Wherefore be pleased, o
God, to give me a contented mind: and then if I have but little in estate, I
shall have much in possession.

Fifthly, mean ones with their poverty, misery, ignominy, are often saved;
whiles others with their honor, and opulency go to hell. When we are judged,
we are chastened of the Lord; that we may not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11. 32. Riches do so puff up some men, that they even think it a discredit
to their great Worships, to worship God. Nothing feeds pride, nor keeps off
repentance so much, as prosperous advantage. The Prodigal never thought of his
father, till he wanted husks. We serve God, as our servants serve us: of whom
many have too good clothes, others too much wages, or are too full fed to do
work. As a woman finding that her hen laid her every day an egg; for all she
was very lean, had a conceit, that if she were fat and lusty, she would lay
twice a day; whereupon she fed and crammed her thoroughly: but in a short space,
she became so fat, that contrary to her expectation, she left laying
altogether. Who so nourishes his servant daintily from his childhood; shall
after find him stubbron, Prove. 29. 21.

Sixthly, they fix their affections upon heavenly riches, and not upon the
temporary and transitory riches of this world: because in sickness, when they
stand in the greatest need of all, they will not do them the least good, Your
gold will not bribe a disease, your bags will not keep your head from aching, or
your joints from the Gout, a loathing stomach makes no difference between an
earthen dish, and one of silver. Riches can no more put off the stone, or
assuage grief, or thrust out cares, or purchase grace, or suspend death, or
prevent hell, or bribe the Devil; then a satin sleeve can heal a broken arm.

Indeed the foolish Prior in Melancthon, rolled his hands up and down in a
basin full of Angels; thinking by this means to cure his Gout: but it would not
do. Yea, thou that placest thy happiness, and put thy confidence in a
little white and red earth; and dotest so upon the world, tell me? When the
hand of God has never so little touched thee, what good thy great wealth will
do thee? Therefore, o vain desires! and impotent contentments of men, that
place their happiness in these things: will not this your fair Herodias,
appear as a stigmatized Gypsy? Will not all the toil and cost you have been at
to get riches, appear as ridiculous; as if a countryman should anoint his
axle-tree with Ambergris? or as if a travaller, should liquour his boots
with Balsamum. Yea, your wealth will not only not save you from evils, but help
to make you more miserable, and not only here, but hereafter, Psalm. 49. 6, 7, 8.

Why then do you set so high a price upon them? and so shamefully undervalue
the riches of the mind? which will much mitigate your grief, and increase your
comfort, in what condition soever you are. But

Seventhly, they little set by the wealth of this world; because their riches
may soon leave them: When with the Spider we have exhausted our very bowels, to
contrive a slender web of an uncertain inheritance: one puff of wind and blast
blown upon it by the Almighty, carries all away. What says Solomon? Prove. 23.
Cease from thy wisdom, will thou cast thine eyes upon that, which is nothing?
for riches takes her to her wings, as an Eagle, and flies away, Verse 4, 5.
and Jer. 17. 11. Isaiah 33. 1. Prove. 12. 27. Yea, all riches are uncertain, but
those that are evil gotten, are most uncertain: as examples of all ages
witness. The first of these was verified in Job; who lived to see himself poor
to a Proverb; and fell from the want of all misery, to the misery of all wants.
And Dionysius, who fell from a Tyrant over men, to be a Tutor ever boys, and
so to get his living. And Perses son and heir, who was fain to learn an
Occupation, the Black-smiths trade; to relieve his necessity. And Henry the
Fourth that victorious Emperor, who after he had fought two and fifty pitched
Battails; became a Petitioner, for a Prebendary, to maintain him in his old
age. And Geliner, that potent King of the Vandals, was so low brought: that he
entreated his friend to send him a harp, a sponge, and a loaf of bread; an Harp
to consort with his misery, a sponge to dry up his tears, and a loaf of bread
to satisfy his hunger. Yea, how many have we known in this City? reputed very
rich, yet have broken for thousands. There are innumerable ways to become,
poor; a fire, a thief, a false servant, suretiship, trusting of bad customers,
an unfaithful factor, a Pyrate, an unskilful Pilate, Godwines sands, a cross
gale a wind, and many the like, has brought millions of rich men to poverty.
And yet this is the only wind, that blows up the Words bladder.

You see little children, what pains they take to rake and scrape snow
together, to make a snow-ball: right so it fares with them, that scrape
together the treasure of this world, they have but a snow-bal of it, for so
soon as the Sun shines; and God breaths upon it, by and by it comes to
nothing.

And as riches well gotten are uncertain, so those that are evil gotten, are
not seldom lost with shame. As how many of our over-reachers have overreached
themselves so far? either by perjury, forgery, receiving of stolen goods, or the
like: that they have left either their bodies hanging between heaven and earth;
or their ears upon the pillory, and died in prison: so that the safest way, to
praise a covetous miser is, when he is dead. But

CHAP. XXVII.
EIghthly, to this may be added, that if riches should not leave us, and be
taken away, as they were from Job; yet of necessity we must ere long leave and
be taken from them; as the rich man in the Gospel, was from his substance and
wealth. Nor do we know now soon, for so soon as a man is born, he hastens as
fast to his end, as the Arrow to the mark: each day, is another march toward
death; and that little time of stay is full of misery, and trouble: and
therefore it is fitly called a passage, a shadow, a span, a tale, a vapor, a
cloud, a bubble in the water; It is like a candle in the wind, soon blown out;
like a spark in the water, soon extinguished; like a thin Air, soon expired;
like a little snow in the sun, soon melted; It is like a pilgrimage, in which
is uncertainty; a flower, in which is mutability; a house of clay, in which is
misery; a Weavers shuttle, in which is volubility; a Shepherds tent, in which
is variety; to a ship on the sea, in which is celerity; to smoke, which is
vanity; to a thought, whereof we have a thousand in a day; to a dream, of which
we have many in a night; to vanity, which is nothing in it self; and to
nothing, which has no being in the world.

And which is further considerable, the young may die as soon as the old. Yea,
more die in the spring, and summer of their years; then do live to their autumn
or winter: and more before ten, then after threescore. There are graves of all
fizes, and likewise sculls in Golgotha, as, says the Hebrew proverb. One dies
in the bud, another in the bloom, some in the fruit, few like the sheaf, that
comes to the barn in a full age.

Men may put far from them the evil day; but they may find it nearer then they
are aware of, Revel. 22. 12. The pitcher goes often to the water, but at length
it comes broken home. The cord breaks at last, with the weakest pull, as the
Spanish proverb well notes. The tree falls upon the last stroke: yet all the
former strokes, help forwards. A whirl-winde with one furious blast,
overturneth the greatest and tallest trees; which for many years have been
growing to their perfect strength and greatness: so oftentimes, the third of
life breaks, when men think least of death, as it fared with Saint Lukes
fool, who promised himself many years, to live in ease, mirth, and jollity;
when he had not one night more to live, Luke 12. 19, 20. For when like a Jay,
he was pruning himself in the boughs: he came tumbling down, with the Arrow in
his side. John the 22th. prophesied by the course of the Stars; that he should
live long: but whilst he was vainly vaunting thereof, the Chamber wherein he
was, fell down, and bruised him to pieces. His glass was run, when he thought
it but new turned. And the Axe was lifted, to strike him to the ground; when he
never dreamed of the slaughterhouse. And whether thy soul shall be taken from
thee this night, as it fared with him formerly spoken of; thou have no
assurance: the very first night, which the rich man intended for his rest,
proved his last night. Nor was there any more between Nabals festival, and his
funeral, then ten or a dozen days, 1 Samuel 25. 38. And could any thing have
hired death, to have spared our forefathers; they would have kept our
possessions from us.

Neither is this all, for if thou be wicked, and unmerciful; thou have no
reason to expect other, then a violent death: for which see, Job 24. 24. Psalm.
37. 10, 11. Job 36. 11, 12. Psalm. 37. 37, 38, 39. and 55. 23. Prove. 12. 27.
Great trees are long in growing, but are rooted up in an instannt. The Axe is
laid to the root, Matthew. 3. 10. down it goes, into the fire it must: if it will
not serve for fruit, it must for fuel. And what know thou? but God may deal
with thee, as Mahomet did by John Justinian of Geneva who having taken
Constantinople by his treason, first made him King, according to promise; and
within three days after, cut off his head. God may have fatted thee with
abundance, on purpose to send thee to the slaughterhouse.

Nay, why has God spared thee, so long as he has? probably not in love to
thee, but for some other end: As perhaps God has some progeny to come from
thee; As for good Hezekiah to be born, his wicked Father Abaz is forborne. Why
did Ammon draw out two years breath? in Idolatry: but that good Iosia was to be
fitted for a King. Many sacrilegious extortioners, Idollaters, etc. Are
delivered, or preserved: because God has some good fruit, to come from their
cursed loins. However, thou can not look to live many years. The Raven, the
Phoenix, the Elephant, the Lion, and the Heart, fulfill their hundred years: But
man seldom lives to four score, and thou art drawing toward it. Besides the
last month of the great year of the World; is come upon us; we are deep in
December, And that day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, for when
thou shall say peace and safety, then shall come upon thee sudden destruction,
as the travel upon a woman with child, and thou shall not escape: as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3.

That nothing is more certain then death, nothing more uncertain then the hour
thereof: That this only is sure, that there is nothing sure here below, and
that if we were owners of more land, then ever the Devil proffered to Christ;
yet when death shall knock at our door; no more can be called ours, then the
ground we are put into, needs no more proof then experience. See, Psalm. 37. 35,
36. But

Ninthly and lastly, a godly man's desires, are fixed upon the riches of the
mind; which being once had, can never be lost. The which Saint Augustine only
counted true riches. The wise and godly are of Pythagoras his mind: who being
asked why he cared no more for riches? answered, I despise those riches, which
by expending are wasted and lost; and with sparing, will rust and rot. They are
of Stilpons judgment, who used to say; All that is truly mine, I carry with me.
They desire not so much, to lay up treasure for themselves upon earth; but to
lay up for themselves in Heaven, as their Lord and Master has commanded them,
Matthew. 6. 19, 20. What says the Apostle? Let not covetousness be once named
among Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. As if that world, which many prefer before Heaven;
were not worth talking of.

All worldly things are but lent us, our houses of stone wherein our bodies
dwell, our houses of clay wherein our souls dwell, are but lent us: honors;
pleasures, treasures, money, maintenance, wives, children, friends, etc. but
lent us: we may say of them all, as he said of the Ax-head when it fell into
the water; 2 Kings 6. 5. Alas; they are but borrowed. Only spiritual graces
are given; of those things there is only a true donation, whereof there is a
true possession: worldly things are but as a Tabernacle; a moveable; heaven is
a mansion.

Now put all these together, and they will sufficiently show; that he is a fool
or a mad man; that prefers not spiritual riches, (which are subject to none of
these casualties) before temporal and transitory.

And so at lenght I have shown you what it is not, and what it is to be rich.
And I hope convinced the worldling, that the richest are not always the
happiest: Yea; that they are the most miserable; who swim in wealth, wanting
grace and Gods blessing upon what they do possess: while that man is
incomparably happy; to whom God in his love and favor, gives only a
competency of earthly things, and the blessing of contentation withal; so as
to be thankful for the same, and desire no more. I will now in discharge of my
promise acquaint you; how of poor; melancholy and miserable; you may become
rich, happy, and cheerful.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THe which I shall do from the Word of God. Nor need it seem strange, that for
the improving of men's outward estates, I prescribe them rules and directions
from thence: For would we be instructed in any necessary truth, whether it be
Theological, concerning God, Ecclesiastical, The Church, Political, The
Commonwealth, Moral, Our neighbors and friends, Oeconomical, Our private
families, Monastical, Our selves.

Or be it touching

Our Temporal estate. Civil Spiritual Eternal Souls, Bodies, Names, Estates,
Posterities.

We need but have recourse to the written Word. For that alone is a magazine of
all needful provision, a storehouse of all good instructions. And let a man
study Machiavel, and all the Machiavilians, and Statepoliticians that ever
wrote; he can add nothing, or nothing of worth to what may be collected thence,
touching this subject. Wherefore, if any of poor would become rich, let him use
the means which tend thereunto; observe and follow those Rules and Directions,
which God has prescribed and appointed in his Word, which are principally
siae; For as the Throne of Solomon was mounted unto by six stairs: so is this
Palace of Plenty and Riches ascended unto, by six steps set upon this ground
already laid. For I find in the Word, six infallible ways to become rich; or
six sorts of men, whom God has promised to bless with riches, and all outward
prosperity. That is to say,

1 The Godly, 2 The Liberal, 3 The Thankful, 4 The Humble, 5 The Industrious, 6
The Frugal.
These of all other men in the world, are sure never to want. And these are the
main heads, unto which I will draw all, I shall say upon this Partition, or
Division.

CHAP. XXIX.
FIrst, if any of poor would become rich, let him become religious: for
Godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Yea, all temporal blessings that can be named, are promised to the
godly, and their seed; and to them only as both the Old and New Testament does
plainly and plentifully prove. As for instance in Deuteronomy the 28th. God
has promised; that if we will hearken diligently unto his voice, observe and
do all his Commandments, and walk in his ways, we shall be blessed in the
city, aand blessed in the field, blessed in our going forth, and in our coming
home, blessed in the fruit of our bodies, and in the fruit of our ground, and
in the fruit of our cattle, the increase of our kine, and the flocks of our
sheep. That he will bless us in our storehouses, and in all that we set our
hands unto; and make us plentiful in all good things: and that we shall have
wherewith to lend unto many, and not borrow, Verse 1, to 15th. and Chap. 7. 11,
to 19th. To which may be added many the like places; As, Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments: wealth and
riches shall be in his house, Psalm. 112. Verse 1, to 4th. Wait on the Lord, and
keep his way, and he will exalt thee to inherit the land, Psalm. 37. 34. The
Lord will withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire, etc.
Psalm. 37. 3, to 7. Fear ye the Lord, ye his Saints: for nothing wants to them
that fear him. The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34. 9, 10. Whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him: because we keep his commandments, and do those things which
are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3. 12. What rare and precious promises are
these? to which I might add very many of like nature. All which David had the
experience of, who tells us that he greatly rejoiced in the strength and
salvation of the Lord, and the Lord gave him his hearts desire, and did not
withold the request of his lips: Yea, he prevented him with the blessings of
goodness, and set a crown of gold upon his head, Psalm. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the
like of Abraham, and Lot, and Job, and Solomon. Let us first seek the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, and all other things shall be ministered unto us,
or come in as it were upon the bargain, as our Savior has assured us, Matthew.
6. 33. Talis est ille qui in Christo credit, die qua credidit, qualis ille qui
universam legem implevit; says Hierom, We have a livery and seisin, of all the
precious promises, both in the Law and Gospel, in the first moment of our
faith. Yea, even an earnest, and partly a possession of Heaven it self: Ephesians.
2. 6. Neither are these promises made only to the obedient themselves: but
riches, and all earthly blessings are entailed upon their seed also, Psalm. 112.
His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the righteous shall be
blessed, Verse 2, 3.

Nor is riches, and outward prosperity promised to the godly, and their seed as
others usually enjoy them, that is, single and barely, but they have a promise
of them, with a supply and addition of all other good things, that may make
them every way happy, as that their prosperity shall be durable and lasting.
That with riches they shall have credit, honor, and promotion with long life
added. That they shall be happy and prosper in all they have or do: as having
God their Protector, who with mercy is said to compass them about on every
side, Psalm. 32. 10. That they shall be freed from all fears and dangers, and
obtein victory over all their enemies; together with death, hell, and the
devil. That they shall be freed from the Law, and likewise from sin, and the
penalty thereof. That they shall have peace external, internal, eternal. And
joy, even the joy of the holy Ghost: which is both glorious, and unspeakable.
That they shall not only persevere, but also grow in grace, and true wisdom.
That all things whatsoever, shall make for their good. That both their persons
and performances shall be good and acceptable; which before were wicked and
abominable. That by the prayer of faith, they shall obtein of God, whatsoever
they shall ask in Christ's Name, and according to his Word. And in fine, all
other good things, that can be named; whether temporal, spiritual, or eternal:
are by the promise of God entailed, upon them that love him, and keep his
commandments, and upon their seed, as I could plentifully and most easily
prove, were it pertinent to the matter in hand. Nor is all this, that God has
promised to those that serve him, so great a matter comparatively; as that we
need wonder at it, or once question the same: For If he spared not his own Son,
but delivered him to death for us; how shall he not with him freely, give us
all things also? Romans 8. 31, 32. It is the Apostles argument. Great, yea, too
great things are they for us to receive; but not too great, for the great and
good God of Heaven and earth to give: all the fear is on our part, whether we
be such to whom the promise is made. For all Gods promises are conditional. And
though of these outward good things, he has promised abundance: yet it is upon
the condition of faith and obedience: as appears by all the forementioned
places; so that if we be not wanting in our duty, and obedience to God; God
will not be wanting in any good thing to us: Nor can we look that God should
make good his promises, if we make them void, by not observing the condition,
as that we may do by our distrusting him. If we will not dare to trust God upon
his promise so confidently as we would a friend, or some great man that is able
and honest.

Besides, the Lord has promised, that there shall be no want to them that fear
him; and that no good thing will he withold, from them that walk uprightly,
Psalm. 34. 9. and 84. 11. Where observe two things, there shall be no want to
such, and such shall want no good thing: so that he must be such an one, to
whom the promise is made; and he must also be sure, that it is good for him,
which is promised. But oftentimes it is not good, for a man to abound with
earthly blessings: as strong drink is not good for weak brains. Yea, if any
thing be wanting to a good man, he may be sure it is not good for him: and then
better that he does want it, then that he did enjoy it, and what wise man will
complain of the want of that, which if he had, would prove more hurtful then
gainful to him? as a sword to a mad man, a knife to a child, drink to them
that have a Fever, or the Dropsy. No good thing will God withold, etc. and
therefore not wants themselves, which to many are also good, yea, very good
things, as I could reckon up many: want sanctified, is a notable means to bring
to repentance, to work in us amendment of life, it stirs up to prayer, it weans
from the love of the world, it keeps us always prepared for the spiritual
combat, discovers whether we be true believers or hypocrites, prevents greater
evils of sin and punishment to come; It makes us humble, conformable to Christ
our head, increases our faith, our joy and thankfulness, our spiritual
wisdom, and likewise our patience, as I have largely shown in The Benefit of
Affliction.

To coonclude, All good things were created for the good, and therefore are
they called goods; because the good God created them for good men to do good
withal. Therefore as Jacob got the blessing, so he gat the inheritance also: to
show that as the faithful have the inward blessing, so they have the outward
blessing too; when they will do them good, and cause them to do good. Yea, in
this case, even as the sheaffs fell before Ruth: so riches shall fall in our
way, as they did to Abraham, and Lot, and Jacob, and Job, and Joseph, upon whom
riches were cast they knew not how; but as if God had only said, Be rich; and
they were rich straight. But that this is the true and only way to wealth and
happiness, needs no more proof then that which is recorded of Solomon 1 Kings
3. 2 Chronicles. 1. where the Lord appearing to him in a dream, said, Ask what I
shall give thee. And he asking only an understanding heart, to discern between
good and evil; that he might the better discharge that great place, whereunto
God had called him; wherein Gods glory, and the peoples good, was his principal
aim and end: Hear what the Lords answer is, Because this was in thine heart,
and thou have not asked riches, wealth or honor, nor the life of thine
enemies, neither yet have asked long life, but have asked wisdom and knowledge
for thy self, that thou might judge my people, over whom I have made thee
King: Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches,
and wealth and honor, such as none of the Kings have had that have been before
thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like, etc. Yea, he was so
surpassing rich, that he gave silver in Jerusalem as stones, and gave Cedars as
the wild fig trees that grow abundantly in the plain, 1. King. 10. 27. 2 Chronicles. 1. 7, to 13, 14, 15. Lo, the true way to Wealth, honor, and happiness,
is; to desire grace, that we may glorify God, and do good: for clearing
whereof, I Will give you a similitude, A man spies a fair apple on a tree, has a
longing desire to it; whereupon he falls a shaking the tree with all his might:
at length it not only comes down, but many other come down to him together with
it.

And so much to prove, that the way to become rich, is first to become godly.
If any shall ask why the godly are not always, nor often rich, notwithstanding
these promises? I answer, that God not seldom withholds these outward
blessings, from his own people in great love, only affording them all things
that they have need of. Our heavenly Father, who knows us better then we know
our selves, and what is good and fit for us, (even as the Nurse knows better
then the child, and the Physician better then the Patient;) knows too well,
how apt we are to abuse these his mercies; and that we cannot abound with
earthly blessings, but we grow proud and surfeit of them: as we see Solomon
himself did, who was the wisest (next to Adam in his innocence) that ever
lived: and likewise how happy it is for them, to be kept short. And when the
All-wise God does foresee, that men will serve him as the Prodigal son served
his father: who only prayed until he had got his patrimony, and then forsook
him, and spent the same in riot to the givers dishonor; even as the cloud that
is lifted up, and advanced by the Sun obscures the Sun. In this case he either
denies them riches in mercy, as he denied Saint Paul in his suit, 2 Cor. 12. 8,
9. And our Savior himself, Matthew. 26. 39. Or grants them their riches in
wrath, Hosea 13. 11. Psalm. 106. 15. of which I have largely spoken in the
foregoing pages, where I have declared how miserable they are, who swim in
wealth, wanting grace, and Gods blessing upon what they do possess.

This is the first and main step to riches, and the next is like unto it, viz.
bounty and liberality to the poor members of Jesus Christ. For,

CHAP. XXX.
SEcondly, He that would be a rich man, let him be a merciful man, and do good
with what God has already given him, be it never so little. for there is not a
more sure and infallible way, to increase and multiply a man's outward estate,
then in being charitable to the poor, if we will believe Gods Word. As what
says our Savior? Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed
down, and shaken together, and running over shall men give into your bosom,
Luke 6. 38. Matthew. 7. 2. Mark 4. 24. In which regard, it may be truly said:
Eleemosyna non est divitiarum dispendium, sed ditescendi potius compendium
quaestusque omnium uberrimus. And to this accords that place in the Proverbs,
There is that scatters, and is more increased: but he that spares more then
is right, shall surely come to poverty, Proverbs 11. 24. The liberal person
shall have plenty, and he that waters, shall also have rain, Verse 25. And
the like in the Psalms, Wealth and riches shall be in the house of him, that
has compassion of, and gives to the poor, Psalm. 112. 3, to 10. See here how
bounty is the best and surest way to plenty. But notable to this purpose is
that, Prove. 28. 27. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack. A rare and
incomparable privilege never to want. And yet this is a bargain of Gods own
making. Plenty shall furnish the table, where Charity takes away, and gives to
the poor. He has sparsed abroad, (says the Psalmist) and given to the poor,
his benevolence remains for ever, Psalm. 112. 9. He has always to give, that
has a free and bountiful heart to give, says Saint Bernard. And of this the
Prophet Isaiah does assure us, The liberal man (says he) devises liberal
things; and by liberality he shall stand, Isaiah 32. 8. A man would think, he
should rather fall by being so liberal and bountiful: but this is the right
course to thrive, and hold out. Nor was it ever known, that God suffered a
merciful and bountiful man to want; ordering his affairs with discretion, Psalm.
112. 5. But you have not heard a tithe of these promises: for the Scriptures no
less abound in them, then silver did in the days of Solomon: of which only a
few more, for I had rather press you with weight, then oppress you with number
of arguments. What says the Wiseman? Prove. 3. Honor the Lord with thy
substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase: so shall thy barns
be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with new wine, Verse 9,
10. In which regard, whhat is this way expended, may be likened to gold the
best of metals: of which experience teaches, that the third part of a grain,
will gild a wyre of 134 foot long; Or rather to those loaves and fishes in the
Gospel: for as they did increase and multiply, even while they were
distributing: so do our riches (and indeed all other gifts.) Even out of that
which the hand reaches to the mouth, it self is nourished.

And thus you see, that (if either Old or New Testament be true) not getting,
but giving is the true and ready way to abundance. That to give in this case,
is the way to have; that parsimony, is no good husbandry: and that we are the
richer for disbursing. Which makes Chrysostom say, that the gainfullest Art is
Almsgiving. And hence it is, that the Scripture compares Almsgiving, to sowing
of seed, 2 Cor. 9. 6. he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: but he
that sows bountifully, shall also reap bountifully. The Apostle compares
giving to sowing, to note unto us the great gain, and advantage that comes
thereby, for who knows not what gain a good husbandman, has by his sowing?
He casts his seed into the ground, and only forbeareth it a few months, and
when the season comes, he reaps a harvest of thirty, forty or an hundred for
one increase. And the like of lending or putting money to interest: to which
the Scriptures also compare it, Prove. 19. Psalm. 37. He who has pity on the
poor, lends unto the Lord: and that which he has given, will he repay him
again, Prove. 19. 17. The Lord is content, to acknowledge himself the charitable
man's debtor. Yea, by our liberality to the poor, our most gracious Redeemer,
acknowledges himself gratified and engaged; as himself does most fteely and
fully acknowledge, Matthew. 25. I was an hungry and ye gave me meat, etc. And for
as much as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren ye have done it
unto me, Verse 35, 36, 40. The poor man's hand, is Christ's Treasury or Bank; as
one fitly calls it, and by putting thereinto, a man becomes a Creditor to his
Savior. Neither will he pay or recompense us, as we do our creditors. For as
Augustine well notes; what we receive, by way of return, is not ten for an
hundred, or an hundred for ten, but an hundred for one, yea, a thousand
thousand for one; an hundred for one here in this world, and in the world to
come life everlasting, together with a Kingdom, even an immortal, eternal
Kingdom of glory and happiness in heaven, which is not to be valued with ten
thousand worlds.

Ann why all this? but in recompense of feeding, clothing and visiting his poor
brethren, and members, when they were destitute. Where note but the
incomparable, and infinite difference, between the receipt and the return: as, o
the unmeasurable measure of our Saviors bounty! And how happy is that man,
that may become a creditor to his Savior! heaven and earth shall be empty,
before he shall want a royal payment.

Wherefore hark n to this, all you self-lovers, that are only for your own
ends: Do you indeed love your selves? and your souls? would you be rich indeed,
and that both here and hereafter? then be charitable to the poor, even to the
utmost of your ability: for this giving is not only an act of charity, but also
of Christian policy: since we shall not only receive our own again, but the
same also with great increase: for as it fared with the widow of Sarepta. whose
handful of meal and cruse of oil with which she relieved the Prophet; the more
she spent, the more it increased, and the more she had; so shall this precious
oil, bestowed on the poor for Christ's sake, be returned upon our heads in great
measure, as some that I could name can say, out of admirable experience, and
others should find, would they but so far forth believe the Lord, as to try
him: Which makes Saint Augustine say, That the charitable man is the greatest
usurer in the world.

I know this is such a paradox to misers, and men of the world; that nothing
seems to them more absurd and ridiculous: what? persuade them that giving away
their goods, is the way to increase them? You must make me a fool (will such an
one say) before I can believe it, and therein he speaks truer then he is aware
of: for these are the very words of St. Paul; He that will be wise, let him
become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. The wisdom of God is
foolishness with the world: and so is the wisdom of the world foolishness with
God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and 3. 19.

To carnal reason it is as unlikely a thing, as that which Elisha told to the
King of Israel, 2 Kings 7. that whereas the Famine was so great in Samaria one
day that mothers aet their own children: yet the next day there should be such
plenty, that a measure of fine flower should be sold for a sheckle, and two
measures of barley for a sheckle. As improbable, as that Abraham should have a
son, being almost an hundred years old; and Sarah past childbearing. As
impossible, as that Lazarus should again live, after he was stark dead, buried,
and stanke again. Yet as unlikely, improbable, and impossible as they seemed to
be: yet they came to pass, and God did not break his promise, nor disappoint
the hopes of such as had the wit, and grace to conside in him: no more will he
in this case, which is by far the easier to be performed. And what though
carnal minds (like that Nobleman, who was trodden to death in the gate of
Samaria, for his incredulity) will not believe, yet truth is truth, as well
when it is not acknowledged, as when it is.

And I wish men would take heed of unbelief and giving God the lie: for, as
there is nothing he so abhors, as that his own household servants should not
dare to trust him, as we may see in that example of the Noble man, 2 Kings 7.
17, 24. and likewise in those Israelites, Psalm. 78. when they said, Can God
furnish a table in the Wilderness? He smote the Rock that the waters gushed
out, and the streams overflowed; but can be give bread also? Can he provide
flesh for his people? Yes, he could and did it, to their small comfort that
made the exception. For because they believed not in God, and trusted not in
his salvation, the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them. He
gave them flesh, even quails in his wrath, until they were choked, Psalm. 78.
10, to 38. and, Numb. 11. 33, 34. But admit God should not answer thy greedy
desire, in multiplying thy estate: yet if he do that which is better for thee,
viz. give thee a competency together with a more contented mind then now thou
have, or ever would have, were thou as rich as Crassus: would it be ever the
worse, or had thou any cause to complain? no, but greatly to rejoice, as I
have shown in the foregoing part.

Wherefore trust God with Abraham, who above hope believed under hope, Romans 4.
18, to 22. For Faith is to God, as Bathsheba was to Solomon, so in favor, that
the King will deny her nothing that good is.

This is the second means, which God has appointed for the improvement of our
outward estates: or the second step to riches and all outward prosperity, viz.
bounty and liberality to the poor.

CHAP. XXXI.
THe third and fourth are thankfulness, and humility; which are no way
inferior to the former.

Thankfulness and humility are the only means to enrich us with Gods blessings:
but pride and unthankfulness, is the only way to make God withdraw, and take
from us both himself, and his blessings. Because the King of Assyria said, By
the power of mine arm have I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent:
therefore, says the Lord, I have removed the borders of the people, and have
spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down the Inhabitants like a valiant
man, Isay 10. 13. AEsops Crow not content with her own likeness, borrowed a
feather of every bird; and she became so proud, that she scorned them all:
which the birds observing, they came and plucked each one their feather back,
and so left her naked: even so does God deal with all proud and ungrateful
persons.

There is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitable to us; both for the
procuring of the good we want, or continuing the good we have; then humility
and thankfulness: Yea, to the humble and thankful soul, nothing shall be
wanting. God will sow there, and there only, plenty of his blessings; where he
is sure to reap plenty of thanks and service: but who will sow those barren
sands, where they are sure not only to be without all hope of a good harvest,
but are sure to lose both their seed and labor. Yet fools as we are, we
forfeit many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy quit-rent of
thankfulness.

Ingratitude forfeits mercies, as Merchants do all to the King, by not paying
of custom. Because Pharaoh says, The River is mine own, therefore God says,
I will dry up the River, Ezekiel. 29. 3, to 13. Isaiah 19. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 11. 9, 10.
Tamberlain having overcome Bajazet, he asked him whether he had ever given God
thanks, for making him so great an Emperor? he confessed ingenuously, he had
never thought of it; to whom Tamberlain replied, that it was no marvel so
ungrateful a man, should be made such a spectacle of misery. When the people
sought themselves only, and how to have their houses ceiled and sumptuous,
neglecting the house of God and his honor, thus it fared with them: Ye have
sown much, and have reaped little; and he that earneth wages, carneth wages to
put it into a bag with holes. Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little: and
when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. I called for a drought upon the
land, and upon all that it brings forth; and upon all the labor of the
hands, etc. Again, when they sought Gods glory, and were thankful, mark the
difference: even from this very day will I bless you, says God, Hag. 1. 4. to
12 and 2, 18, 19. He that is unthankful for a little, is worthy of nothing:
whereas thanks for one good turn, is the best introduction to another. Holy
David was a man after Gods own heart, and therefore he ever mixeth with his
prayers praises. Bless the Lord, o my soul, says he, and forget not all his
benefits, Psalm. 103. 2. And being of a public spirit, he discovers the secrets
of this skill, as when he says, Let the people praise thee, o God, let all the
people praise thee: then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God,
even our God, shall give us his blessing, Psalm. 67. 5, 6, 7.

Wherefore be not like the Swine, that feeds upon the Acorns, without ever
looking to the Oak; from whence they fall. Or the Horse, that drinks of the
Brook, and never thinks of the Spring. Yea, since God is the fountain, from
which all our enjoyments flow; let this be our continual determination: He has
given us all the grace, good, and happiness we have; and we will give him all
the possible thanks, and honor we can. Yea, teach us, o Lord, to receive the
benefit of thy merciful favor, and to return thee the thanks, and the glory.

And the like of Humility, Blessed are the meek (says our Savior) for they
shall inherit the earth, Matthew. 5. 5. The reward of humility, and the fear of
God, is riches, and honor, and life, Prove. 22, 4. If there be a hollow in a
valley lower then another, thither the waters gather; And the more lowly we are
in our own eyes, the more lovely we are in Gods: the more despicable in our
selves, the more acceptable in him, as is seen in the example of the Publican,
Luke 18. 13, 14. And the Prodigal, Luke 15. 18, 19, etc. Nor can any thing make
us more acceptable to God, then the conscience of our own unworthiness: when
with Jacob we can say, O Lord, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies,
which thou have showed unto thy servant: For with my staff I passed over this
Jordane, and now I am become two bands, Genesis 32. 10. When with the Publican we
can confess, I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven, Luke 18. 13, 14.
And with the Prodigal, I am not worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15. And with
the Centurion, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, Luke 7. 6.
And with John Baptist, and Saint Paul, the like, I am not worthy, I am not
worthy. This is the way to obtein what we would have at the hands of God: who
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, Jam. 4. 6, 10. Prove. 29.
23. and 15. 33. and 18. 12. Unto him will I look, says the Lord, even to him
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit; and that trembles at my words, Isaiah
57. 15. He has filled the hungry with good things, but the rich he has sent
empty away, Luke 1. 52, 53.

So that if thou expectest to have God bless and prosper thee, then beware thou
forgettest not, at whose cost thou live: Beware, lest when thou have eaten
and art full, and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver, and
thy gold is increased, and all that thou have is enlarged; thine heart be
lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God; and thou say in thine heart, My
power, and the might of mine hand has got me this wealth: but on the contrary,
Remember that it is the Lord thy God, that has given thee power to get wealth,
and that it is only his blessing that makes rich. This is Gods own counsel set
home with a very strict charge to all that have not a mind to perish, Deuteronomy.
28. 10, to 20.

Many are the examples I might give you, of such as have been undone by their
pride. While Saul was little in his own eyes, God made him head over the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and gave him abundance; but when out of his greatness, he
abused his place and gifts, God took them all away again. And so it had like to
have fared with Hezekiah, when he but began to be puffed up with the wealth,
and precious things that God had given him, 2 Kings 20. 12, to 19. But most
remarkable is the example of Nebuchadnezzar; who when he ascribed all to
himself, saying, Is not this great Babel which I have built, with the might of
my power, and for the glory of my majesty? was presently deprived of his
Kingdom, and all that he had, and sent to graze with the beasts: but when he
was humbled to the very ground, acknowledged the Author, and ascribed all to
the God of heaven, he had his Kingdom, and all else restored unto him, Dan. 4.
The way to obtein any benefit, is to acknowledge the Author, and devote it in
our hearts to the glory of that God, of whom we receive all: For by this means
shall God both pleasure his servants, and honor himself. And indeed, that he
may be honored by our wisdom, riches, graces; is the only end, for which he
gives us to be wise, rich, gracious. And who has more interest in the grape,
then he that planted the Vine? Who more right to the crop, then he that owes
the ground, and sows the seed? Therefore, Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches,
Jer. 9. 23. For we have not only received our talents from God, but the
improvement also is his mere bounty. Of him, and through him, and for him, are
all things: to whom be glory, for ever, Amen. Romans 11. 35, 36.

And so much of the fourth means to grow rich.

CHAP. XXXII.
FIfthly, the next means, which God in his Word has appointed to this end, is
labor and industry in some lawful calling: for it is the beating of the brain,
or the sweating of the brow, not the bare talk of the lips, or desire of the
heart, that makes rich, according to the common Proverb, Wishers and woulders
are seldom or never good householders. The idle person, says Solomon, shall be
clothed with rags: and the sluggards poverty comes upon him, as an armed man;
but the hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. and 12, 27. The Greeks
have a saying, That plentifulness follows painfulness, and that all things are
made servants to care, and industry. Caius Furius, by his painful dexterity,
and unwearied labor, got more means out of one small field, then his neigbours
out of many great ones: whereupon he was accused to the Magistrate, as if by
witchcraft, he had conveyed the corn of other men's ground, into his own; but he
came with all his goodly rustical instruments, with his strong and lusty
daughter, and his well fed Oxen, and spoke thus to the Judges: See, my Lords,
these be my witchcrafts and sorceries; but I cannot show you my watchings and
sweatings; which being done and spoken, he was presently absolved by the
sentence of all. Whence the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, to labor in their
several callings, if they would have sufficient for themselves, and wherewith
to help others. And this makes Solomon, in praising the virtuous woman for her
bounty, note that she works willingly with her hands, and that her candle was
not put out by night, Prove. 31. 10, to 31. And Saint Luke the like of Dorcas,
her pains and industry in making coats and garments, Acts 9. 36, 39.

And what but Idleness makes so many beggars, and base persons? It is the most
corrupting Fly, that can blow in any humane mind: We learn to do ill, by doing
what is next it, nothing. Whence it is that vice so fructifies, in our Gentry
and Servingmen: who have nothing to employ themselves in, for they only sit to
eat and drink, lie down to sleep, and rise up to play; this is all their
business, and this brings thousands of them to beggary or worse.

Be therefore painful, and industrious in thy calling: and God will undoubtedly
prosper and replenish thee, with the good things of this life. This is another
step.

CHAP. XXXIII.
SIxthly, if thou would thrive and grow rich, then be frugal and thrifty in
spending: For thrift (which is a due saving from sinful, and needless expenses)
and a wary husbanding of what we get, has made as many rich men, as painful
getting.

It is our Saviors rule, so to dispose of that plenty which God in his
goodness has bestowed upon us, that nothing be lost. John 6. 12. And it is a
rule, which all good men will be sure to observe: For He who gets what he has
justly,
Pays what he owes duly,
Requites favors received thankfully,
Considers the case of the poor cordially,
Will not, yea dares not spend prodigally,
Let means come in never so plentifully.


And yet he of all men, is sure of a lasting competency, Prove. 28. 27. Jam. 4.
2, to 10.

Frugality, says Justine, is the mother of virtues. But an expensive man
(whatsoever his gettings be) by wasting, and overlashing of his estate is sure
not to thrive. As it fared with that Captain in Tully; who was not a penny the
richer, for that huge sum of money given him, because he had done with it, as
a naked man would do with the Nuts that he gathers; carry them all away in his
belly, for lack of pockets. And this the Poets insinuate, by their lusty Giant
Briarius: who had nothing to show, of all his comings in; because his fifty
bellies did consume the gettings of his hundred hands. All the labor of that
man or Monster, was for his mouth; and did slide through his throat. Devorat os
oris, quicquid lucratur os ossis.
To want and waste, differ but in time.


A poor man has no riches, a prodigal shall have none. The Vessel that runs
out unduly, will be empty, when men come to draw out of it: so will the state
be, if we let it leak like a cracked vessel: But what the difference is, betwixt
a wise and prudent frugality, and a vain expense of Gods benefits, we may learn
from, Genesis 42, etc. where notwithstanding the seven years of famine, Egypt had
corn enough, when all other Countries were without, and the people ready to
famish: which needed not have been, if they had been more sparing in the seven
plentiful years: for those years of plenty, were not confined to Egypt: other
Countries adjoining, were no less fruitful, as the Learned aver. But that
Prodigality has brought many rich men to poverty, and poor men to beggary, I
have sufficiently shown in the 17th. Chapter. And so much of the means, whereby
of poor a man may become rich: I come in the last place to show you, how you
may be happy, as well as rich, and cured of all your care, misery, and
melancholy: which is the principal thing I desire to pleasure you withal. For
millions there are that are mighty rich, and yet are the most miserable,
melancholy, and discontented men alive.

Here ends the First Part, the second follows.
Postscript to the Pleased.
ACcording to my skill, I have taught you to improve your estates: but as to
profit your souls, would more please me and pleasure you; so I have to that
end, taken the greater pains, in providing proper remedies (of the same alloy)
for each soul seduced, or afflicted. If such as they concern, shall be pleased
to make use of them; they may (with Gods blessing) not only have their vices
lessened, their knowledge increased, and their minds cheared and comforted:
but probably they shall find in them, the flower, cream, or quintessence, of
what would otherwise cost them twenty years reading to extract.

If you meet not with those little pieces, that are printed in this small
Character, at the Stationers: At James Crumps a Book-binder in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard, you may have them all; being in number two and twenty.


