THE TRIAL OF TRUE WISDOM; WITH How to become Wise indeed. OR, A Choice and
Cheap Gift for a Friend; both to please and pleasure him: Be he inferior or
superior, sinful or faithful, ignorant or intelligent.
By R. Young of Roxwel in Essex, Floreligus.

Add this as an Apendix, or Third Part, to The Hearts Index. And, A short and
sure way, to Grace and Salvation.

Section 41.
LUcian tells of an Egyptian King, who had Apes taught (when they were young)
to dance, and keep their postures with much art: these he would put into rich
Coats, and have them in some great presence to exercise their skill; which was
to the admiration of such as knew them not, what little sort of active, nimble
men the King had got: And such as knew them, thought it no less strange; that
they should be trained up to so man-like, and handsome a deportment. But a
subtle Fellow that was once admitted to see them, brought and threw amongst
them, a handful of Nuts: which they no sooner spied; but they presently left
off their dance, fell a scrambling, tore one another rich Coats; and to the
dirision of the beholders (who before admired them) they discovered themselves
to be mere Apes.

These ensuing Notions (which I have purposely taken, as a handful out of the
whole sack, to squander away amongst my acquaintance) are such Nuts, as will
discover not a few (who are men in appearance, and their own opinion) to be as
wise, and well affected as Aesops Cock; that preferred a barley Corn, before a
Pearl: or Plinies Moal, that would dig under ground with great dexterity: but
was blind, it brought into the Sun. Or Diaphontus, that refused his mothers
blessing, to hear a song: Or the Israelites, who preferred Garlic and Onions,
before Quails and manna.

Men no more differ from Beasts, Plants, Stones; in speech, reason, shape, than
some differ from others, in heart, in brain, in life. Whence the very heathen
Poets usually and most fitly compare some men to stones, for their hardness,
and insensibleness; others to plants, that only fill their veins; a third sort
to beasts, that please their senses too; a fourth to evil Angels, that only
sin, and cause others to sin; a fifth to good Angels, that are still in motion,
always serving God and doing good, yet ever rest.

Again, Experience teaches, that men's judgments and censures are as various,
as their pallats: For what one admires, another slights; as is evident by our
Saviors Auditors; of which some admired, others censured, a third sort wept, a
fourth scoft, a fifth trembled, a fixed blasphemed when they heard him. And how
should it be otherwise, when the greater part, are as deeply in love with vice
and error; as the rest are with virtue, and truth. When men's conditions, and
constitutions vary as much; as their faces. As the Holy Ghost intimates, in
comparing several men, to almost every several creature in the Universe. Nor is
the Epicure more like a swine, the Lustful person a Goat, the Fraudulent man a
Fox, the Backbiter a barking Dog, the Slanderer an Asp, the Oppressor a Wolf,
the Persecutor a Tiger, the Churchrobber a wild Bore, the Seducer a Serpent,
yea a Devil, the Traitor a Viper, etc. 2 Timothy 4 17. Luke 13. 32. Phil. 3. 2.
Psalm. 22. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21. and 74. 13, 14, 19. and 80. 13. Matthew. 23. 33.
Dan. 7. 4, 5, 6, etc. Zeph. 3. 3, 4, etc. Cant. 2. 15, 17, etc. then every of
them is unlike another.

Amidst such a world of variety, I have chosen to set forth, how one man
differs from, and excels another in brain, and to prove, that to be wise
indeed, is the portion but of a few, even amongst us. And this discovery alone
(as I deem) will be richly worth my pains, and each man's serious Observation.

Sect. 42.
NOw all sorts of men, may be comprised, under one of these three Heads: The
Sensual. Rational. Spiritual.


For if you observe it, some men like the Moon at Full, have all their light
toward earth, none toward Heaven: Others like the Moon at VVaine, or Change,
have all their light to Heaven wards, none to the earth: a third sort like to
the Moon in eclipse, as having no light in it self, neither toward earth, nor
toward Heaven.

Touching these three degrees of comparison, you shall find, that the one
exceeds the other (in wisdom) as the stars exceed one another in glory. Of
which particularly.

First, There is no less difference, between the Rational and sensual, the wise
and simple, the learned and unlearned, than there is between men and beasts; as
Menander speaks. Or between the living and the dead, as another has it. And
yet the Rational, do not so far excel the sensual, as the spiritual excel the
rational.

Sensual men are so be-nighted, and puzzled with blindness, that they know no
other way than the flesh leads them. It is the weight that sets all their
wheels a going; the horses that draw their chariot, the very life of their
corruption, the corruption of their life, without which they do nothing.

The minds of brutish men, that have been ill bred, are so drowned in sin, and
sensuallity; and their spirits so frozen, and pitifully benumed with
worldliness, and wicked customs, that they cannot judge aright, either of
spiritual matters, or rectified reason. Yea, in matters experimental, they are
of as deep a judgment as was Callico, who stuffed his pillow (a brass pot) with
straw, to make it soft. Or that Germain Clow^, who under-took to be very ready
in the ten Commandments: but being demanded by the Minister which was the
first? made answer, Thou shall not eat. Or that simple fellow, who thought
Pontius Pilate must needs be a Saint, because his name was put into the Creed.
They are like the Ostrich, Job 9. 17. whom God has deprived of wisdom, and to
whom he has given no part of understanding.

Which men also, are so far from receiving instruction, that they will scorn
and scoff at their admonisher. As they have no reason, so they will hear none.
Nor will they believe any thing, but what they see, or feell: and he that
learns of none but himself, has a fool to his t^acher. Yea, such as refuse
admonition, are by wise Solomon branded, for the most incorigible Fools alive;
so that their knowledge is ignorance, their wisdom folly, their sight
blindness. They neither consider what reason speaks, or Religion commands;
but what the will and appetite affects. For will is the axeltree, lusts and
passions the wheels whereupon all their actions are carried and do run.
Appetite being their Lord, Reason their servant, and Religion their slave.
Whereas Religion should govern their judgment, judgment and reason their wills
and affections; as Adam should have done Eve. They that are after the flesh, do
mind the things of the flesh: The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 5. to 9. And
which leaves them without all hope of being wiser, they had rather keep
conscience blind, that it may flatter them, than inform it, that it may give a
just verdict against them, counting it less trouble, to believe a favorable
falsehood, than to examine whether it be true. So that it is impossible for
fleshly minded men, to believe what sots they are, touching the good of their
souls. Wherefore when we see the folly, and misery of those that serve sin and
Satan, and how peevishly averse they are to their own eternal salvation, let us
pity them, as being so much more worthy our commiseration, as they are more
incapable of their own misery. And so much of the First sort, namely,
Sensuallists.

Sect. 43.
SEcondly, There is another degree of Knowledge, that is accrued or obtained,
by education and learning, observation and experience, called natural or
speculative knowledge, or reason improved. For humane learning, is as oil to
the lamp of our reason, and makes it burn cleerer: but faith and illumination
of the spirit, more than doubles the sight of our minds; as a prospective glass
does the corporal sight, Matthew. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 7. to 17. Joh. 12. 46. For as
the soul is the lamp of the body, and reason of the soul, and religion of
reason, and faith of religion: so Christ is the light, and life of Faith, Joh.
1. 9. and 8. 12. Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 14. Christ is the sun of the soul; reason
and faith the two eyes: reason discerns natural objects, faith spiritual and
supernatural. We may see far with our bodily eye sense, farther with the minds
eye reason; but farther with the souls eye faith than with both. And the
Believer has the addition of Gods spirit, and faith above all other men. I am
the light of the world, says our Savior, he that follows me (meaning by a
lively faith) shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life,
Joh. 8. 12. and more see two eyes than one: yea, the day with one eye, does far
more things descry, than night can do with more than Argos eyes. So that as
mere sense is incapable of the rules of reason; so reason is no less incapable,
of the things that are divine and supernatural, Jer. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15,
16. Ephesians. 5. 8. And as to speak is only proper to men: so to know the secrets of
the kingdom of heaven, is only propper to believers, Psalm. 25. 14. Prove. 3. 32.
Amos. 3. 7.

Now of natural and speculative knowledge, the wicked have as large a share as
the godly: but of spiritual, experimental, and saving knowledge which is
supernatural, and descends from above, Jam. 3. 17. and keeps a man from
every evil way, Prove. 2. 12. the wicked have no part with the godly. Whence all
men in their natural condition are said to be blind and in darkness, Matthew. 4.
16. and 15. 14. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. and 5. 8. Whereas believers, are called
children of light, and of the day, 1 These. 5. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Nor is this kind of knowledge, any way attainable, but by Grace from above. No
learning, experience, or pains in studdy and Books, will bring them to it,
Ephe. 1. 17, 18. and 3. 19. except they become new creatures, have hearts,
eyes, and ears sanctified from above; and that the holy Ghost becomes their
teacher, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 111. 10. Joh. ^^. 15. Romans 8. 14, 15.

Nor is it saving knowledge that they seek after: For though many of them, be
great seekers after knowledge, great pains-takers to become wise: yet it is not
divine and supernatural knowledge, that they labor for, or desire.

Indeed wisdom in the largest sense, has ever carried that show of excellency
with it, that not only the good have highly affected it, (as Moses who studied
for wisdom; and Solomon who prayed for wisdom; and the Queen of Sheba who
traveled for wisdom; and David who to get wisdom, made the word his
counselor, hated every false way, and was a man after Gods own heart) but the
very wicked have labored for it, who are ashamed of other virtues; as, O the
pleasure that rational men take in it! Prove. 2. 3, 10, 11. and 10. 14. Phil. 3.
8.

Knowledge is so fair a virgin, that every clear eye is in love with her; it is
a pearl despised of none but swine, Prove. 2. 3. 10. 11. (whereas brutish and
blockish men, as little regard it) they who care not for one dram of goodness,
would yet have a full scale of knowledge. Amongst all the trees of the garden,
none so pleases them as the tree of knowledge. And as wisdom is excellent
above all, so it is affected of all, as oil was both of the wise and foolish
virgins. It has been a mark that every man has shot at, ever since Eve sought
to be as wise as her Maker: but as a hundredth shoot, for one that hitts the
white: so an hundred aim at wisdom, for one that lights upon it, Eccles. 7. 28.
because they are mistaken in the thing. For as Jacob in the dark mistook Leah
for Rachael, so many a blind soul, takes that to be wisdom, which is not like
Eve, who thought it wisdom to eat the forbidden fruit, and Absalom, who
thought it wisdom to lie with his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all the
people; and the false Steward, who thought it wisdom to deceive his Master. And
so of Joseph's brethren, of Pharaoh and his deep counselors, of Achitophel, of
Herod, of the Pharisees in their project to destroy Jesus; and many the like.
All these thought they did wisely, but they were mistaken, and their projects
proved foolish, and turned to their own ruin.

Sect. 44.
BUt take some Instances, to prove that all sorts of Naturians are Fools, in
comparrison of the Godly. I Will begin with those that rep^^e themselves, and are
reputed by others, the wisest amongst men: And they are your profound
Humanists, and cunning Politicians, wherein you shall see, whether the most and
greatest number are not grossly mistaken, in their opinions and verdicts
touching Wisdom.

First for profound Hamanists, a man would think that they were incomparably
wise; for none so thirst after knowledge and wisdom as they; and to get it they
are no niggards of their labor: nor do they leave any thing unstudied but
themselves. They know all parts and places of the created world, can discourse
of every thing visible and invisible, divine, humane and mundane; whether it be
meant of substances or accidents, are ignorant of nothing but the way to
heaven, are acquainted with all Laws and customs, save the Law of God, and
customs of Christianity; they are strangers no where but in the court of their
own consciences: Yea, they build as hard, and erect as high as did the
Babel-builders; but all to no purpose: they never come to the roof, and when
they die they are undone. They spend all their time in seeking after wisdom; as
Alchimists spend all their estates, to find out the Philosophers stone; but
never find it; they never attain to that, which is true wisdom indeed. For as
the ragged Poet told Petronius, that Poetry was a kind of learning, that never
made any man rich: so humane learning of it self, never made a wise man.

As thus (if I may be so bold) what is it, or what does it profit a man, to
have the etymology, and derivation of wisdom and knowledge, without being
affected with that, which is true wisdom indeed to be able to decline virtue,
yet not love it? to have the theory, and be able to prattle of wisdom by rote;
yet not know what it is by effect and experience? To have as expert a tongue,
and as quick a memory as Portius; a perfect understanding, great science,
profound eloquence, a sweet style? To have the force of Demosthenes, the depth
of Thesius, the persuasive art of Tully, etc. if withal he wants Grace, and
lives remissely? With the Astronomer, to observe the motions of the heavens;
while his heart is buried in the earth? to search out the cause of many
effects, and let pass the consideration of the principal, and most necessary?
With the Historian, to know what others have done, and how they have sped;
while he neglects the imitation of such, as are gone the right way? With the
Lawmakers, to set down many Laws in particular, and not to remember the common
Law of nature, or Law general that all must die? Or lastly, with Adam to know
the Nature of all the Creatures: and with Solomon to be able to dispute of
every thing, even from the Cedar to the Hyssop or Pellitory; when in the mean
time he lives like Dives, dies like Naba^^ and after all goes to his own place
with Judas? Alas! many a Fool goes to hell with less cost, less pains, and far
more quiet: that is but raw knowledge, which is not digested into practice: It
is not worth the ^^me of knowledge, that may be heard only and not seen, Ioh.
13. 17 (...). 4. 6. Good discourse is but the froth of wisdom: the sweet and
(...) of it, is in well framed actions: that is true knowledge, that makes the
knower blessed. We only praise that Mariner, that brings the (...) safe to the
haven.

What says Aristotle? to be wise and happy are terms reciprocal. And Socrates,
that learning, says he, pleases me but a little, which nothing profits the
owner of it, either to virtue, or happiness: And being demanded, Who was the
wisest and happiest man? He Answered, He that offends least. He is the best
scholar, that learns of Christ obedience, humility, etc. He is the best
Arithmetitian, that can add grace to grace; he is the best learned, that knows
how to be saved. Yea, all the Arts in the world, are artless Arts to this.

Sect. 45.
THe best knowledge is about the best things; and the perfection of all
knowledge, to know God, and our selves: Knowledge and learning, says
Aristotle, consists not so much in the quantity, as in the quality; not in
the greatness, but in the goodness of it. A little gold (we know) is more worth
than much dross: a little diamond, than a rocky mountain. So one drop of
wisdom, guided by the fear of God; one spark of spiritual, experimental, and
saving knowledge, is more worth than all humane wisdom and learning: yea, one
scruple of holiness, one dram of faith, one grain of grace, is more worth than
many pounds, of natural parts. And indeed Faith, and Holiness, are the nerves,
and sinews; yea, the soul of saving knowledge.

What says Aristotle? No more than the knowledge of goodness, makes one to be
named a good man; no more does the knowledge of wisdom alone, cause any person
properly to be called a wise man. Saving knowledge of the truth, works a love
of the truth known: yea it is a uniform consent, of knowledge and action. He
only is wise, that is wise for his own soul: he whose conscience pulls all he
hears, and reads to his heart, and his heart to God: who turns his knowledge
to faith, his faith to feeling, and all to walk worthy of his Redeemer. He that
subdues his sensual desires and appetite, to the more noble faculties of
reason, and understanding; and makes that understanding of his to serve him, by
whom it is, and does understand. He that subdues his lusts to his will, submits
his will to reason; his reason to faith; his faith, his reason, his will,
himself to the will of God: this is practical, experimental, and saving
knowledge; to which the other is but a bare name, or title. A competnet estate
(we know) well husbanded, is better than a vast patrimony neglected. Never any
mere man (since the first) knew so much as Solomon: many that have known less,
have had more command of themselves.

Alas! they are not always the wisest, that know most: For none more wise and
learned in the worlds account, than the Scribes and Pharisees: yet Christ calls
them four times blind, and twice fools in one chapter, Matthew. 23. And the like
of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2. 16. who had such a prophetical knowledge, that scarce any
of the Prophets, had a cleerer revelation of the Messiah to come. And the same
may be affirmed of Judas, and Achitophel; for many that know a great deal less,
are far wiser. Yea, one poor crucified thief, being converted, in an hours
time, had more true wisdom and knowledge infused into him, than had all the
Rulers, Scribes, and Pharisees.

It is very observable, what the High Priest told the Council, as they were set
to condemn Christ; Ye know nothing at all: he spoke truer than he meant it;
for if we know not the Lord Jesus, our knowledge is either nothing, or nothing
worth. Rightly a man knows no more than he practices. It is said of Christ, 2
Cor. 5. 21. that he knew no sin; because he did no sin; in which sense, he
knows no good, that does no good. These things if ye know (says our Savior)
happy are ye, if ye do them, Joh. 13. 17. And in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep the
commandments of God, and do them: for this is your wisdom, and understanding
before God, and man.

What is the notional sweetness of Honey, to the experimental taste of it? It
is one thing to know what riches are, and another thing to be Master of them:
It is not the knowing, but the possessing of them that makes rich. Many have a
depth of knowledge, and yet are not soul-wise; have a liberary of divinity in
their heads, not so much as the least Catechism in their consciences; full
brains, empty hearts. Yea, you shall hear a flood in the tongue, when you
cannot see one drop in the life. Insomuch, that in the midst of our so much
light, and means of Grace, there be few I fear, that have the sound, and saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified, which was the only care, and
study of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

Sect. 46.
ANd that I am not mistaken, the effect shows: For if men knew either God, or
Christ, they could not but love him; and loveing him, they would keep his
commandments, Ioh. 14. 15. For hereby (says St. John) It is manifest that we
know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 John 2. 3. But he that says, I know
him, and yet keeps not his commandments is a liar, and there is no truth in
him, ver. 4. What says our Savior? This is life eternal to know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3. But how shall a man
know, whether he has this knowledge? Answ. St. John tells you in those last
words mentioned, and so plainly, that you cannot be deceived, except you desire
to deceive your own soul.

The knowledge of God that saves us, is more than a bare apprehension of him;
it knows his power, and therefore fears him; knows his justice, and therefore
serves him; knows his mercy, and therefore trusts him; knows his goodness, and
therefore loves him, etc. For he that has the saving knowledge of God, or of
Christ, has every other Grace: There is a sweet correspondence between every
one, where there is any one in truth: As in the generation, the head is not
without the body, nor the body without each member, nor the soul without its
powers and faculties; so in the regeneration, where there is any one grace in
truth, there is every one, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If you will see it in particulars,
read Psa. 9. 10. Jer. 9. 24. 1 John 4. 6. Joh. 4. 10. 1 John 4. 7, 8. and 2. 3.
Joh 42. 5, 6. 1 Ioh. 4. 7. which Scriptures show, that as feeling is
inseparable to all the organs of sense; the eye sees and feels, the ear hears
and feels, the pallat tastes and feels, the nostrils smell and feel; so
knowledge is involved in every grace: Faith knows and believes, Charity knows
and loves, Patience knows and suffers, Temperance knows and abstains, Humility
knows and stoops, Repentance knows and mourns, Obedience knows and does,
Confidence knows and rejoices, Hope knows and expects, Compassion knows and
pities. Yea, as there is a power of water in every thing that grows; it is
fatness in the olive, sweetness in the figg, cheerfulness in the grape,
strength in the oak, taleness in the cedar, redness in the rose, whiteness in
the lilly, etc. so knowledge is in the hand obedience, in the mouth
benediction, in the knee humility, in the eye compassion, in the heart charity,
in the whole body and soul, piety.

Alas! If men had the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, it would disperse and
dispel, all the black clouds of their reigning sins in a moment; as the Sun
does no sooner show his face, but the darkness vanishes: or as Caesar did no
sooner look upon his enemies, but they were gone: Egypt swarmed with locusts,
till the west wind came, that left not one: He cannot delight in sin, nor dote
upon this world, that knows Christ savingly.

Virtue is ordained a wife for knowledge; and where these two join, there will
proceed from them a noble progine, a generation of good works. Again, as the
water engendereth ice, and the ice again engendereth water; so knowledge begets
righteousness, and righteousness again begets knowledge. It is between
science and conscience, as it is between the stomach and the head; for as in
man's body, the raw stomach makes a thumatick head, and the thumatick head
makes a raw stomach; so science makes our conscience good, and conscience
makes our science good: Nor is it so much scientiae capitis, as conscientia
cordis, that knows Christ and ourselves; whence Solomon says, Give thine heart
to wisdom, Prove. 2. 10. and let wisdom enter into thine heart, Prove. 4. 4. And
when he would acquaint us how to become wise, he tells us, that the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1. 7. as if the first lesson to be wise,
were to be holy. Again, If it be asked, Why the natural man perceives not the
things of the spirit of God? Saint Paul answers, he cannot know them, because
they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14 and indeed if they are spiritually
discerned, how should they descern them that have not the spirit? For though
the outward man receives the elements and rudiments of Religion by breeding and
education, yet his inward man receives them by heavenly inspiration, 1 (...)
2. 11, 12, 13. and 12. 3. 8. Matthew. 16. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 29 2, 3, 4, Psa. 111. 10.
Luke 24. 45. Ioh. 15. 15. And this alone is enough to prove, that no wicked man
is a wise man; for if God alone be the giver of it, we may be sure that he will
reveal his secrets to none but such as he knows will improve their knowledge to
his glory, and the good of others: Even as the husband man will not cast his
seed but into ground that will return him a good harvest, Psa. 25. 14. Luke 24.
45. Mark 4. 34. Genesis 18. 17. 1 John 4. 7.

Sect. 47.
BUt would these men (any one, even the best of them) thus improve, or employ
their knowledge? Or do they desire it to any such end? No: but to some other
end, as I shall in the next place acquaint you.

Some men desire not to know, some desire only to know; Or rather thus, Few men
in comparison desire knowledge, fewer that desire divine and supernatural
knowledge; fewest of all that desire to be the better, or that others should be
the better for their knowledge: More particularly, a world of men desire
knowledge for no other end but to remove their ignorance; as Pharach used Moses,
but to remove the plagues. Others again study the Scriptures, and other good
Books, only to make gain thereof; or to be the abler to dispute and discourse,
as boys go into the water, only to play and paddle there, not to wash and be
clean. With Eve, they highly desire the tree of knowledge, but regard not the
tree of life.

As I would fain know, what fruit or effect the knowledge of most men produces
in them, except it be to enable them to dispute and discourse, to increase wit,
or to increase wealth, or to increase pride, or perhaps to increase Athiesm,
and to make them the more able and cunning to argue against the truth and power
of Religion? Whether the utmost of their aim be not to enrich, dignifie, and
please themselves; not once casting the eye of their souls at Gods glory, their
neighbors good, or their own salvation? Whether their main drift be not
purchasing of a great estate for them and theirs, with out either fear of God,
regard of men, or the discharge of their duty and calling? Again, whereas a
godly man and a good Christian, thinks himself as happy in giving light to
others, as in receiving it himself; how many are there, who as themselves are
never the better, (I mean in regard of Grace) for their great wisdom and
learning, so no more are others; for commonly they resemble dark Lanthorns
which have light, but so shut up and reserved as if it were not: and what is
the difference betwixt concealed skill, and ignorance; It is the nature and
praise of good, to be communicative, whereas if their hidden knowledge do ever
look out, it casts so sparing a light, that it only argues it self to have an
unprofitable being.

And for the most part these men if they may be thought great Rabbis, deep and
profound Scholars; this is the hight of their ambition, though neither the
Church be benefited, nor God glorified by it; whereas they ought the contrary:
for as the grace of God is the fountain from which our wisdom flows; so the
glory of God should be the Ocean to which it should run: yea, that God may be
honored with, and by our wisdom, is the only end for which he gives us to be
(...): And for default of this end, he not seldom croffeth the mean^, whereby
while men strive to expel ignorance, they fall into (...); as an E^^^^rick to
cure one Disease, causes a worse. Briefly, to conclude this (...), So many as
are pust up with their knowledge, or do not part with their sins, th^w that
they never sought it for Gods glory, but for their own honor and glory. And
certainly if we seek not Gods glory in doing his work, he will give us no wages
at the latter end.

Sect. 48.
BUt for men to do no good with then gifts, is not all; yea, it were well if
that were the worst, for not a few of them resembl Achitophel, and Jonadab, who
employed their wit wickedly, and do mischief instead of good with their wisdom:
like Herod, when you shall see turning over the Bible, searching the
Scriptures, examining the Prophets; but to what end and purpose? To know good,
but to do evil: yea, the greatest evil under the Sun, slay Christ in the
cradle: With many, their knowledge and learning is not for God and for Gideon;
but for Antichrist and for Babylon; and so of all other gifts; how many are the
worse for them? As give Saul a Kingdom, and he will tyrannize; give Nabal
plenty, and he will be drunk; give Judas an Apostleship, and he will sell his
Master for money; let Sarmantus have a good wit, he will exercise it in scoffing
at holiness. Briefly, how often does wisdom without grace prove like a fair
estate in the hands of a sool, which not seldom becomes the owners ruin? Or
Absoloms hair, which was an ornament, wherewith he hanged himself: So that
wisdom without grace is nothing else but a cunning way of undoing our selves at
the last. Many men's knowledge to them, being like the Ark to the Philistims,
which did them more hurt than good: When their knowledge makes them prouder,
not better; more rebellious, not more serviceable; as it is Isa. 47. 10. Thy
wisdom and thy knowledge they have caused thee to rebel: And very often this
falls out, that as the best soil usually yields the worst air, so without
grace there is nothing more pestilent than a deep wit, no such prey for the
Devil, as a good wit unsanctified. Wit and Iearning well used, is like the
golden earrings and bracelets of the Israelites, abused like the same gold
cast into an Idol; than which, nothing more abominable.

Now when it comes to this, That they fight against God with the weapon he has
given them; when with those the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 73. 9. They set their
mouths against heaven, and are like an unruly Jade, that being full fed kicks
at his Master; what course does the Lord take with them? Answ. Read but that
Parable, Luk 19. 24. Job 7. 17. it will inform you: For to him that uses his
Talent of knowledge well, he gives more; as to the servant that used his
talents well, he doubled them: but to them that use not their knowledge well,
much more if they abuse it, he takes away that which he had formerly given
them: as he took heat from the fire when it would burn his Children, Dan. 3.
27. As you (...), Isa. 44. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Job. 7. 17. Psa. 111.
10. 1 Cor. (...) 15. Eccles. 2. 26. Prove. 28 5. Matthew. 21. 43. Acts 26. 18 Isa.
29 14. and 44 25. and 6. 9, 10. Dan. 2. 19. 23. Job 5. 13, 14. Job 9. 39. and
12. 40. Romans 1. 28. Ephe. 4. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 20. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. turn
to the places, for they are rare. I will destory the Tokens of the Soothsayers,
and make them that conjecture, fools: I will turn the wise men backward, and
make their knowledge foolishness, says the Lord, Isa. 44. 25. He takes the
wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish,
Job. 5. 13. the case of Achitophel: And justly are they forsaken of their
reason, who have abandoned God; yea, most just it is, that they who want grace,
should want wit too. And so much of abusing their gifts.

Lastly, These great knowers and wise men are so far from desiring soul wisdom,
and saving-knowledge to the ends before specified, that they do not at all
desire it, for that it suits not with their condition. For Naturalmen desire
only humane and mundane knowledge: Spiritual men, that which is heavenly and
supernatural; and the reason why they desire it not, is, for that they know it
not. A man desires not that he knows not, says Chrysostom; neither are
unknown evils feared: wherefore the work of Regeneration begins at
Illumination, Acts 26. 18. Coll. 1. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Now according as men are wise, they prize and value this wisdom, and endeavor
to obtain it, Prove. 18. 15. For it is more true of divine wisdom, than it was
of that Grecian beauty: No man ever loved her, that never saw her; no man ever
saw her, but he loved her.

And so on the contrary, according as men are ignorant and blockish, they
under-value and dis-esteem it, hate it, and are prejudiced against it: And
hereupon carnal men being blinded by the Prince of darkness, together with
their own wickedness, and being of a reprobate judgment, do most usually and
familiarly term and esteem this soul-wisdom, this divine, spiritual,
experimental, and saving-knowledge to be mere foolishness, or madness, Wisd. 5.
3. to 9. and the Professors thereof to be fools and madmen; Elisha was counted
no better, 2 King. 9. 11. and the rest of the Prophets, Hosea 9. 7. and Paul,
Acts 26. 20. and all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. 10. Yea, our Savior Christ
himself with open mouth was pronounced mad by his carnal hearers, Joh. 10. 20.
Mark. 3. 21. and this has been the worlds vote ever since. The sinceer
Christian was so reputed in Pliny's time, and after in St. Austin's time: yea,
Julian the Pelagian could gibe St. Austin, that he had none of the wise Sages,
nor the learned Senate of Philosophers on his side; but only a company of mean
tradesmen, of the vulgar sort, that took part with him: Whose Answer was, Thou
reproachest the weak things of the world, which God has chosen to confound the
things that are mighty.

To worldly men Christian wisdom seems solly, says Gregory. And well it may,
for even the wisdom of God is foolishness with the world, 1 Cor. 1. 18 23.
therefore no disparagement to us his servants, if they repute us fools; nor I
think any honor to such sensualists that so repute us: However we will give
them their due: For,

Sect. 49.
I Grant that in some kind of skill they outstrip the best of Gods People,
who, if they are put to it, may answer as Themistocles did when one invited him
to touch a lute; for as he said, I cannot fiddle; but I can make a small town a
great state: So the godly may say, We cannot give a sollid reason in Nature,
why Nilus should overflow only in the Summer, when waters are at the lowest?
Why the Loadstone should draw iron, or incline to the pole star? How the heat
of the stomach, and the strength of the nether chap should be so great? Why a
flash of lightening should melt the sword without making any impression in the
scabbard? Kill the Child in the womb, and never hurt the Mother? How the waters
should stand upon a heap, and yet not overflow the earth? Why the clouds above
being heavy with water, should not fall to the earth suddenly, seeing every
heavy thing descends? Except the reason which God gives, Genesis 1. 6. and Job
38 8. to 12. and 26. 8. Psalm. 104. 9. But we know the mystery of the Gospel,
and what it is to be born a new, and can give a sollid reason of our faith: we
know that God is reconciled to us, the Law satisfied for us, our sins pardoned,
our souls acquitted, and that we are in favor with God; which many of these
with their great learning do not know. And thus the godly are proved wiser than
the wisest humanist that wants grace. You have likewise the reasons why these
great knowers, know nothing yet as they might and ought to know: that is to say,

First, Because they are mistaken in the thing; they take speculative knowledge
for soul wisdom; and soul saving wisdom to be foolishness and madness. Now if a
man take his aim amiss, he may shoot long enough ere he hit the white: and
these men are as one that is gone a good part of his journey, but must come
back again because he has mistaken his way.

Secondly, Because they are Unregenerate, and want the Eye of Faith.

Thirdly, For that they seek not to God for it who is the giver thereof, and
without whose spirit there is no attaining it.

Fourthly, Because they are proud, and so seek not after it, as supposing they
have it already.

Fifthly, Because if they had never so much knowledge, they would be never the
holier, or the better for it, but rather the worse; nor would they employ it to
the honor of God, or the good of others.

Sixthly, Because they either do, or would do mischief instead of good with
their knowledge.

Seventhly, Because they will not consult with the word about it, nor advise
with others that have already attained to it. Or thus, They read and hear the
Scriptures and mind not, (I mean the spirituallity of the word) or mind and
understand not, or understand and remember not, or remember and practice not.
No, this they intend not of all the rest; and they that are unwilling to obey,
God thinks unvvorthy to know.

When the Serpent taught knowledge, he said, If ye eat the forbidden fruit,
your eyes shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil: But God teaches
another lesson, and says, If ye will not eat the forbidden fruit, your eyes
shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil, Romans 12. 2. See Psa. 111.
10. and 119. 97, 98, 99, 100. Or if you do eat it, you shall be like images
that have ears and cannot hear, Romans 11. 8. Isa. 6. 10. Matthew. 13. 14. Psalm.
115. 6.

From all which Reasons we may collect, That there are but a few amongst us,
that are wise indeed, and to purpose; For these Seven Hindrances are applyable
to seventy seven parts of men in the Nation. Besides, if these great knowers
know so little, how ignorant are the rude rabble, that despise all knowledge?
Nor can it be denied but all impenitent persons, all unbelievers (who prefer
their profits and pleasures before pleasing of God; as Herodias prefered John
Baptists head before the one half of Herod's kingdom,) are arrant fools; yea,
fools in folio: For if they were wise, says Bernard, they would foresee the
torments of Hell, and prevent them.

And so wise are the godly, for they prefer grace, and glory, and Gods favor,
before ten thousand worlds.

Sect. 50.
OBject. But here thou will say, (or at least thou have reason to say) if there
be so few that are soul-wise, I have all the reason in the world to mistrust my
self; wherefore good Sir, tell me how I shall be able to get ihis spiritual and
experimental knowledge? this divine and supernatural wisdom?

Answ. By observing these Five Rules:

First, Let such a willing and ingenuous soul, resolve to practice what he does
already know, or shall hereafter be acquainted with from the word of God and
Christ's faithful Messengers: For he that will do my Fathers will, says our
Savior, shall know the doctrine, whether it be of God orno, Joh. 7. 17. A good
understanding have all they that keep the commandments, (says holy David)
Psalm. 111. 10. and proves it true by his own example and experience: I
understood (says he) more than the Ancient, and became wiser than my teachers,
because I kept thy precepts, Psalm. 119. 97, 98, 99, 100. To a man that is good
in his sight, God gives knowledge and wisdom, Eccles. 2. 26. The spiritual man
understands all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. Wicked men understand not judgment,
but they that seek the Lord, understand all things, Prove. 28. 5. Admirable
encouragements for men to become godly and conscientious; I mean practical
Christians.

Secondly, If thou would get this precious grace of saving knowledge; the
way is, to be frequent in hearing the word preached, and to become studious in
the Scriptures, for they and they alone make wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Ye err (says our Savior) not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22. 29. Mark 12.
24. We must not in the search of heavenly matters, either do as we see others
do; neither must we follow the blind guide carnal reason, or the deceitful
guide our corrupt hearts; but the undeceivable, and infallable guide of Gods
word which is truth it self: and great need there is; for as we cannot perceive
the foulness of our faces unless it be told us, or we take a glass and look our
selves therein: so neither can we see the blemishes of our Souls, which is a
notable degree of spiritual Wisdom, but either God must make it known to us by
his spirit, or we must collect the same out of the Scriptures, that celestial
glass; though this also must be done by the spirits help. Therefore

Thirdly, If thou will be Soul-wise and truly profit by studying the
Scriptures, be frequent and fervent in Prayer to God who is the only giver of
it, for the direction of his holy spirit: For first, humble and faithful
Prayer, ushered in by meditation, is the cure of al obscurity. Especially being
accompanied with fervor and fervency; as you may see, Matthew. 21. 22. If any
lack wisdom, says St. James, let him ask of God who gives to al men liberally
and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1. 5. Mark the words, it
is said if any; wherefore let no man deny his soul this comfort. Again, ask and
have; It cannot come upon easier terms. Yea, God seems to like this suit so
well in Solomon, as if he were beholding to his Creature, for wishing well to
it self. And in vain do we expect that alms of grace, for which we do not so
much as beg. But in praying for Wisdom, do not pray for it without putting
difference; desire not so much brain-knowledg as to be Soulwise, and then you
will employ your wisdom to the glory of the giver. Let thine hearts desire be
to know God in Christ, Christ in Faith, Faith in good works; to know Gods will
that thou may do it; and before the knowledge of all other things, desire to
know thy self; and in thy self, not so much thy strength, as thy weakness:
Pray that thine heart may serve thee instead of a commentary, to help thee
understand such points of Religion as are most needful and necessary, and that
thy Life may be an ^^^^sition of thy inward man, that there may be a sweet
harmony betwixt Gods Word, thy judgment, and whole conversation, that what
the natural man knows by roat, thou may double by feeling the same in thine
heart and affections. As indeed experimental and saving knowledge is no less
felt than known; and, I cannot tell how, comes rather out of the abundance of
the heart, than by extreme study; or rather is sent by God unto good men, like
the Ram that was brought to Abraham when he would have Sacrificed his son
Isaak. When Christ taught in the Temple, they asked, How knovveth this man the
Scriptures, seeing he never learned them? So it is a wonder what learning some
men have, that have no learning! Like Prisilla and Aquila, poor Tent-makers,
who were able to school Apollos that great Clerk, a man renowned for his
learning: What can we say to it? For no other reason can be given but as Christ
said, Father so it pleases thee: For as Jacob said of his venison, when his
Father asked how he came by it so suddenly? Because the Lord thy God brought it
suddenly to my hands. So holy and righteous men do more easily understand the
words of God, than do the wicked, because God brings the meaning suddenly to
their hearts; as we read, Luke 24. That Christ (standing in the midst of his
Apostles after he was risen from the dead) opened their understandings, that
they might understand clearly the Scriptures, and what was written of him in
the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, verse. 44. 45. Lo how
suddenly their knowledge came unto them! But see what a general promise (God in
the Person of wisdom) hatth made to all that serve him, Prove. 1. Turn you at my
reproof, and behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, and make known my words
unto you, verse. 23. And Psalm. 25. The secrets of the Lord are revealed to them
that fear him, and his covenant is to give them understanding, verse 14. These
secrets are hid from the wicked, neither has he made any such covenant with
them but the contrary: As see, Dan. 12. 10. Unto you it is given to know the
secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to others in Parrables, that they seeing
should not see, and hearing they should not understand, Luke 8. 10: Mark: 3:
11: Matthew: 13: 13:

Again, It is not enough to pray, except also it be in Christ's name, and
accrding to his will, believing to be heard for his sake, and that it be the
intercession of Gods own spirit in you: And (being truly sensible of your sins
and wants) that you chiefly pray for the pardon of sin, the effusion of
grace, and for the assistance of Gods Spirit: that you may more firmly believe,
more soundly repent, more zealously do, more patiently suffer, and more
constantly persevere in the practice and profession of every duty.

But above all you must know, that as Sampsons companions, could never have
found out his Riddle, if they had not plowed with his heifer: so no man can
know the secrets of God, but by the revelation of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 8.
Mat. 16. 17. Yea, suppose a man be not inferior to Portius, or Pythagoras, who
kept all things in memory, that ever they had read, heard, or seen: To Virgil,
of whom it is reported, that if all Sciences were lost, they might be found
again in him: To Aben Ezra, of whom it was said, that if Knowledge had put out
her candle, at his brain she might light it again; and that his head was a
throne of wisdom: or Josephus Scaliger, who was skilled in thirty Languages:
Yet if he want the Spirit of God to be his teacher, he is a dunce to the
meanest, and most illiterate believer. For one excellent, and necessary
prerogative of the spiritual man is this; he has God for his teacher; he
learns the Counsels of God, of that spirit which only knows Gods counsels,
Luke 21. 15. which is no small privilege: for the scholar learns quickly, when
the Holy Ghost is his teacher; the Eye sees distinctly, when the Holy Ghost
does enlighten it. With the Spirits help, the means can never be too weak:
without, never strong enough, Luke 24. 44, 45. Pro. 1. 23.

51.
Fourthly, Thou must get an humble conceit of thine own wisdom. The first step
to knowledge, is to know our own ignorance. We must become fools in our own
opinion, before we can be truly wise, as the Apostle sets it down, 1 Cor. 3.
18. And indeed, the opinion of our knowing enough, is one of the greatest
causes of our knowing so little: For what we presume to have attained, we seek
not after. Yea, the very first lesson of a Christian is humility. He will teach
the humble his way, Psalm. 25. 9. Jam. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. And he that has not
learned the first lesson, is not fit to take out a new. Pride is a great let to
true wisdom: For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, Jam.
4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Whence it comes to pass, that few proud wits are reformed,
John 9. 39. And for this cause also did our Savior propound his woes to the
Pharisees, his doctrines to the People.

A heart full of pride, is like a vessel full of air: This self opinion must
be blown out of us, before saving knowledge will be poured into us. Christ will
know none but the humble, and none but humble souls truly know Christ.

Now the way to become humble, is, by taking a serious view of our wants. The
Peacocks pride is much abated, when she looks on the blackness of her legs and
feet. Now suppose we know never so much; yet that which we know, is far less
then that which we are ignorant of: and the more we know, the more we know we
want, Pro. 1. 5, 7. Psalm. 73. 22. And the lesle sensible we are of our
blindness, sickness, deformity, etc. the more blind, sick, and deformed we
are.

Fifthly, Thou must labor to get a true and lively faith: For as without faith
we cannot please God: so without faith, no man can know God. Faith most clearly
beholds those things which are hid both from the eye of sense, and the eye of
reason, John 12. 46. Unregenerate men, that waht faith, are like blind Sampson
without his guide: Or like Poliphemus, who never had but one eye, and that
Ulysses put out. For so does the pleasure and custom of sin blind the
Sensuallist.

We must have minds lifted above nature, to see and love things above nature:
heavenly wisdom, to see heavenly truth; or else that truth which is saving,
will be to us a mystery, Mark. 4. 11. If it seem not foolishness, 1 Cor. 2. 7,
8, 14. To them that are lost, the Gospel is hid, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Whereas the
Believer discerns all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 12.
15, 16. Yea, God Gives him a mouth and wisdom, where against all his
adversaries, shall not be able to speak or resist, Luke 21. 15. These are the
five steps, which lead up to the palace of wisdom, which all must ascend by,
that mean to enter. If you have once attained this precious grace of saving
knowledge, you will as much as in you lies, employ the same to the glory of the
giver, And so much to prove, that he is the wisest man, whose knowledge lies in
the best things, (as the weaker vessel may hold the better liquor) and that if
men be never so learned, except they have learned the Mystery of the Gospel,
and what it is to be borne again by their own experience, (which few with their
great learning do indeed know) they are in Gods account, no better then fools.
I come now to prove, that the greatest Politician is a verier fool then the
former.

52.
Secondly, If we shall look upon the most cunning Politician, with a single
eye: judge righteous judgment, and not according to appearance only, we shall
find that the greatest Polilician is the greatest fool. For he turns all his
Religion into hypocrisy, into Statisme, yea, into Atheism, making Christianity
a very footstool to policy.

I confess they are wiser in their generation, then the children of light; and
are so acknowledged by Christ himself, Luke 16. 8. But why? not that there is a
deficiency of power in the godly, but will: for could not David go as far as
Achitophel? could not Paul show as much cunning as Tertullus? Yes, surely if
they would: But because their Master, Christ, has commanded them to be
innocent as doves; They have resolved in an heroical disposition with Abraham,
Genesis 14. 22. that the King of Sodom shall not make them rich. No crooked, or
indirect means, shall bring them in profit; they will not be beholding to the
king of Hell for a shooty. And hereupon the Foxes wiles, never enter into the
Lions head.

But to speak of them as they are: These cunning Politicians, in stead of being
wise as serpents, they are wise serpents. They are so arted in subtleties,
through time and practice, that they are near upon as wise, as that old serpent
the Devil. Indeed he has one trick beyond all theirs; for like a cunning
fencer, he that taught them all their tricks, kept this one to himself,
namely, how to cheat them of their souls. But take a short Character of them.

They are such cunning dissemblers, that like Pope Alexander the sixth, what
they think, they never speak. Why is this cast away, says Judas? Crafty cub,
he would have had it himself. They are like a fellow that rides to the pillory,
they go not the way they look. They will cut a man's throat under color of
courtesy, as Ulysses by gold, and forged letters, was the means of stoning
Palamides, even while he made show of defending him. And then to wipe off all
suspicion from themselves, their gesture and conntenance shall be like Julius
Caesar's; who seeing Pompey's head fell a weeping, as if he had been sorry for
it, when by his only means it was cut off. So like Rowers in a boat, whilst
in their pretense they look one way, in their intent they go the quire
contrary: As our Savior found it to fare with the Pharisees, and Sadducees,
Matthew. 16. 1, 3. which made him to conclude, with, O hypocrites! Nor shall any
man be able to determine, either by their gesture, words, or actions, what they
resolve, though like Hebrew letters, you spell them backward. Only this you
may be sure of, that they do not intend, what they pretend; Like as in juggling
feats, though we know not how they are done, yet we know well, that they are
not done as they seem to be.

Now if they can any way advantage themselves by another ruin, and do it
cunningly; as Iezabel did, when she killed Naboth, by suborning false witness
against him, and proclaimed a Fast before the murder: Though all such policy
be but misery, and all such knowledge, ignorance, Yet, o how wise they think
themselves! but they are grossly mistaken: for wherein does this their great
wisdom consist? but first; in being wise to deceive others: as the Old serpent
did our first Parents; or secondly in the end to deceive themselves, as the
same serpent did, which brought a curse upon himself for so doing, Genesis 3. The
crafty Fox hugged himself to think how he had cozened the Crow of her
breakfast: but when he had eaten it, and found himself poisoned with it, he
wished the Crow her own again. Wealth got by deceit, is like a piece of butterd
sponge, an Italian trick, it goes down glib; but in the stomach swells, and
will never be got out again. The gains a man gets by deceiving, at last he may
put in his eye, and yet see himself miserable. Sin is the greatest cheater in
the world, for it deceives the deceiver.

. 53
That it is so with them, and all others who go to Counsel, and leave the God
of wisdom behind them: let their case be viewed in other persons. What says
Pharaoh to his deep Counselors? Come, let us do wisely, when indeed he went
about that which destroyed both him and his country. The Scribes, Pharisees,
and Elders, took counsel against Christ; as though they would most wisely
prevent their own salvation. Joseph's brethren, to prevent his having dominion
over them, (as his dreams imported) thought they had taken a very wise course,
in selling him to the Ishmaelitish Merchants, which was indeed the only means
to effect it. They murder Christ, lest the Romans should come: and by so
doing, their coming was hastened. The Jews say, Come let us kill him, that the
inheritance may be ours: But in killing him, they lost the inheritance and
themselves too. And so it always fares with our Machivillians in the end, speed
they never so well for a time. For let the Devil promise them never so fair,
(suppose it be a Kingdom) the up-shot will be but sad and doleful: as it fared
with Athaliah, who having slain all the Kings seed, that she alone might reign,
lost both the government, and her life too. Or as it did with Abimelech, who
slew seventy of his brethren, that he might with safety enjoy the Kingdom lost
both it, and his life with it. And many the like we read of.

Whence St. Ambrose observes, that the plots of the wicked, always return upon
their own heads. As Pope Hildebrands servant, by stumbling, was killed with
that stone he should have thrown down on Frderick the Emperor, at his
Devotions. Or as Griphus his mother, was made to take that draught, wherewith
she intended to poison him. Yea, how little was Judas set by of the High
Priests, when once he had served their turn? How did they shake him off in that
pitiful distress, with look thou to it? And so how poor are the witches, that
in confidence of these promises, even sell their souls to the Devil.

See here in these few Examples, you have the depth and solidity of our
greatest and wisest Politicians, and yet lewd men, most ridiculously and
absurdly, call wicked policies, wisdom, and their success, happiness. But
herein Satan makes them of all fools the superlative, in mistaking villainy and
madness for the best virtues. And what is the summa totalis of all but this?
Faux-like, they project other men's overthrow, purchase their own. Neither
has any man been wise to do evil, but his wisdom has had an evil end. As o
the multitude of Examples that are recorded, to give credit to this Doctrine!
Was not the wisdom of the Serpent turned into a curse? the wisdom of the
Pharisees into a woe? the wisdom of Achitophel into folly? the wisdom of
Nimrod into confusion? the wisdom of the unjust Steward into expulsion out of
Heaven? the wisdom of Jezabel, into a shameful death? etc. So that in the
issue, their case proves but like the spiders, that was weaving a curious net
to catch the swallow: who when she came, bore away both net, and webb, and
weaver too. Wherefore, o God, make me but soul-wise, and I shall never envy
their knowledge, that pity my simplicity: Let me be weak in policy, so I may
be wise to salvation.

And I cannot but wonder to see, how the most are mistaken in them: But being
thus discovered, I hope it will appear, that as love and lust are not all one,
so a cunnning Politician and a wise man are not both one. As we have seen some
that could pack the cards, and yet were not able to play well.

54.
True, if men shall look upon them side-wayes, as Appelles painted Antigonus,
that is, upon their strength of ^rain and parts alone, and not consider them
whole, and together, their abilities, with their deficiencies, they will take
them for wise men, and so be mistaken. But

If you would know how to call them, they are properly subtle persens? as the
Holy Ghost styles Jonadab, who gave that wicked and crafty counsel to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 3, 5. And the woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. 2. And Elimas, Act. 13. 10.
as being rarely gifted to deceive, and more crafty and wily then is usual. But
not wise men; for this is rather wisdom back ward, and to study the dangerous
art of self-sophysiry, to the end they may play wily beguile themselves, and to
plot self-treason, then which there is no greater, when the betrayer and
betrayed, spell but one man.

Again, admit them the most, they are not wise in good, though they be wise to
do evil: Or if you will, wise in goods, not wise in grace: For as that old
Serpent seemed to boast, that he was richer then Christ, when he said, All
these are mine, Matthew. 4. 9. So the Politician may truly say, for the most
part, I am wiser then my plain dealing neigbour by five hundred pounds. So that
in some sense it may be said of them, as one speaks of women, though partially,
that they are more witty in wickedness then men. Nor can I more fitly compare
them, then to Dats, Night-crows, Owls, and Cats, which can see better in the
dark, then in the light. Their wisdom is like that of the Polipus: which is a
most stupid and foolish fish, yet uses great skill in taking of other fishes.
Never the less, yield them all that has been mentioned, this is the up-shot.
They are blind, and in darkness, as having their beginning from Satan, the
Prince of darkness, and their end in Hell, which is the pit of darkness: and
because they are wise only to evil, their wisdom shall have but an evil end.

In the dialect of the wise man, the greatest sinner is the greatest fool,
Prove. 1. 7. And David thinks, there is no fool to the Atheist, Psalm. 53. 1. and
49. 13. And Saint Austin tells us, that the wisest Politician upon earth, the
most ample, and cunning Machivillian that lives, be he a Doctor in that deep
reaching faculty, is worse then a fool: For if the Holy Ghost, says he,
terms him a fool that only laid up his own goods, Luke 12. 18, 20. find out
a name for him, that takes away other men's. And though worldly men call the
simple fools, yet God calls the crafty fools, Jer. 8. 9. Mat. 6. 23. And of all
atheisis, and fools, which seem wise, there be no such fools in the world, as
they that love money better then themselves.

And so you have the wisdom of Humanists, and Politicians desciphered;
together with the wisdom of Gods servants. You see the difference between
them, and therein as I suppose, that neither of the former are so wise as the
godly man, nor so wise as the world reputes them, or they themselves.

I confess the one speak Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, the other Statutes,
History, and Husbandry, well enough to make their neighbors think them wise:
but the truth is, they seem wiser then they are, as is said of the Spaniard;
whereas the godly, like the French, are wiser then they seem. The former are
wise men in foolish things, and foolish men in wise things. Sharp-eyed as
Eagles, in the things of the earth, but blind as Beetles in the matters of
heaven. O that they had but the wit to know, that when all is done, Heaven is a
brave place, where are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor care heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God
has prepared there for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

. 55.
Now as I have shown these two sorts of men their folly, to the end some of
them may be convinced, and ashamed, and consequently become soul-wise, that so
they may be saved; which is the principal thing I drive at (for I take no
pleasure in disgracing men purposely.) So it were as easy to prove, that all
sorts of sinners, are no better then sots, and shallow-brains, in comparison of
the conscientious Christian. Nor do I see, but it may prove of great, and
general concernment: therefore that others also may have benefit by the same, I
will briefly touch upon some particulars. And the next that I will speak to,
shall be such as come nearest to these last mentioned; that is, your Covetous,
Miserly Muck-worms, who though they be near neighbors to those Ambodexters I
last spoke of, yet they are not the same men.

Now although you cannot name one property of a natural fool, but the Covetous
man is in that particular a greater fool: Yet I will make the parallel in one
only: lest I should weary my Reader, before I have dispatched all my Clients,
or half listed my men.

The Covetous miser, if you mark it, esteems not of things according to their
true value; but prefers bables and trifles before things of greatest worth,
which is the most remarkable property of a natural fool, that is, being like
the ignorant Indians in Florida, Virginia, New England, and K^nida, who for a
Copper kettle, and a few toys, as Beads, and Hatchets, will depart from the
purest gold, and sell you a whole Country, with the houses and ground which
they dwell upon.

As Judas preferred thirty pieces of silver, before him that was Lord of the
whole world, and ransom of mankind: so the covetous man prefers Earth, yea
hell to heaven, time to eternity, his body before his soul; yea, his outward
estate before either soul or body. Whereas the godly care for the soul, as the
chief jewel, and only treasure; and for the body for the souls sake; and
settle their inheritance in no land but the land of promise; their end being to
possess a kingdom without end. They are not like Shebna, who built his
sepulcher in one Country, and was buried in another: But like our English
Merchants, that traffic in Turkey, get wealth in Turkey, yet plant not in
Turkey, but transport for England. It cannot be said of them, as it may of the
most; that they worship the golden Calfe: because they consider, that Pecunia,
the worlds Queen, (I mean that world, whereof the Devil is King) extends her
Regiments, but to the brim of the grave, and is not current one step farther.

Worldly hearts are penny-wise, and pound-foolish; they know how to set high
prizes upon the worthless trash of this world; but for heavenly things, or the
God that owns them, they shamefully under-value. Like Judas, who valued Mary's
ointment, which she bestowed upon the feet of Christ, at three hundred pieces
of silver, and sold his Master, on whom that odor was spent, for thirty. But
it is not so with the godly; they think it the best purchase that ever was in
the world, to buy him who bought them; in comparison of whom all things else
are dross and dung, as Paul speaks, Phil. 3. 8. And indeed if we once have him,
we have all thing, as the Apostle argues, Romans 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. So
that the godly's man is only rich, the servant of Christ is Lord of all.
Whereas by a just judgment of God upon the covetous Miser, who makes Mammon
his god: The Devil makes them his Drudges, to get and bring him in Gold, as
the King of Spain does the poor Indians) that he may keep it in bank, for the
next prodigal to spend as ill, as the other got it. As how often is that spent
upon one Christmas revelling by the son, which was forty years a getting by the
Father? O fools, incomparable! to take a world of care and pains, endure so
much grief, sting of conscience, loss of credit, to deprive themselves of
Heaven, damn their own souls, to get wealth: and when they have got it, not to
be a jot the better for it. Yea, they are less satisfied, and contented then
other men, meanlier accommedated then mean men: Yea, a poor beggar that has
nothing here, is in better estate, then a rich Miser, that has nothing in
effect, either here or hereafter. O that they would but use that! yea, half
that wit, study, and industry hereafter, to save their souls, that they have
formerly done to damn them. But hear more.

Aristippus cared only for his body, as if he had had no soul: Zeno but for
his soul, as if he had had no body: Achitophel for his Family alone, as if
neither soul nor body had been worth caring for: but these neither for body,
nor soul, nor any thing, but for a little muck to leave behind them. Yea, he
can find in his heart to go to hell for another, that wishes him gone, and
will damn his own soul to leave his son rich. Yea, what a deal of pains and
care does the covetous man take for his own damnation? ever tormenting himself
to get that; for getting whereof he shall be tormented: so himself is
voluntarily miserable here, and hereafter, that others may be happy. And so
much of the Miser. The next I will fall upon, shall be such as equal these in
their Idolatry another way; as

56.
Fourthly, what think you of common Idolaters? are not they arrant fools? I Will
give you but one instance mentioned, Exodus 32. and you will need no more. Turn
to the place, and there you shall find, that those blockish Israelites made
them a molten Calfe, and then said, This is thy god, that brought thee out of
the land of Egypt, ver. 34. This is such a pregnant example, that there needs
no more to prove it; that a Beast should be their god; yea, and a beast of
their own making, and that this beast should have brought them out of Egypt,
which could not move it self, but as it was moved, and that before it had any
being. This is such a blockish absurdity, that as one would think, should never
enter into the heart of him, who is endowed with a reasonable soul. But what
can the Prince of darkness propound? that a wicked heart, (blinded with the
custom of sin, and given up by God, to be further blinded by Satan) will not
believe, as appears by our Ranters, Shakers, and Quakers at this day.

And such other fools are the Papists, though great Clerks, and wise men: who
(if I could intend to aquaint you) maintain a thousand ridiculous tenants,
stif^y defending those things for truth, which the Holy Ghost calls in express
words, The doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. And most justly are they
forsaken of their reason, who have abandoned God. Yea, most just it is, that
they who want grace, should want wit too. If Idolaters will need set up a false
god for the true, is it not equal, that the true God should give them over to
the false? Again,

Fifthly, how does lust blind and besot men? when the Adulterer prefers a
filthy strumpet before his own chaste wife, though his own lawful Consort is
known to be more comely, and lovely then the strange woman. Yea, when they
shall confess the same (as it was the speech of one too great to name) That
were she not his wife, he could love her above all women in the world; a word
able to rot out the tongue that spoke it. But take an instance of this nature,
I Will give you one amongst many very remarkable. We read, Judges 16. that
Sampson cared more for his pleasure in this kind, then his li^t. O strange
debauchednesse! his filthy lust of a Nazarite, leaves him scarce a man! He that
might not drink wine, is drunk with the cup of fornication. How could he other
then think, if lust had not blinded and bewitched him? She whose body is
mercenary to me, will easily fell me to others? she will be false, if she will
be an Harlot. Was there ever such a motion made to a reasonable man? Tell me,
wherewith thou may be bound to do thee hurt? Who would not have spurned such
a suitor out of doors? And when upon the trial he saw such apparent treachery,
he yet wilfully betrays his life, by her to his enemies. All sins, all passions
have power to blind, and infatuate; but lust most of all. Never man that had
drank flagons of wine, had less reason left him, then this Nazarite. Many an
one loses his life, but he casts it away; not in hatred to himself, but in love
to a Strumpet, He knew she aimed at nothing but his slavery, and death, yet had
not power to deny her. He had wit enough to deceive her thrice, not enough to
keep himself from being deceived by her. Thrice had he seen the Philistims in
her chamber, ready to surprise him upon her bands; and yet will needs be a
slave to his Traitor. Yea, in effect, bids her bind him, and call in her
Executioners to cut his throat. O beware of a Harlot, as you would of the
Devil! and the rather, for that under the habit of a woman, it may be the
Devil in shape of a woman, as some have so been cheated. But

Sixthly, what can we think of an improvident Gamester? is not he a Fool? who
will hazard his whole estate upon the chance of a treacherous dye, that
flatters him with his own hand, to throw away his wealth to another. And a
Thief he is too, for if he wins, he robs another; if he looses, he no less
robs himself.

57.
Seventhly, let me refer it to any rational man, whether the Voluptuous
Prodigal is not a stark Fool? who suffers himself to be stolen away for an
Apple: For, for a little tickling of the palate, a kind of running Banquet, he
will hazard the loss of eternal comfort, and expose himself to a devouring
fire, an everlasting burning? Isa. 33. 14. And what greater folly? Is it not a
dear purchase? an ill penni-worth? yea, a desperate madness, to buy the
merriment of a day, (yea, possibly the pleasure of an hour, may deterimine it)
with ages of pangs, with eternity of unsufferable torments, that are capable of
neither ease 1. or end.

Nor is this all, for they run upon Gods judgments, as Balaam did upon the
swords point in the Angels hand, and yet are so far from being afraid, that
they applaud their own wisdom, for giving such liberty to their lusts;
thinking no men in the world enjoy the like freedom. When indeed their bondage
is much worse then the cruel and tyrannical bondage, and slavery of Egypt. For
first, that bondage was of the body only, but the service of sin is of the
whole man, body and soul.

Secondly, in the bondage of Egypt, they served men; but in this bondage,
service is done to sin and Satan, most vile Lords, which command most base,
and filthy works.

Thirdly, in the bondage of Egypt, the most harm was temporal, loss of
liberty, smart and pain of body, in this service of sin, the loss is
eternal, even destruction in Hell for ever (without the infinite goodness of
God.) Fourthly, in this bondage under Pharaoh, they had a sense of their
thraldom, and desired liberty; in this of sin, men do not so much as suspect
themselves to be bound, but think themselves free, and despise liberty. Lastly,
in all outward bondage, they which are bound may possibly help themselves; as
by running away, or by entreaty, or by ransom: In this bondage we lie still,
as it were, bound hand and foot (till God by his mercy deliver us) not having
so much as the least thought of relieving our selves. By all which it appears,
that such who take the most liberty to sin, are the most perfect slaves in the
world; because most voluntary slaves: and that Christ's service is the only
true freedom; his yoke an easy yoke; his burden but as the burden of wings
to a bird; which makes her fly the higher. Wherefore, as we serve the laws,
that we may be free: so let us serve Christ, and we shall be the freest people
alive.

A godly man being demanded, what he thought was the strangest, and foolishest
thing in the world, answered, an impenitent sinner, or an Unbeliever: For, said
he, that a man should provoke God, so gracious and mighty, that he should
believe Satan the father of lies and cruelty, forget his own death so imminent
and in-evitable; obey the command of his Flesh, a Drudge so ignoble, admire the
world so fickle and dangerous, prefer it before Heaven so blessed and glorious;
wilfully cast himself into hell, a place so woeful and dolorous, and all for
vanity, such a wretched emptiness; that he should fear the blasts of men's
breath, and not the fire of Gods wrath; weep for the loss of friends, and not
for his soul: And lastly, that Christ should stand at the door of his heart,
craving for entrance, that he may remedy all, and make him everlastingly happy;
and God call him every day, either by his Word in the mouths of his
Messengers, or by strange judgments, or extraordinary mercies upon himself,
or others, and all in vain Such an one, says he, is the most foolish and
degenerate creature alive:

Thus I might go on to Traitors, Murderers, Back-byters, Seducers, Drunkards,
Blasphemers, Persecutors of the godly, proud persons, Hypocrites, Thieves,
Atheists, and what other sinners you can name: and prove them all fools alike.
But I have already (upon one occasion or other) done it in some other Tract.
Nor do I love to tautologize, except it be for a great advantage to my Reader,
and for others good: though in such a case, I can, I thank God, dishonor my
self, that I may honor my Maker. The which if men did well ponder, they would
be more sparing of their censures; How-ever I could wish, that our Reverend
Divines would afford themselves more liberty in this case then they do. There
be some expressions, that we borrow from our Predecessors, that deserve to be
mentioned, or used (by a Minister that remains perhaps twenty, or thirty years
in a Parish) more then once, though it be to the same Congregation (for that
which takes not, or is not minded at one time, may at another: and how many
have been converted, by that only argument? that God sees all things even in
the dark, when the doors are shut, and the curtains drawn.) Nor do I think,
that a dull and flat tool, or instrument would be used, when a more quick, and
sharp one may be had at as easy a rate, and perhaps nearer at hand. But we are
mostly (even the best of us) loath to deny our selves; though it be for our
Masters, (and many of our Brethrens great gain and) advantage. But of this by
the way only, a word or two more, that may reach to all, that are in their
natural condition, and I shall conclude.

58.
In the last place, Are not all wilful sinners arrant fools? who Adam-like,
will receive whatever comes, or is offered them? be it bribe, or other sinful
bait, not once thinking this is forbidden fruit, and thou shall die the death.
That think the vowed enemy of their souls, can offer them a bait without a
hook? you cannot but acknowledge them stark fools, though thou thy self be
one of the number.

Again, for men to dishonor God, and blaspheme his Name, while he does support
and relieve them, to run from him, while he does call them, and forget him,
while he does feed them. To imitate the Common Protestants in Queen Mary's
time, who laughed the Martyrs to scorn, and esteemed them superstitious fools,
to lose their lives and fortunes, for matters of Religion, accounting faith,
holiness, immortality of the soul, etc. mere fopperies and illusions. To be
quick-sighted in other men's failings, and blind to their own. Are not these so
many infallible properties of a fool? and yet these are the lively characters,
of every sensuallist. In so much, that if I should give you a list, or
Catalogue of all the fools in one City, or County: You would bless your
selves, that there are so few Bedlam houses, and yet so many out of their wits,
that can not perceive or discern the same. And yet no wonder; for as I told
you-ere-while, Sensual men are so be-nighted, and puzzled with blindness, that
they know no other way, then the flesh leads them. Yea, many by loss of
conscience become Atheists; and by loss of reason, Beasts. Yea, to any thing
that is spiritually good, the natural man is blind, and deaf, and dead, as ye
may see by these ensuing Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Romans 1. 21, 22, 25. Ephesians. 5.
14. Isa. 6. 9, 10. John 12 40. Psalm. 69. 23. Matthew. 4. 16 and 15. 14. Ephesians. 4.
18, 19. and 5. 8. 1 Pet. 2 9. Acts 28. 27. Romans 11. 8. Matthew. 23. 16, 17. 19.
24. 26. and 27. 3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2. 16. Revel. 3. 17. Romans 6. 13. and 8. 11.
Micah 7. 16. Psalm. 58. 4. Ephesians. 2. 1. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost, in whom the god of this world has blinded, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

But it is otherwise with the godly: as let Satan, or the world offer a wise
Christian the bait of pleasure, or profit: his answer shall be, I will not buy
repentance so dear: I will not lose my soul, to please my sense. If affliction
comes, he will consider, that Gods punishments for sin, calls for conversion
from sin: and in case God speaks to him by his Word, to forsake his evil
ways, and turn again to him, he will amend his course, lest if he hear not
the word, he should feel the sword. Whereas nothing will confute a fool, but
fire and brimstone.

The Lord spoke to Manasses and to his people; but they would not regard:
Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the King of
Ashur, that took Manasses, and put him in fetters, and brought him in chains,
and carried him to Babel, 2 Chronicles. 33. 10, 11.

Fools, says holy David, by reason of their transgression, and because of
their iniquity, Psalm. 107. 17. From which words, Musculus infers, that all
wilful transgressors are arrant fools. And it is the saying of Cardan: That
dishonesty is nothing else but folly and madness. Yea, Solomon throughout all
his Proverbs, by a fool, means the natural man; and by a wise man, a man
sanctified. O that it were rightly learned, and laid to heart by all, that are
yet in the state of un-regeneracy! for it is every one of their cases. To
conclude in a word, Without knowledge, the soul is not good, Prove. 19. 2. The
ignorant cannot be innocent. I am the light of the world (says our Savior)
John 8. 12. and 12. 46. Where light is not, Christ is not: for Christ is light.

59.
And so according to my skill, I have performed what I at first promised. It
remains before we leave it, that some use be made thereof, that so both wise
and weak, may learn something from what has been spoken of this subject.
Wherefore, in the first place, If it be so, that both the sensual and rational,
even all that are yet in their natural estate, are incapable of divine, and
supernatural knowledge, that they are blind touching spiritual things. Then
let not any carnal wretch hereafter dare to speak evil of the things, actions,
or persons, that are out of the reach of his capacity, but silently suspend his
judgment, until he be better informed: For as it pertains not to the
Rustic, to jugde of letters: So it belongs not to natural men to judge of
spiritual things. Yea, let those ignorant ones, that have used to speak evil
of the way of truth, learn to kick no more against the pricks, lest they bring
upon themselves the same curse, that their fellows did, who brought up an evil
report of the Holy Land, Number. 13. 32, 33. and 14. 23, 24. Yea, put case they
shall think they do God good service in it, as many do in persecuting, and
putting to death his children and Ambassadors, John 16. 2. as a world of
examples witness. Yea, the Jews thought they did mavelous well, in
crucifying the Lord of life. But what says the holy Ghost, Prove. 14. There is a
way that seems right unto a man: but the end thereof are the ways of death,
verse. 12. Even the Powder-traytors thought they merited, when they intended to
blow up the whole State.

Alas, Natural men are no more fit to judge of spiritual matters, then blind
men are fit to judge of colors. And yet none more forward then they; as you
may see by those blind Sodomites, that dealt so roughly and coursely with Lot
and his two Angel^, Genesis 19. 1. to 12.

That they are ignorant, and so unfit, is evident of what is recorded of
Michol, 2 Samuel 6. 16. Of Nichodemus, John 3. 4. Of Festus, Acts 26. 24. And
lastly, of Paul before his conversion. I was, says he, a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and an opposer of Christ and his members; but I did it ignorantly
through unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13. It Is worth your observing too, that he was no
sooner enlightened with the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, but he was of a
contrary judgment, and preached that faith which before he condemned and
persecuted. And this will be every one of their cases, in the end; if not in
this life, yet hereafter, when Hell flames has opened their eyes, they will
confess. We fools thought his life madness, and his end to be without honor:
How is he now numbered with the children of God, and his lot among the Saints?
And when they shall see it, they shall be troubled with horrible fear, and
shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that
they looked for: and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within
themselves, This is he whom we once had in derision, and in a proverb of
reproach, therefore have we erred from the way of truth, we wearied our selves
in the way of wickedness and destruction: but as for the way of the Lord, we
have not known it. The light of righteousness has not shined unto us, nor has
the Son of righteousness arose upon us. What has pride profited us? or what
good has our riches and our vaunting brought us? with more of the like, for
which read, Wisdom 5. And what is the cause they acknowledge not the same now,
but their blindness and folly? and because they put their own faults in that
part of the wallet that is behind them; but ours in the other part, or end
which is before them: For self-examination would make their judgments more
charitable. Read al^o these Testimonies, John 15. 21. and 16. 2, 3. Mat. 16.
23. and 22. 29. 1 Cor. 2. 8. Isa. 5. 20. But I will give you other instances.
Was it not an a gu^^nt that Haman was blind? who thought Mordecaies not bowing
the knee to hi^, a more heinous offense, then his own murdering of thousands?
Were not the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees blind, who could see more unlawfulness
in the Disciples plucking a few ears of Corn on the sabbath day? and the Palsy
man's carrying his bed; then in their own devouring of Widows houses? who
thought they might better murder Christ, then others believe in him? and be
themselves the greatest of sinners, then our Savior to be in company with
sinners? Was not Ahab blind? who thought Elijah more troubled Israel, in doing
the will of the Lord, then himself in provoking the Lord above all the Kings of
Israel that were before him. And the like in our days. Is it not the manner of
thousands with us? not only of Clownes, and ill-bred people, who walk after the
flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness (whom St. Peter calls bruit beasts, led with
sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed.) But of proud wits, who one
would think should have more brains, and know something, to speak evil of the
things which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Yea, how severely will they
censure, not only things indifferent, but the most holy and approved good
duties in the godly? while they will patiently pass by the most heinous
crimes, as cursing, blaspheming, etc. in themselves and others; an infallible
sign of a man not born anew. Yea, will they not more deeply censure our
serving of God, then their own blaspheming of him? and think it a more heinous
offense in us to be holy, then for themselves to be profane, and persecute
holiness.

And what one does, is a law to the rest, being like a flock of sheep; which if
they but see one take a wrong way, all the rest will follow. As you may see in
the Example of Corah, and his two hundred and fifty followers, in Demetrius and
his fellows, in their quarrel against Paul and his companions. And lastly, in
Lots neighbors, Genesis 19. where you shall read, that when some Godless persons
had assaulted him, and his two Angels; before night, all the men of the City,
from the young even to the old, from all quarters compassed the house round,
seeking to break it open, railing upon, and reviling him. Yea, though they were
struck with blindness, they would not leave off, until they had wearied
themselves, and felt fire and brimstone about their cars, verse. 4 to 2 5.

Natural men in heavenly things, resemble Shel-fish, that have no smell: Or the
Cam^lion that has no taste. Nor do they see any more, then the mere bark or
outside ^f spiritual performances, 2 Samuel 6. 16. And the Flesh (Satan's ready
instrument) will be ever suggesting to them strange surmises, touching what the
Religious either say, or do.

And still, the more sottish, the more censorious: For where is least brain,
there is most tongue, and loudest. Even as a Brewers Cart upon the stones,
makes the lowdest noise, when his barrels are emptiest. They that knowleast,
will censure most, and most deeply. It is from the weakest judgments, that the
heaviest judgment comes. And so the more censorious, the more sottish, seem
they never so wise in the worlds account: For admit the^ have a show of
wisdom; yet for matter of Religion and saving knowledge, they know not their
right hand from their left; as it fared with those sixscore thousand Ninevites,
Jonas 4. 11.

So that it is no disparagement to us, seem they never so learned: As what but
their ignorance makes them so censure us. They suspect much, because they know
little; as children in the dark, suppose they see what they see not. Yea, a
Dog will be very violent in barking at his own shadow on a wall, or face in a
glass. The Duke of Von^osme seeing his own and others faces in a well, called
for aid against the Antipodes. Paglarencis thought himself cozened, when he
saw his sow had eleven Pigs, and his Mare but one Foale that would be confessed.
So that they are like Harpast, a blind woman in Seneca's family, who found
fault with the darkness of the house when the fault was in her want of sight.
Or the Owl, that complained of the glory of the Sun, when the fault was in
her own eyes. Or like Pentheus, in Euripides his Bacchus, who supposed he saw
two Suns, two Thebes, every thing double: when his brain alone was troubled.
Or those that are vertiginous, who think all things turn round, all e^re: when
the error is only in their own brains. And so much for caution to the one.

60.
Secondly, for comfort to the other; If all natural men are (like Sampson
without his guide,) not able without the Holy Ghosts direction, to find out
the Pillars of the house, the principles of faith: let us not wonder, that they
swerve so much from the godly in their judgment, and practice: As is it any
strange thing to see a blind man stumble and fall? Neither let us be
discouraged, maugre all their slander and opposition. Nor think the worse of
our selves, if such shall reproach us never so: The Corinthians exceedingly
slighted Paul, he was this, and he was that; But what says Paul? With me it is
a very small thing that I should be judged of you, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. We know
little children will often laugh at wise men, when they are about serious and
necessary affairs: which notwithstanding is not an argument of the unworthiness
of the things they laugh at, but of the folly of them which laugh. Will the
Merchant be discouraged because his wine pleases not a sick man's palate? Much
less cause have we to be discouraged by their distaste, or dislike of us and
our actions, as having more certainty to rely upon; they perhaps have sense,
reason, and experience to rely upon, but we have them with the advantage of
Gods Word, and Spirit, and Faith, three infallible witnesses. Yea, we have
great cause to rejoice, that they revile, and speak evil of us. For his is both
a token of perdition to them, and to us of salvation, and that of God, as the
Apostle phraseth it, Phil. 1. 28.

True, they may raise any slander upon the best of us, as the Chief Priests did
upon our Savior, Math. 28. 13, 14. and that slander may be believed time out
of mind, (as the Jews to this day believe that his Disciples stole him cut of
the Sepulcher) Matthew. 28. 15. to the hardening of many in their Atheism, and
Unbelief: For what should hinder? When Naboth was proved to be a blasphemer of
God, and Susanna a whore upon oath; and the same recorded to posterity; when
Jeremiah was reported to be an enemy to the State? Paul a polluter of the
Temple? Steven a destroyer of the Law? All the Disciples deceivers, and Christ
himself a wine-bibber, a Sabbath-breaker, a seducer of the people, a Beelzebub,
etc. So we may perhaps under-goe the like, in one kind or other (as the Devils
servants, want neither wit nor malice to devise;) But what need it trouble us,
so long as it shall add weight to our Crowns? For if we any way suffer for
Christ, be it but rebuke for his sake, happy are we here, and great shall our
reward be in heaven, Mat. 5. 11, 12.

Wherefore let us never be ashamed of our Masters service, nor of their
censures: No matter what Judas says touching Mary's ointment, so long as
Christ approves of it. Did our Savior Christ forbear to heal on the Sabbath
day, because the Scribes and Pharisees took it ^ll? no, but rather did it the
more, Luke 6. 7. to 12. and Luke 13. 31, 32. When Peter and John were charged
to speak no more in the name of Jesus; their answer was, We cannot but speak
that which we have heard and seen, Acts 4. 20. When Michol scoft David, and
called him fool for his dancing before the Arc, His answer was, I will be yet
more vile, and more lowly in mine own eyes. He knew that nothing could be more
heroical, then this very abasement. And it is our very case. Every scoffing
Michol, (for none else will do it) every drunken sot, derides our holy
profession: but with God and the gracious, we shall be had in honor. Yea, our
very malicious, and scoffing adversaries shall honor us, by deriding us. Their
dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor. Wherefore let us
imitate St. Austin; who as he feared the praise of good men, so he detested
that of evil, and ungodly men. And take our Saviors counsel; seek to justify
our judgments, to the children of wisdom, of whom she is justified; and not
to fools, by whom she is daily crucified. Neither let any think the better of
such whom they extol; for the blind eat many a fly.

61.
Thirdly, are the one regenerate, the other carnal? the one of this world, the
other chosen out of it? the one children of light, and of the day, the other
blind and in darkness? the one Christ's friends, the other his enemies? do the
one live after the flesh, the other after the spirit, Gal. 5. 15. 1 Pet. 4. 2.
Then look we for no love from, or peace with them: Different dispositions can
never agree. There can be no amity, where there is no sympathy. Athens and
Sparta could never agree, for that the one was addicted to serve Minerva, the
other Mars. Yea, when it was said of Phocian and Demosthenes, that they could
never agree; it was answered, No, how should they? when the one drinks water,
and the other wine. Much more may it be applied to these, when the holy Ghost
says, 2 Cor. 6. What communion between light and darkness? what peace between
the Believer and the Infidel? or unbeliever, verse. 14, 15. And in another
place; Know ye not, that the amity of the world, is the enmity of God? And that
whosoever will be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God, Jam.
4. 4. And again, He that is borne after the flesh, will persecute him that is
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. Yea, Solomon tells us directly, and in plain
terms, That a wicked man is abomination to the just; and that he who is upright
in his way, is abomination to the wicked, Pro. 29. 27. Even our very ways which
God has commanded us to walk in, are abomination to them.

Whence it is, that the Natural man can agree with all that be natural; be
they civil, or profane, Turks, or Jews, Papists or Atheists, because all
these agree with him in blindness, and darkness: But with a sincere, and holy
Christian, a practicer of piety, he can never agree, because his light is
contrary to the natural man's darkness; Grace in the one, is a secret disgrace
to the other. Wherefore to be without enemies, or to have such our friends, we
may rather wish then hope; yea, once to expect it, were an effect of frenzy,
not of hope. Only let not us by our offending God, or jarring amongst our
selves, put weapons into their hands to wound us withal: and then we are sure
to have Christ (who is able enough to vindicate all our wrongs) to assist us,
and prevent our Enemies.

62.
Fourthly, If none be truly wise, but such as have passed the second birth; and
that this wisdom which makes us differ, comes down from the Father of
lights; and that we cannot have it, except God vouchsafe to give it us: it may
teach us to be humble, Job 42. 6. And not like the Ape, that is proud of his
Masters jacket: And thankful, for Heavenly notions, grow not in us; we spin
them not out of our own breasts. Nor was there any thing in us, that makes us
differ: we slept nigh half our time in ignorance, and that we ever awakened,
it was only Gods infinite goodness and free grace. What cause have we then
to bless the giver? And to become suitors to our Savior in their behalf, who
are not yet awake: That he will be pleased to open their eyes, and remove that
vail which is laid over their hearts, in their hearing the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.
14, 15, 16. And in the mean-time, let us condole their disastres, and drop some
tears in pity and compassion for their great and grievous misery.

Fifthly, and lastly, If with God one spark of spiritual, experimental, and
saving knowledge, be of more worth then all humane wisdom and learning, then
strive we after that knowledge that will make us for ever blessed. Let us so be
learned, that we may be saved. Let us not in our hearing, reading, and
communication, do as little children, that look only upon the babies in a
Book, without regard to the matter therein contained. But like men in years,
have more respect to the pith, and solidity of the matter, then to the phrase;
and to the profit of our souls, then the pleasing of our senses. Yea, let us so
mind what we either hear or read; that if any virtue be commended, we practice
it; if any vice condemned, we avoid it; if any consolation be insinuated, we
appropriate it; if any good example be propounded, we follow it. Yea, so mind
we what we hear, or read, as if it were spoke only to each of us in
particular; which to do, is to be for ever happy. Good counsel for our young
Gulls, who will hear no other Ministers but such as flatter sin, and flout
holiness; nor read other Books, then such as fill them with Pride, and Lust,
and the Devil.

So I have given you a good, and profitable Book, one faultlesse fault being
born with. An answer that may satisfy such as shall make the Objection I
expect, viz. about repetition, which I take to be a fault deserving thanks.

If any shall find themselves gainers by reading of this piece, let them also
peruse the two foregoing parts, viz. The Hearts Index, and A short and sure
way to Grace and salvation, as treating upon the most needful subjects for a
natural man's conversion, that I could think of: The which being small things,
are sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews, welyard; And by Henry
Cripps, in Pope's Head Alley.

ERRATA.
Not to mention all the litterall mistakes, and points misplaced; there is one
fault in the Title page so gross, (though it past the view, both of
Transcriber, Composer, Corrector, and Author, without being discerned:) that
it would be mended with a pen, and of Floreligus, made Florilegus.

FINIS.

