ENGLAND'S Improvement BY SEA and LAND TO Outdo the Dutch without Fighting, TO
Pay Debts without Moneys, To set at Work all the POOR of England with the
Growth of our own Lands.

To prevent unnecessary SUITS in Law; With the Benefit of a Voluntary REGISTER.

Directions where vast quantities of Timber are to be had for the Building of
SHIPS; With the Advantage of making the Great RIVERS of England Navigable.

RULES to prevent FIRES in London, and other Great CITIES; With Directions how
the several Companies of Handicraftsmen in London may always have cheap Bread
and Drink.

BY ANDREW YARRANTON, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham for the Author, and are to be sold by T.
Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheap Side, and N. Simmons at the
Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXVII.

LICENSED.

October. 4. 1676. Roger L'estrange.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ARTHUR Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal: And to the
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir THOMAS PLAYER, Knight, Chamberlain of the City of London.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
THat I here not only present you with these my weak Endeavors, for the
vigorous Improvements of those unparalled Advantages, which the situation of
our Climate, the Nature of our Soil, and the Constitution of both our People
and Government affords us, in order to the making us every way great, beyond
any Nation in the World; but have also at their peeping abroad into the severe
light, taken the boldness to seek their shelter under the secure umbrage of
your joint Protections: your own real worth, which has deservedly purchased
each of you such great Honor and Esteem in the Breasts of all the Nation, is
the only Argument that I shall plead for this presumption, it being sufficient
security for my Pardon. I could not imagine which way what I lay down in my
Book, as matter of Fact, should in this unsteady Age ever come to be put into
Practice, without the favor and encouragement of those who might not only
obtain for it a free Access to his Majesty, but such also whose very smilings
on its Design might be a sufficient Shield to guard it against all the Arrows
of Obloquy and Envy, that are usually shot at the Projector, be the Undertaking
never so Noble. My humble Address therefore to both your Honors is, That as
one may be an Advocate for it to the Prince, whose increase of Wealth,
Strength, and Honor are the chief things aimed at in this Undertaking; so the
other may procure for it a favorable Reception amongst those honorable
Gentlemen of the City, whose Wealth and Grandeur are the chief support of
Trade, and consequently of England; the Improvement of which has been my whole
study for many years, and which I now make public merely out of a real love to
my Country, whose future flourishing is the only Reward I ever hope to see of
all my Labors. Might I once but see our Titles to Lands and Houses secured,
our Rivers made communicable, the Poor provided for by Bank Granaries, the
Manufactures of the Land encouraged, and as the result of all our Trade upon
the Increase; I should not doubt then in few years to see this Kingdom enricht
above Ten Millions per An. which is but a moderate Account of what Profit must
inevitably arise from a due Execution of these Reasonable Proposals. I have
chalkt out the Way, and given a fair Prospect of the whole, and I hope clearly
Evidenced that it is all feasible, and matter of Fact. That God may therefore
give his blessing on your Pious Endeavors, for the promotion of so Glorious a
Work, as it is the unanimous Prayer of the Nation in General, it is also, and
always shall be, the humble Petition of

Your most obedient Servant, A. Y.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Lord WINDSOR.
My Lord,
FRom the great Encouragement your Lordship has been pleased to afford me, in
those indefatigable Pains you have taken in the Survey of several Rivers, and
contriving with me effectually which way these might be rendered so far
Navigable, that the Public might thereby receive a general Advantage, I am
emboldened to make my humble return of Thanks in this small Dedication; in
which should I (as the usual Custom is) enumerate your Lordships Favors
wherewith you have been pleased to honor me beyond my Desert, although in so
doing I should only discharge my Duty, yet the captious Reader would be apt to
mis-interpret my grateful Acknowledgments for crafty Insinuations, as if
designed only to court your Noble Protection: And by declaring to the World how
far your Lordship has dived into these Mysteries of Navigation, and what a
fair Prospect you have given your Country of the great Profit necessarily
arising from those Undertakings, I should give my Adversaries occasion to
suspect, that I make use of so unquestionable a Testimony for one part of my
Book, merely in design to wheedle them into an easier credence of the whole.
But I hope Your Lordship is assured, that I have a greater veneration for your
Honor, than to make a Stale of either your Name, Favor, or Authority; or that
I should presume to abuse them on any occasion, as young Swimmers do their
Bladders, with which they too too often boldly adventure beyond their depth. I
know indeed some speculative Gentlemen have of late plunged themselves so far
into the deep, that they have not only sunk in their Undertakings to their
everlasting reproach: but their Ignorance buoyed up with Pride being the only
thing that has been able to keep above water, they have given the World
sufficient Tests of the vast difference betwixt Speculative Notions and
Practical Experiments. But what I here Present Your Lordship has been for the
most part already experienced in Neighbor Nations, and the rest sufficiently
proved, by such undeniable Demonstrations, that I doubt not in some few Years
to see England (in spite of my Opposers) a flourishing Kingdom. Which,
together with Your Lordships pardon for this rude Address, and the continuance
of your Favor to protect me in this bold Undertaking, is all that is aimed at,
or desired by,

My Lord, Your Honors faithful and most humble Servant, Andrew Yarranton.

To Sir Walter Kirtham Blount, Baronet, Sir Samuel Baldwin, Sir Timothy
Baldwin, Knights, Thomas Foley, Philip Foley, Esquires, Thomas Smith Esquire,
Joseph Newbrook, Samuel While, Nicholas Baker, John Finch, and Nicholas
Harrison, Gent.
My Noble Patriots,
THat I have not returned you an earlier Account of those Travels, in which out
of a pure love to your Country you were pleased some years since to employ me,
I had rather in few words submit to your just Reprehension, than, by making a
tedious Apology, tell my Readers a long story, that little or nothing concerns
them. It is I hope sufficient that I acquaint them, that if from the Remarks I
have made on the Balance of Europe, or my studious prying into the curious
intreagues of Trade, and the thriving Politics of our Neighbor Nations, any
Advantage shall arise unto us in this Kingdom, they must with me return their
Acknowledgments wholly to you, whose Generous Souls not only engaged me at
first in the Undertaking, but also wholly maintained both me and my Interpreter
throughout my Travels, in the quest of such things, as my own Fortune would
have proved too slender to have otherwise acquired. But that I may not be
condemned with the Sluggard for laying up my Talent in a Napkin, I herewith
present you also an account of my choicest Observations and Practice for this
twenty five years in Trade; in which such Secrets as the benefit of your Moneys
gave me the advantage of finding out abroad, are at length by great pains and
study rendered all practicable here at home, and so adapted to our own Climate
and Constitutions, that nothing but Sloth or Envy can possibly hinder my
Labors from being crowned with their wished for Success: Our habitual fondness
of the one has already brought us to the brink of Ruin, and our proneness to
the other almost discouraged all Pious Endeavors to promote our future
Happiness. People confess they are sick, Trade is in a Consumption, the whole
Nation languishes, and the Physic prescribed is very proper and good, but some
like not the Season, and fain would put it off (like Repentance) still a little
longer, until at length it be too late. Others fancy not the Doctor, and so
resolve not to like it because his Advice. All that I shall say to both these
is, That the Obstructors of our Happiness will purchase to themselves as many
hard Thoughts from their ruined Posterity for hindering the increase of Wealth,
Honor, and Honesty amongst us, as your Wisdom will create you Blessings, for
your study, care, and liberal Expenses to promote so Noble a Design. And if by
what I here present you, you find I have discharged my Trust like a faithful
Steward, your Approbation, as it will be the best Security against the
Captious, it is likewise the highest Ambition of,

Gentlemen, Your sincere and most humble Servant, Andrew Yarranton.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
REader, thou must take notice that all Kingdoms and Commonwealths increase in
Strength and Riches, according as they are situated for Trade, and do
convenience themselves with just and equal Laws and Customs, whereby they
outdo the rest of their Neighbors. We see of late years what great Contests
and bloody Wars have been betwixt England and Holland, and all to obtain the
Mistress called Trade: Sometimes the English Merchants complaining how the
Dutch out-trade them, and that they are not able to live. And so in process of
time they and others under pretense of ascertaining the Merchants Rights blow
up a War betwixt England and Holland, which has seldom been composed with a
Peace but the Merchant goes by the worst, and the People of England seldom
bettered, or the Trade advanced. And it being my fortune to be traveling, and
at Draysden the Duke of Saxony's Court, when the sad News came of the Dutch
burning our Ships at Chattam, I made it then my business amongst other things I
was employed in, to observe as far as I could how and which way the Trade of
England might be improved and advanced. And when I had made my Observations of
the Trade there, and how far it was to be taken notice of in order to the
establishing of the like in England, to set the Poor on work, which was the
Linen, Thread, Tape, and Tin-plates, I came for Holland, being the time the
Treaty was at Breda, where the Triple League was concluded, ( viz.) between
England, Holland, and Swetheland. And there spending some time in the
observations of their Laws, Customs, public Banks, Cut Rivers, Havens, Sands,
Policies in Government and Trade, with their Natural Fortifications both by Sea
and Land; weighing and considering all things, I was then satisfied we could
not beat the Dutch with fighting. And by long studying and weighing every part
of their Condition, and also knowing some of our failings in the advance of
Trade, and our weak Laws conducing thereunto, I did see that all was out of
joint; and pursuing the Causes thereof, in a small time it appeared to me that
although we could not beat them with fighting, yet on the other hand it was as
clear to me that we might beat them without fighting; that being the best and
justest way to subdue our Enemies. My fancy growing higher and higher, and
knowing it might be acceptable service to the Public Good of the Kingdom, I
discoursed all parts and points now writ some hundreds of times, with some
Lords, some Judges, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Merchants, Sea Officers, and Courtiers;
and upon all that I could hear, and receiving all that could be said against
it, I was the more confirmed it might be done; upon which I was encouraged by
many, and some of them Lawyers, who offered me their assistance and help to
make it ready for the Press, which I was preparing for. But before I could
complete my intentions I received a Letter from a Friend in Flanders, wherein
he acquainted me that there would be Wars between France and England, and
Holland, and that the Dutch would be in great danger, and in process of time
Flanders also, and that France and England would join against Holland: Upon
which I made a Map, and put the English in two Squadrons at half Sea, and the
French in one Squadron with them, and I put the Dutch in three Squadrons within
their Sands and natural Holds, and did in the same Map underwrite the Reasons
here set down in this Treatise (why we might beat them without fighting) which
Map was done three Weeks before the Breach was, which is ready to be produced,
if by any desired: And I did then at Whitehall, and in many other places, show
by discourse the little fruits we might expect, and the great danger might
ensue in breaking the Balance of Europe, it being then so indifferently
settled. But the Balance being now broke, and understanding the Duchess
preparations, (as to build Great Ships,) I am satisfied they aim at a larger
Trade than ever, when opportunity offers it self, and will endeavor to carry
the Flag in the Eastern Seas, and it is possible some where else, if not
prevented by the English. Therefore these few Sheets are set abroad to show the
World how they may be Beat without Fighting; and by no other ways than the Free
Lands of England being put under a Voluntary Register by Act of Parliament:
From the Credit whereof spring Banks, Lumberhouses, with all Credits necessary
to drive Trade, Cut Rivers, the Fishery, and all things else that Moneys are
capable of; and it will drive away the great fears and complaints rooted in the
hearts of the People, as the decay of Trade, the growing Power of the French,
and much more.

ENGLAND'S Improvement BY SEA and LAND.
The true way to beat the Dutch at Sea without Fighting.
TO Beat the Dutch with Fighting is difficult, by reason of the great
Advantages they have by their Sands and Holds all along the German Shore, from
the Mouth of the Texel, and other Holland Rivers, unto the Mouth or Influx of
the Elbe: And within these Sands and Holds they lie close and safe as long as
they please, and we cannot come at them with our Ships; the Reason is, we draw
five Foot Water with our Ships more than the Dutch do with theirs; and we must
lie beating at Sea, and receive all Storms and Accidents that the Seas and our
Ships are liable to, while the Dutch are at Anchor within their defensible
Sands and Holds, and upon their own Coasts, and there with ease may take in and
be supplied with all manner of Ammunition, Provision, and Men, with all other
things they stand in want of. And when the wind blows strong at East, we must
bear away, and cannot keep our Station. The same wind that blows our Ships off,
blows the Dutch out, and if they have a mind to follow us, they may; and when
we are within some of our Bays they may come at us with ease: And as I said
before, the reason is, we draw five Foot Water more with our Ships, than the
Dutch do with theirs: They build for their Shores and Harbors, and we build
for ours; and we see by experience they make their Sea War only defensive, and
so will do until they find themselves strong enough to venture to fight at
half Sea. And what a comfort is it to the Dutch, to see their Fleet lie, safe
at Anchor near their own Shores, and their Enemies blown off by Storms and
great Winds, and their Coasts in two hours time free, clear, and safe from any
Enemies? And when such an Accident falls out, they may immediately put to Sea
their several trading Fleets.

Now that they have such Natural defenses by reason of their Holds and Sands,
was very difficult to make Gentlemen of great parts and knowledge believe. But
these Natural fortifications and (I may say) preservations are not only the
protection of the Dutch, but of like benefit to all the People Inhabiting the
German Shore, from the Mouth of the Texel and other Holland Rivers, unto the
Mouth of the Elbe: And the Dutch may now and at all times by the help of these
Sands and Holds sail with their Smacks and small Vessels, of which they have
great numbers, forth of the Texel clear along the Friezland and Bremen Shore
into the Emes, Weser, and Elbe, to fetch in all manner of Provisions for
Holland, which may be had plentifully down the Emes, Weser, and Elbe; and from
Hamburgh all manner of Naval Stores, while the English or French must look on,
and cannot possibly come at them.

And if their Men of War are so secured by their Sands and Holds, and that the
Smacks and small Vessels may creep Eastward by help of them, and fetch in
Provisions and Naval Stores uninterrupted; Then it is very clear and evident,
they are not to be beat, War being made upon them, they acting their parts only
defensive.

I could say something of their Natural and Artificial fortifications in
Holland, Zealand, and Friezland, having Surveyed many of their great Towns. For
it is of great advantage to the Naval Power of Holland, that their three
Maritime Provinces are so strengthened by Art and Nature. And it is of like
great advantage to the three Maritime Provinces that their Naval powers and
force are so defensively secured by the Sands and Holds upon theirs and the
German Shores.

I have several years in Public in the hearing of some hundreds of Gentlemen
given the same reasons which now I here put in Print; And I have often heard
many Gentlemen say and swear they might be fetched forth and destroyed, and
such discourse was only by Persons Dutchify'd; Some of which Persons, as they
since have told me, did intend to get me secured for setting but the strength
of the Dutch; and speaking of a Public Register, as they then thought, was
speaking against the Laws. But since those Gentlemen are my Converts, and have
pressed me hard several times to know what was the reason applicable unto the
German Shores than to the English. I promised them that it should come forth in
Print, for their and all other Gentlemen's satisfaction; and I am sure it is
worth the knowing: And it is as necessary to be perfectly known by all
Ministers of State in Europe, as it is for them to know where the Balance of
Europe is best to be lodged for their Princes good. And I affirm that this
ought by many Princes, who intend a Sea War, to be the first thing taken into
consideration. For whosoever will make a Sea War must not promise himself
success against all Reason.

In discovering to you the true Reasons of these Sands and Holds, I must show
you the length of the Rivers of Germany and England, with the nature of the
Land and Soil the Rivers run through, with the advantage the Winds give in
making these Holds and Sands; and how the Winds clear our Sands, and help to
deepen our British Rivers.

Most People think it very strange, That in our three great Rivers in England,
(viz.) Thames, Humber, and Severn, we should have five Foot Water more at the
Mouth or Influx than is at the Influx of the Texel, Rhine, Emes, Weser, or
Elbe, upon the German Coast; none of our Rivers running above one hundred and
fifty Miles, and some of the German Rivers running one thousand Miles; And it
stands to Reason, the farther the Rivers run, and the more Water is in them,
the deeper they should be at the Influx.

First, you must observe how the Winds blow, and how the Rivers lie to be
Commanded by them. And secondly, you must consider from whence the Rivers come,
and whither they run, either through Clay, Gravelly, or Sandy Lands. The Winds
blow at South and West two Thirds of the year, and these Winds are great and
strong, and have their Gusts and force upon the Mouths of the German Rivers;
and when there are great Rains in Germany, and upon the Borders of Poland,
where are great Sands, it brings them down into the Elbe, and so down to the
Mouth or Influx thereof; where often it meets with a South or West Wind, and the
Tide and Wind coming in both together, force the Sands into Beds, which by
degrees increase to great Banks, and so alter the Channel, and in process of
time work themselves by new Freshes down the Elbe into the Sea, and then the
Winds and Tide trouls them, and give them a settlement along the Shores. And
the like it does at the Mouth or Influx of all the great Rivers on the German
and Holland Shores. And as long as the Winds blow, and the Rivers run as now
they do, these Natural fortifications and preservations by Sea shall be to the
People inhabiting the German and Dutch Coasts.

The true Reasons now being made plain, I desire the Reader to consider (if
this I have said be true) which is more advisable; an hazardous War by Sea, or
to bring to pass the things that will beat the Dutch without fighting?

The Reason wherefore the British Rivers draw five Foot Water more than the
German Rivers do at the Mouth or Influx is, because they run not above one
hundred and fifty Miles, and through Clay, and Gravelly Land, which sort of
Soil sends but little quantity of Sand down into the great Freshes. And our
South and West Winds being great, and blowing, as I said before, two parts in
three in the year at those Points, force out the Sands, and send them into the
Ocean; And upon some certain Tides, force them over to help to augment the
Holds on the German Shore. Observe but the Mouth of the River Dee that runs by
Chester which lies in the Face of the South and West Winds, and there you will
find the Winds and Tides have done the like; By which at this present a Vessel
of twenty Tuns cannot come loaded to that Old Noble Town of Chester.

But now it is time to begin to show you how we may beat the Dutch without
fighting? To beat the Dutch with fighting, so as to force them from their
beloved Mistress and delight, (which is Trade and Riches thereby) has been the
design of most of their Neighbors for this forty years last past, who thought
thereby to bring that Mistress of Trade to leave that People, and betake her
self to a place of better Ports, and healthfuller Air. To which purpose upon
the end of War betwixt England and Holland, many advantageous Articles have
been agreed upon, and some good Laws made to encourage Trade and the Merchants:
But I see although we get this Mistresses Love, it is but for a short time; she
is still endeavoring to be gone, and seat her self in that dull and phlegmatic
Air. And the Reasons wherefore she does so, and will do so, I will here
discover unto you.

All Kingdoms and Commonwealths in the World that depend upon Trades, common
Honesty is as necessary and needful in them, as Discipline is in an Army, and
where is want of common Honesty in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, from thence Trade
shall depart. For as the Honesty of all Governments is, so shall be their
Riches; And as their Honor, Honesty, and Riches are, so will be their
Strength; And as their Honor, Honesty, Riches, and Strength are, so will be
their Trade. These are five Sisters that go hand in hand, and must not be
parted. All people that know any thing of Holland, know that the people there
pay great Taxes, and eat dear, maintain many Soldiers both by Sea and Land;
and in the three Maritime Provinces have neither good Water nor good Air: And
that in some of the Provinces they pay Fifty years Purchase for their Lands,
and are many times subject to be destroyed by the devouring waves of the Sea's
overflowing their Banks. And notwithstanding all these strange, and unheard
Inconveniences, yet they will not quit their Station, and remove to places of
more safety and less Taxes (though never so civilly treated.) The Reason
whereof is, First, They have fitted themselves with a Public Register of all
their Lands and Houses, whereby it is made Ready Moneys at all times, without
the charge of Law, or the necessity of a Lawyer. Secondly, By making Cut Rivers
Navigable in all places where Art can possibly effect it; thereby making Trade
more Communicable and Easy than in other places. Thirdly, By a Public Bank,
the great Sinews of Trade, the Credit thereof making Paper go in Trade equal
with Ready Money, yea better in many parts of the World than Money. Fourthly, A
Court of Merchants to end all differences betwixt Merchant and Merchant.
Fifthly, A Lumber-house, whereby all poor people may have Moneys lent upon
Goods at very easy Interest. As I have showed you their Strength before, now
in these five Particulars you may see their Policy, upon which lies all their
Happiness and Welfare. By these Policies of the Dutch, and the want of our
Lands being put under a Register, One hundred pounds a year in Holland at this
present time will raise a Family sooner, and drive a better and more profitable
Trade, than a man can do of a Thousand pounds a year in England. But if we
write by their Copies, we shall do the great things they now do, and I dare say
outdo them too.

Now I will demonstrate to all men unbiassed the truth of what I assert, and
show them the Condition the Gentlemen and People of England are in at this day;
and also the Condition the Dutch are in at this day in all their Provinces. Let
a Gentleman now in England that has a Thousand pounds a year Land, that owes
Four thousand pounds, come to a Money Scrivener, and desire Four thousand
pounds to be lent him on all his Land, and produce his Writings, and the Estate
has been in the Family Two hundred years; I know at this day the Answer will
be, that by the Law of England as it is now practiced, no man can know a Title
by Writings, there being so many ways to incumber the Land privately: And
therefore the Answer commonly is, Bring us Security for the Covenants, and we
will lend you the Moneys. The Gentleman gets such Friends as he can procure to
be bound for his Covenants, whom if they accept, then the Procurator and
Continuator have their Game to play: But if he bring not such Security as they
like, he goes without this Four thousand pounds; which is a sad and lamentable
case, he having Lands worth a Thousand pounds a year. And now he is put to his
shifts, his Creditors come upon him, the charge of Lawsuits comes on, all his
Affairs are distracted, his Sons and Daughters want Money to set them into the
World. At last it is possible he gets Two thousand pounds a piece of two
several Persons, of one at York, and of the other at London, and Mortgages all
his Lands to each man: This continues private for some years: The while the
Gentleman strives what he can to be honest, and prepare Moneys to pay off one
of the Mortgages: But it commonly falls out otherwise, either through bad
Times, or decay of Tenants, great Taxes, or the Eldest Son matching contrary to
his Father's will, or oftentimes it is worse, he is so debaucht no one will
match with him: Now the Gentleman's miseries come on, and what must he then do?
for the persons that have the Lands Mortgaged will not stay, because by this
time it is discovered the Land is twice mortgaged. I tell you the Lawyers
Harvest is now come in, and the Estate torn to pieces, and the Gentleman, his
Wife and Family, and it may be Creditors too undone. For seeing all is in
danger to be gone, the Friends of the Wife Trump up a former Title to the two
Mortgages, and fence to get all the Estate that Sheriff, Bailiffs, Sollicitors,
and Lawyers leave, to be to the Uses intended or pretended in the Private
Settlement. But you will ask me, What the poor Gentleman shall do to secure his
Person? I will tell you what some have done, and many more I know must do, even
turn over either to the Fleet or Bench. O Pity, and Sin, that it should be so
in brave England! First, Pity that a poor Gentleman cannot have Moneys at such
interest upon his Land, as the Law directs, to pay his just Debts, and for the
good and comfort of his Family. Secondly, It is a Sin, that a Gentleman of a
Thousand pounds a year should be the occasion of ruining so many Families as he
does, by putting them to such vexatious Suits for their Moneys lent, and it may
be at last lose all.

And that you may further see the badness of the Land Security at this day,
take these two Accounts. In the Country where I live, I have been a
Commissioner in the Third part of the greatest Estates in the County, wherein I
have seen the Settlements two ways, and many of them proved which are lying
dormant, and so will do. The Civil Wars were the occasion of these Settlements.
And in the next County an Attorney ( Nicholas Phillpot of Hereford) about four
years since put out in print two Sheets, to show Reasons wherefore a Register
of Lands is needful: And amongst the rest, this is one: For, says he, in the
County where I live, I know men that have deceived, and are deceived, to the
value of Forty thousand pounds, besides what all others know. And whoever
perfectly knows that Country will say, none in England out-does it as to
benefit the life of man: But Honor and Honesty being decayed, Riches will not
stay. I am sorry I must make such a Discovery of the badness and uncertainty of
Titles, but if the wound be not searched to the bottom, there will be no hope
of a Cure.

In this posture as you see are many poor men in England, which cannot borrow
Four thousand pounds of a Thousand pounds a year Land. I pray let us see what a
posture a Dutchman stands in, that has One hundred pounds a year, and wants
Four thousand pounds.

Now I am a Dutchman, and have One hundred pounds a year in the Province of
West-Friezland near Groningen, and I come to the Bank at Amsterdam, and there
tender a Particular of my Lands, and how tenanted, being One hundred pounds a
year in West-Friezland, and desire them to lend me Four thousand pounds, and I
will Mortgage my Land for it. The Answer will be, I will send by the Post to
the Register of Groningen your Particular, and at the return of the Post you
shall have your Answer. The Register of Groningen sends Answer, It is my Land
and tenanted according to the Particular. There is no more words, but tell out
your Moneys. OBSERVE all you that read this, and tell to your Children this
strange thing, That Paper in Holland is equal with Moneys in England. I refuse
the Moneys, I tell him I do not want Moneys, I want credit, and having one Son
at Venice, one at Newemberge, one at Hamburgh, and one at Dantzick, where Banks
are, I desire four Tickets of Credit, each of them for a Thousand pounds, with
Letters of Advice directed to each of my Sons, which is immediately done, and I
Mortgage my Lands at Three in the Hundred. Reader, I pray Observe, that every
Acre of Land in the Seven Provinces trades all the world over, and it is as
good as ready Money; but in England a poor Gentleman cannot take up Four
thousand pounds upon his Land at six in the hundred Interest, although he would
Mortgage a Thousand pounds a year for it. No and many Gentlemen at this day of
Five hundred pounds a year in Land, cannot have credit to live at a Twelvepenny
Ordinary. If this be so, it is very clear and evident, that a man with One
hundred pounds a year in Holland so convenienced as their Titles are, and at
the paying but three in the Hundred Interest for the Moneys lent, may sooner
raise Three Families, than a Gentleman in England can either raise One, or
preserve the Family in being, for the Reasons already given. But were the Free
Lands of England under a voluntary Register, all these Miseries would vanish,
and the Lands would come to Thirty years Purchase, which I shall show you in
its proper place.

But I know you would understand the Reason, why a West-Friezland man may have
Four thousand pounds upon a Hundred pounds a year?

I Answer, Because there the Land is worth Fifty years Purchase. And after the
Four thousand pounds is lent, the Party that owns the Land may, if he please,
at the smaller Bank at Groningen take up Six hundred pounds more in Bank
Dollers, upon the same Hundred pounds a year: For Credit is given to the value
of the Land within Two years Purchase of what the Land goes at.

I can both in England and Wales Register my Wedding, my Burial, and my
Christening, and a poor Parish Clerk is entrusted with the keeping of the Book;
and that which is Registered there, is good by our Law: But I cannot Register
my Lands to be honest to pay every man his own, to prevent those sad things
that attend Families for want thereof, and to have the great benefit and
advantage that would come thereby. A Register will quicken Trade, and the Land
Registered will be equal as Cash in a man's hands, and the Credit thereof will go
and do in Trade what Ready Moneys now does. Observe how it advances Trade in
Holland, and of how little Advantage it is to the Trade of England. I having
One hundred pounds a year in Holland, meet with a Merchant upon the Exchange at
Amsterdam, and agree with him for Goods to the value of Four thousand pounds
for six Months: If he demands Security, I go to the Bank, and give him Security
by a Ticket of my Land, and by the Credit of that Ticket the Merchant is
immediately in Trade again as high as the Commodity was he sold. But if I make
a Bargain at London for Four thousand pounds worth of Goods for six Months, the
next discourse is, What Security? Then the Buyer and the Seller agree to meet
at the Tavern at Four of the Clock in the Afternoon: There the Buyer produces
his Security, many times not approved of; so the Merchant cannot put off his
Commodities, nor the Chapman have the Goods he stands in need of. But if the
Buyer or any Friend of his, that would Credit him, had Land under a Register,
then a Ticket upon such Lands given to the Merchant would be equal to him as
Ready Moneys; and I say better too.

It is the common mistake of the world who cry up the Dutch for a great Cash in
Bank, it is not so, it is a great mistake; For it is a Bank of Credit, and
Paper is in that Bank equal with Moneys, the Anchorage, Fund and Foundation
being laid Safe: And that is the Lands being under a Register, from whence
issue these delightful Golden Streams of Banks, Lumber-houses, Honor, Honesty,
Riches, Strength and Trade. You may read in Sir William Temples Book of his
Observations of the Nether-lands this Expression:

When the States send to Persons who have lent them Moneys to come and receive
their Moneys and Interest, says he, they come with Tears in their Eyes
desiring them to continue it longer: And the Reason is, they know the Security
is good. And when ever they give Notice they will take up a Sum of Moneys,
there is great striving who can get in his first.

But you will say, I talk that Gentlemen of England cannot have Moneys for
Land; It is not so: And that I say Lawyers know no Titles, I ought to have my
pate cracked; for money is plentiful, and Lawyers are cunning enough to spy out
good Titles.

As to both I would it were true, for the sake of the poor Gentlemen, and the
Lawyers too. But as to the greatest part of them, that have Thousand pounds a
year, the World knows they are so far from borrowing Four thousand pounds, that
they cannot borrow Four hundred pounds; and I dare say some Lords also.

Nay, to my knowledge three eminent Lawyers have been put to much charge and
trouble, in their Estates lately purchased by them, in Montgomery, Hereford,
and Worcester Shires, by reason of former Encumbrances. Now if an Eminent
Lawyer cannot purchase an Estate without so much trouble, hazard, and charge,
upon a Title settled at least fifty years ago by all the Judges of England, and
in the Exchequer-Chamber; upon what Security can the Bankers be understood to
lay out their Money safe? And the poor Countrymen are yet in a worse condition.

I will now shoot a Granado into London, not to fire them, but I hope 'twill
make them look about them, and enquire after the Engineer, and demand how such
combustible matter can be made, and do good and no harm, and how it may be
fixed, so that Lumbard-street and thereabouts may both preserve and increase
their Credit. I will now show you the Condition of London, as at present it
stands, and how it would have been, if the Houses new built had been by Law to
be Registerd at Guild Hall. Admit the Green Dragon Tavern in Fleet Street were
mine, and Set at One hundred pounds a year, and I owe six hundred pounds, and
go to the Scriveners and desire them to lend me six hundred pounds upon the
Green Dragon Tavern. I Show them the Purchase of the Ground Rent, the Patent
from the Judges taken in, and all other Titles bought. I presume I cannot have
the Six hundred pounds upon my house, but I must give great Security for my
Covenants. I present such Security as I can get, which will not be accepted.
Now for want of this six hundred pounds, on a sudden to pay my Debts, I am
undone, Wife, Children and many more whom I owed moneys to, my Goods seized, my
House taken from me, and it is possible a Prison too, or a Statute of Bankrupt
taken out, to the Ruin of all. But if it had been foreseen when the Act past
for the building the City, that there had been put into the Bill these few
Lines, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty. etc. That all Houses
which shall hereafter be new built in and near the City of London, destroyed by
the late dreadful Fire, may (if they please) he Registered by the Owners at the
Guild Hall within the City of London; And all such Houses so Registered, shall
be a good Title to the Party Registring such Houses, and shall Bar all
persons whatsoever, The King not Excepted; Provided there be no Claym entered
within six Months next after the Registring of such House and Houses; And such
Clayms as are entered shall be proceeded upon in the said City, and no where
else, in due form as the Law directs. And if this had been done, I then go to
any Scrivener that deals that way, and desire to borrow a Thousand pounds on
the Green Dragon Tavern in Fleetstreet, being Rented at One hundred pounds a
year; there will be then no more to be done, but their Servant is sent to the
Guild Hall to see whose the Green Dragon Tavern is, and he brings word it is
mine; There is no more ado, I say, but the Thousand pounds is told out, and I
give Security for it by a Mortgage put into the Register of my House. Then I go
and pay my Debts, prevent Lawsuits, preserve my self, Wife, Children, and
Reputation, and all is well: And that which is best of all, the Party lending
the Moneys is safe, well and surely secured. It is possible great part of the
Thousand pounds lent might be the Moneys of poor Widows and Orphans, here are
both to the Lender and borrower great Advantages; To the one there is
undeniable Security, and to the other present Relief upon all occasions. The
wanting whereof has been the ruin of some thousand Families since the firing
of London. And this is that which will increase and enliven Trade; and the
Houses Registered will be equal with ready Moneys at all times, according to the
value of the Houses. And if this we treat on had been done, there needed not
one House to stand empty and untenanted, as now they do; nor the Trade to
depart out of the City, as it has done since the Fire. I desire and heartily
wish that the Governors of the City would prepare a Bill against the next
Sitting of Parliament to put the new Buildings under a Register. I will not
Prophecy that a Bank shall rise in London equal with that of Amsterdam, London
being put under a voluntary Register; but I will make it out, when ever the
Heads of the City please to desire it, That if London, with the Free Lands of
Middlesex, Essex, Kent, and Surrey were under a voluntary Register; two of the
Ridings of Yorkshire, Lincolneshire, Suffolk and Norfolk were under another
voluntary Register; Glocestershire, Somersetshire, and Monmouthshire under
another voluntary Register; and Devonshire under another; then there would be
as great a Bank at London as at Amsterdam, and would be able to do much more in
Trade, Credit, and all great things, than they can; and as great a Bank at
Bristol as at Hamburgh, and would be able to drive as great a Trade, and set up
the neglected, and I may say decayed Trade of Fishing upon the Coast of Wales
and Ireland; and as great Banks at the two Towns of Lynne in Norfolk and at
Hull in Yorkshire, and drive as good a Trade as at Dantzick, and enliven the
Clothing Trade now brought very low, and set on foot that great and desirable
Rich Trade of Fishing on their Coasts, which so advantageously offers it self.
(O yes, O yes, O yes, what is become of the Moneys given voluntarily for the
setting forward this good work of Fishing about twelve years since? If any one
will help me to the twenty shillings I gave, I will give him nineteen for his
pains.) And as great a Bank at Exeter as at Noremberge, and give life and
strength to the great Woollen Manufacture in all the West of England. For no
great things can be done without a Bank, and no Bank can be of any benefit to
Trade, and the Public, but where there is a Register.

And I would have the mistaken world know, that a Bank is as safe and
practicable in a Kingdom, as in a Commonwealth, and particularly in an Island
that is convenient for Trade. And the Reason why it is so, is, because it is a
Bank of Credit, not of Cash, as is the Chamber of London, and the East India
Company, whose Treasures are abroad in Trade and increasing, and only the Books
in the Offices. I say it is impossible to keep a Bank from rising in this
Kingdom, nay many Banks, if we were under a voluntary Register. But now the
Land Credit and the City Bank Credit are both disparaged; therefore it is
impossible that Trade can any way be secured or bettered. And for persons
behind-hand and in debt they must expect misery.

Of late years the monied Men in England sent their Moneys into Lombard Street,
and there received a Note from a Goldsmiths Boy, which was all they had to show
for their Moneys. And certainly there was a Reason wherefore the great monied
men did take such slender Security for their Moneys; The Reason was, because
the Land Security was so uncertain and bad, and it was so troublesome and
chargeable getting their Moneys again when they had occasion to use it, that
forced them to Lombard Street. For two parts in three that put their Moneys
into these uncertain Banks, know better how to lay their Moneys out in Land
Security, than any of the banking Goldsmiths or Merchants either. But the Land
Security being not good, the Moneys tumbled into the wrong Channel. And all
persons that have designs to get considerable Sums of Moneys into their hands
for intended designs, or hazardous adventures, apply themselves to the
Money-Bankers, and there make their approaches by noble Treats, great Offers,
with large Interest, with Country Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and it is
possible some Citizens also for Security; and at last creep into the credit of
borrowing great Sums of Money upon Land Mortgaged twice or thrice before, for
in the Country none could be borrowed. At length the Banker calls for his
Moneys, but none can be paid. The Banker dares not adventure to sue; but all
that he dare do, is to employ a Lawyer only to whisper (not to make a noise) or
give him some private Duns; for if he sues or falls on, that would cause the
person that credited the Banker to call in his Moneys, and so the Banker's
Credit would be spoiled; therefore all is to be silent and hush. The Banker by
this time sees and knows his condition, now he casts about how to preserve
himself from the Storm approaching, and it is possible some considerable
Creditor by this time spies some bad Bargains made by the Banker, and calls in
his Moneys: His earnestness puts on others to do the like, and then all his
Creditors crowd to him as Pigs do through a hole to a Bean and Pease Rick. Now
the Banker stands upon his guard, speaks fair to some, prevails with others to
have patience a while; and in the mean time he advises not his Creditors, but
his own interest. Now by the importunity of his Wife and Friends, he secures
perhaps Two or Three Thousand pounds free from all Peoples approaches. Then you
shall have him make Offers, and prays Time, proffers his Books to be surveyed,
and says that he will be just, and has husbanded the Moneys with justice and
honesty. The Books are presented, the major part of the Creditors proclaim that
there is Estate sufficient to pay all. So the minor Creditors must be
concluded. And then Time is given to pay by degrees, and Bond is given for the
Payment: But by whom? Even by the Bankers themselves. A brave Security! but if
their Books were surveyed by Persons that know Men, and the Securities that are
given, it is not to be questioned but Sir Foplin Flutter and Esquire Nipp have
good part of the Moneys upon the Mortgages of Lands, Manors, and Tenements,
and great part as easy to be recovered as it is to bring Penmenmoor and Gore
Agoluath together, being the two great Mountains in North Wales. And it is
possible that great part of those Moneys are ventured to Sea by Merchants; and
rather than their Friend the Goldsmith shall suffer, he shall shut up Shop and
go to Sea with his Merchant, and bring home the supposed lost Estate, and at
his return pay God knows what.

It is probable that any man that sends his Moneys into any of these Banks will
conclude it impossible to employ so great Cash, as they are entrusted with, any
other way than by lending upon Land Security, or to Merchants to venture to
Sea, or to Citizens and others upon Personal Security. And if the Cash can be
employed no other way, then the Lender must conclude the Banker is not able to
secure the Moneys, but must run the hazard of bad Security by Land, and such
hazards at Sea as attend Merchants, with the badness and uncertainty of
Personal Security. And it is not to be imagined there being such great Cash put
into the Bankers hands, that they should stand to the loss of all moneys
misventur'd by trusting and bad Securities: And it must be madness for the
Bankers to keep the moneys in their Chests by them, unless they intend to keep
part for themselves, and pay part, and then lay the Key under the Door. I beg
this one question of such Country Gentlemen as have put their moneys into the
Bankers hands, Whether they do not know better how to lay out their moneys on
Land Security than the Bankers do? Yes I know they do ten to one better; for
they partly know Titles that may be indifferent certain, and know the
Reputations of the Persons better than the Bankers, as I have set down before.
And if there can be no Security given to the Bankers more than I have set down,
then in the name of God let them that have a mind to proceed further with them
go on and prosper if they can.

But it will be Objected, That I am no Friend to the way of Banking as now it
is. I do profess it, and have been of the same mind this ten years last past;
and have declared before some of the Bankers and many Persons of Quality
besides, that this way of banking would endanger the Kingdom. And when I saw it
convenient, which was in January last, I gave Reasons in Public Coffee-houses
for my Opinion, some of the Bankers being present. Their way of Dealing I knew,
and what Security they took, which was impossible should run long. And as the
Land and Personal Security is at this day, no living man, although never so
knowing in the Laws or in Men, can take a great Cash into his hands, and pay
six in the hundred for it. Is it not a sad thing, that a Banker's Boy should
take up more moneys upon his Notes in one day, than two Lords, four Knights,
and eight Esquires in twelves months upon all their Personal Securities? Unless
we are cutting off our Legs and Arms to see who will feed the Trunk. We cannot
expect this from any of our Neighbors abroad, whose interest depends upon our
loss. Were it not much better that those Lords, Knights, and Esquires that now
pay eight, nine, and ten pounds in the Hundred for their moneys, and are
contented to sell their Lands at sixteen years Purchase, after Lawsuits and
troubles attending the Law have destroyed the one half, should bring up their
Lands to thirty years Purchase, and Moneys down to three and a half in the
Hundred, and redeem the old Credit paid by the People to them?

And I must here beg the Gentlemen's pardon that wear the Gold Chains in the
City of London, if I Petition them to take into their Care the true interest of
that Ancient Noble City, which is by using such means as may bring it under a
voluntary Register, where a Bank will suddenly rise, and such a Bank as will be
for the benefit and advantage of the whole Kingdom, and Trade Universal.

Suppose all the houses in Lombard Street be put into a Register, the title
thereby safe and secure, let them be the Credit, Anchorage, Fund and Foundation
to build your Bank upon. Then admit the houses in Lombard Street are worth ten
thousand pounds a year, and valued at twenty years purchase, which they will go
at, and much more; Then the Bank credit that is to secure the Lender will be
200 thousand pounds. I say this being liable to make good all Moneys the
Bankers shall receive and take up, then there is no fear but the Lender will
have his ends answered and his Moneys well secured. And it is certain such an
Anchorage, Fund and Foundation being once laid, will mount that Bank within Two
Months to six hundred thousand pounds, (and higher it ought not to go.) Then
out comes the Moneys unimployed from all persons in or near London; Even
Servants, Men and Maids, will tumble in their Moneys as fast at one end of the
Bank as it can be told out; And at the other end it is tumbled out again into
Trade to Merchants and such as stand in need of ready Moneys, and thereby Trade
is made easy and much convenienced. And then it will be true with us what Sr.
William Temple says of the Dutch in his Book of his Observations of the
Nether-lands, That when the Bankers there send to the people that have lent
them Moneys to come and fetch their principal and interest, then, says he,
they come with Tears in their Eyes desiring them to continue it. But in England
many times Men may cry out their Eyes before they get either principal or
interest. What a comfort would this be to Widows and Orphans, and all such as
know not how, or dare not set out their Moneys at interest, their Moneys now
lying dead on their hands, if this were done? And by this Bank, and it is Credit
will spring up a Lumber-house, nay many in the City of London to force Trade,
to give to people one Commodity for the other, the things now offered at by
many Gentlemen at Devonshire house. But they having no Fund, Anchorage and
secure Foundation, it can come to nothing; these Lumber-houses grow out of the
sides of the grand Banks, which are in all parts and ever shall be the Anchor
and Cable of all smaller Banks. If it shall please God once to raise a Bank in
London of six hundred thousand pounds Fund and Anchorage, out of such a Bank
will sprout out many Lumber houses and smaller Banks, to quicken Trade. And
certainly then the Moneys will be lent at four in the hundred, and ready Moneys
at all times upon unperishable Commodities, even to three parts of four of the
Value, as does the King of Swetheland with his Iron and Copper at Hamburgh. I
could write a whole Volume of the advantage it would be to our English Trades,
the growth and manufactures of our own Kingdom: But you shall have a touch or
two. When I speak of putting all the poor of England at work with the growth of
our own Country (here to be manufactured) I do know four persons in England,
the Father and three Sons, that are in a great Trade, and I believe they Return
more moneys in Trade than any two Merchants or Traders in England, which have
their moneys at five in the Hundred. And I have heard many say, that they had
rather let them have their moneys at four in the Hundred, than any others at
six, because it was safe, and they could have it again when they pleased. But
the Reason of all this is, the Anchorage is safe, they having a great real and
personal Estate. And thus it will be with any Bank that shall be settled upon a
good, secure, and unperishable foundation, into which moneys will be tumbled at
small Interest.

Now I have showed you what the Credit and Advantage of a Bank well settled
will be of one Street in London; but what will the Credit of a Bank be, if once
all the new buildings in and near the City of London, destroyed by the late
Fire, come under a Register! O you with Gold Chains, I will tell you half the
Houses in the City cannot miss coming into the public Bank, to build and help
to lay a Foundation to that rich, that desirable, that just, beneficial and
honorable thing: And the other half of the Houses will be good Security to the
Owners to take up moneys upon them, to serve their occasions, and drive their
Trades with ease. Then the Houses will rise in their Rents, the Trade will
return to the City, the Rats and Mice will leave the Houses (now only inhabited
by them) Honor and Honesty will return. I have met with many that make these
Objections. First, The Lawyers will be against it. Secondly, All Gentlemen in
Debt will be against it. Thirdly, All the Lawyers in the House of Commons, and
Gentlemen in the House in Debt will be against it. And, Fourthly, It will undo
thousands of People, for in producing their Writings holes will be picked in
their Titles.

As to the first, If the Lawyers Estates will rise in Purchase from sixteen to
thirty years, then certainly his Family will be better provided for by that
way, and I was saying, more justly than now practiced: And if I do not mistake,
it will make Trade much more large in the Kingdom than now it is, which makes
more for the Lawyers. And let the Lawyers and all others consider, the Free
Lands of England are not the one fifth part; and so all that is desired is but
two Feathers out of their Goose, and there will be sufficient plucking and
picking work besides. And for ten years there will be more Law than ever to
clear up Titles, to make them fit to come into this voluntary Register. The
benefit of all these things certainly will be much more to the Lawyers
Advantage than what they get by their present practice. As to the Second, "The
Gentlemen in debt will be against it; I say no they will not, for it will pay
their debts without Moneys, and that is their Interest, the undeniable truth of
that you have at large in this discourse. As to the Third, you say, The Lawyers
and Gentlemen in the house of Commons in debt will be against it. My answer to
that is, That two worthy Members of the house of Commons whose estates are
encumbred, say, they are wholly convinced of the absolute necessity and the
advantage of a Register, and will carry the Bill into the House when a fit
opportunity offers it self. And I question not, but before that time all the
People of England, especially those poor Cities and Towns that depend upon
Trade, and want Credit and Stock, will discourse their Parliament Men in these
things hinted at, who thereby will see the necessity of a Register. As to the
Fourth Objection, and indeed it was a string that the Lawyers held hard at,
That it would undo thousands of Families, because that by producing their
Writings holes would be picked in their Titles, and Gentlemen would not Let
their Estates be discovered. I say here is a Salve to cover all this Sore; that
is, the Register is voluntary, not compellable, so he that will Register may,
and he that will not may choose; and there will be Lands Registered sufficient to
encourage Trade upon a sudden. And those that will make use of the Lawyers, and
the Charge attending the Law, may pursue their old way; and I will promise them
the persons that have Registered will not be angry with them. But I will plainly
show you how the person Registring (who possibly owes Ten thousand pounds, and
has made three or four Mortgages of a Thousand pounds a year) will pay his
Debts without Moneys, and will then see the Lawyers Objections are only made
for their own good, that they may pick some more Feathers off him.

Now suppose the Mayor of Warwick having a Thousand pounds a year owes Ten
thousand pounds; he comes and Registers his Lands, and when the Law says, it
shall be a good Title, no man having entered a Claim, then the Mayor of
Warwick's Land is a good Title. By this Credit the Mayor shall have his Land
rise price within six Months to six and twenty years Purchase. The Mayor sells
off so much Land as pays the Ten thousand pounds, and has as much in value
left as he had before, (and his Debts paid,) and has then freed himself from
all the Charge that attends the Law, and is also able to provide for his
Family, and be an Instrument for the good of the public and place where he
lives. Whereas before, having but a Thousand pounds a year, and owing Ten
thousand pounds, he was valued worth nothing, his Family neglected and not
provided for, and all his business was to fence with the assistance of Lawyers,
to keep off and prolong the Consumption which his Estate was then liable to.

Then suppose the Mayor of Coventry has One thousand pounds a year, and owes
Ten thousand pounds, and has mortgaged his Lands to four several persons, one
knowing not of the Mortgage to the other: He observing what the Mayor of
Warwick has done, that he has paid his Ten thousand pounds, and freed himself
from all Encumbrances, (and has as good an Estate as before,) what do you
think he will do? I tell you what he will do, he will go to all persons he has
mortgaged his Land to, and confess the truth, and desire them to come with him,
and all Register their Titles, when the Law says that these Titles shall be
good: Then the Mayor of Coventry by virtue of these Registered Lands, does the
same thing that the Mayor of Warwick did before. And I wish that the Members of
Parliament for Warwick, Worcester, and Hereford Shires, would seriously
consider of what is here asserted; and if they are convinced of the truth
hereof, let them pursue the ends for the obtaining of it, and they will quickly
find the benefit thereof.

All Scotland is under a Register, and worth twenty four years Purchase; and on
the other side in the North of Ireland, although but three Hours Sail, is worth
but eight years Purchase; and in England on this side Twede, it is worth but
sixteen years Purchase; the Register is the Cause. The Manor of Taunton Dean
in Somersetshire is under a Register, and there the Land is worth three and
twenty years Purchase, although but a Copyhold Manor, and at any time he that
has One hundred pounds a year in the Manor of Taunton, may go to the Castle
and take up Two thousand pounds upon his Lands, and buy Stuffs with the money,
and go to London and sell his Stuff, and Return down his moneys, and pay but
five in the hundred for his moneys, and discharge his Lands. This is the Cause
of the great Trade and Riches in and about Taunton Dean, (O happy Taunton
Dean!) What Gentleman can do thus with Free-lands? No, it is not worth sixteen
years Purchase all England over, one place with another; and if not timely put
under a Register, it will come to twelve years Purchase before long. Now you
see a Register is practicable in Scotland and also in England; And if it were
so by Act of Parliament in these particular places I have formerly mentioned in
this Treatise* there would be no Complaint for want of People or Trade in
England.

Methinks I hear some object and say, Although Scotland be under a Register,
yet that is a very poor Country. There are many reasons to be given wherefore
Scotland might be very poor; And if it were not under a Register the Land would
not be worth eight years purchase; But being under a Register you see how much
it exceeds the Lands in England in purchase. Scotland is ruled by a
Commissioner, and there you cannot expect that which you may where the Monarch
keeps his Court. For here the Merchants have access with speed and ease to have
their grievances heard and redressed. But in tributary Kingdoms there ever were
and ever will be self-interest Parties to keep as much as in them lies, the
Peoples grievances from the Princes knowledge, provided they can thereby
feather their own Nests. Witness Flanders and the Viceroys that have been sent
by the Spaniard to govern there. But Scotland is not under half the
Improvement, or ever will be, as England is; For in England there are large
Rivers, and well situated for Trade, great Woods, Mines, good Wool and large
Beasts. In Scotland very little Woods, few Iron Mines, course Wool, and often
great part of the Sheep are starved. And no Northern Kingdom is or ever will be
of any great Riches, or are capable thereof: But such will as have these things
abounding in them, good Ports, advantageous Laws for Trade, good Wool, and
good quantities thereof, much and well Wooded, with plenty of Iron, Stone and
Pit Coals, with Lands fit to bear Flax, with Mines of Tin and Lead. Scotland
is a thin and lean Kingdom, and wanting in these things. England is a fat
Kingdom, and has all these things in it. Yet the Lothean Lands in Scotland are
twenty four years purchase. At Edinburgh there is a Grand Register, and in each
County a particular one, and no man can be there deceived in a Purchase unless
it be his own fault. England is at sixteen years Purchase. The reason is
obvious why Scotland must be so, and why England is so. But a voluntary
Register in England will cure all, and put us six years purchase above
Scotland. For as I formerly said, as our Honor and Honesty is, so will be our
Riches; and Riches bring Trade, and Trade brings strength to an Island. And for
want of good Titles let the world judge what a Condition we are coming into.

I will give you one small Instance, what the poor decayed Trade and Clothiers
of England would be able to do in easing themselves, and making their Trade
comfortable, if they had but the Authority of the Law to Register all their
Houses and Lands. Take it from the City of Salisbury, there I make the
Precedent, and as it would be with them, so it would be with all the Towns in
England who deal in the Woollen and Iron Manufacture. Suppose the Clothiers in
and near Salisbury have two thousand pounds a year in free Lands, and their
Lands were by Law fixed under a Register, then the Anchorage and Foundation of a
Bank will be at least fifty thousand pounds; And immediately tumbles into them
all the idle Moneys, nay Moneys now under Ground, (and good part of the plate)
ten Miles round; The Usurer will pray, and the Men and Maidservants will beg
to take in their Moneys. Immediately one hundred thousand pounds will be
brought in, and at four in the hundred. What will this do to the poor
Clothiers? Nay what will it do to each Gentleman, and all men near Salisbury
that have or keep Sheep? I say the help and present Credit of this great Bank
and Cash will raise the price of Wool, and set the Poor at work; Thereby
enabling the Tenants to pay their Rents, keep the poor of the Parish, bring the
Clothiers and the City into a Comfortable Condition; but most of all it will
prevent the Trade departing this Kingdom, which of necessity it will do, if not
timely prevented. For the Irish Wool carried away with their Beef to Holland,
France and Germany, their making Cloth of cheap Wool with cheap Victuals, with
Moneys at three in the hundred, will out do us, and undo us too if (...)
prevented. Eight years since I discovered (...) of the Worse Manufacture, and
the Reasons, which he made public in his first Book.

The same that may be done at Salisbury by this way, may be done by all the
Towns in England that depend upon any of our own Manufactures. And in this case
here is nothing desired, but that Men thus qualified with Lands may employ it by
the Authority of the Law to the good of themselves and mankind, and to be
justly honest to all.

Now methinks I hear many of Salisbury say, But how may this be done which you
say? I tell you how: desire your Parliament Man to draw you up a Bill and carry
it into the House the next sitting. But you will say, he will not do it. Then
get your Bishop to do it. You will say, he is no Lawyer. Pray tell him it is
easier than making the River Navigable. But a Register and the River Navigable
together will do rarely well. Well, if the Bishop will do the one, I will do
the other; I will only tumble over a few papers wherein are my Observations
when I surveyed the River.

The Preamble of the Bill to be carried into the House of Commons, for putting
the City of Salisbury and the Free Lands within ten Miles thereof, under a
voluntary Register, with some Heads of the said Bill.
WHereas there past an Act of Parliament in the (...) Year of his Majesty's
Reign that now is, for making the River Avon Navigable, from the City of
Salisbury to the Town of Christ-Church, and so into the Sea, so as Boats,
Barges, and Lighters may come up the said River to the City of Salisbury, and
so down again into the Sea, for carrying and recarrying of Wood, Coals, Corn,
and all other Commodities to and fro; And whereas the said River is begun to be
made Navigable, and some considerable Sums of Money are laid out about the said
Work, which if once finished will tend much to the benefit and fur therance of
Trade to the said City and Country thereabouts: And whereas there has formerly
been a great Trade in the said City and Country adjacent, in the making and
working in the Woollen Manufacture, which is now much decayed, and if not timely
prevented will be worse; the occasion whereof is the want of present Money (and
Credit) for the Clothiers to drive their Trades, to be by them had when wanted,
and that at low and easy Interest; And finding that in many places beyond the
Seas Trade is much advanted by the Lands being under a Register, and in Taunton
Dean in England the Town and Manor there being under a Register, has in a
strange manner given life, ease, and benefit to the Trade there and
thereabouts, whereupon that place is much enviched; And to the end that the
River of Avon when made Navigable, may answer the Charge of making it so, and
the woollen Trade in Salisbury and thereabouts may be encouraged, Wherefore be
it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, That from and after the twenty fifth day of June, one thousand six
hundred seventy and seven, all manner of person or persons that shall desire
it, may and shall have their Freehold Lands and Houses. Registered at the
Registers Office within the City of Salisbury, which shall lie within the said
City, and within ten Miles thereof, accompting two thousand yards to the Mise:
Provided such Houses and Lands so to be Registered with their. Names, Metes, and
Bounds be first set up and affixed three Lords Days upon the Church Door of the
Parish where such Lands are; And that the Minister with one of the
Church-Mardens, and one of the Overseers of the Poor, first certify under
their Hands and Seals the doing of the same, with a true Copy of the Paper so
affixed, to the Register, with forfeiture of twenty pounds and three Months
imprisonment to any person or persons that shall take down or deface the said
Writing, during the time it is ordered by the Law to be up: And then all
Freehold Lands and Houses thus Registered shall be a good and perfect Title
unto the person Registring the same, and to his Heirs for ever: And no Sale,
Mortgage, or Lease, or any other thing whatsoever shall be good as to the Land
Registered, unless Registered in the said Court, Provided that all persons
whosoever may at any time within (...) Months next after any Land is so
Registered, make their Claim, and upon such Claim proceed in the said City and
not elsewhere, by due course of law to recover their Right; any thing in this
Law to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted, That all Bonds
and Bills to be entered into from and after the Twenty fifth day of June, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred seventy and
seven, may by the person or persons having right to the said Bond or Bonds,
transfer and assign the said Bond and Bonds, and the Assignment being made and
executed shall transfer the whole property of the said Bond or Bonds to the
party to whom such Bond or Bonds are assigned, and the property with the
Assignment shall pass and be good from man to man, in the nature of Bills of
Exchange, whereby one Bond may pay and run through the hands of many persons,
and thereby prevent the Charge of Law, and the Ruin of many Families for want
thereof. Observe what is here set down for Salisbury, is to show you, That all
the Towns of England lie under the same advantage.

But I know some hard Questions will be asked me now; As First, Who shall keep
this Register? Secondly, Who shall choose the Register? Thirdly, How shall he be
chosen? Fourthly, Who shall pay him for his pains? And Fifthly, What Security
shall he give to perform his Trust?

As to the First, let the Register be kept by two Gentlemen whom you have
experience of for Honor and Honesty. Secondly, let the Register be chosen by
the Major voices of all the Freeholders in and within ten Miles of the City of
Salisbury, who have forty shillings a year and upwards. Thirdly, Let him be
chosen by the way of the Baletting Box. I will tell you how that is: Every
Freeholder must have Bowls given them of several Colors, when they see who
stand to be Registers. Then let A. be for the White Bowl, B. for the Black
Bowl, C. for the Red Bowl, D. for the Green Bowl, and so on; and when the
Parties appear, each Freeholder drops into the Baletting Box one Bowl in a
piece of Paper that none can see the Color, either Black, White, Red or Green.
So he that has most Bowls is the man. And by this way no man knows how to
find fault with his pretended Friend, or knows who is his Enemy. And certainly
this way would drive out base interests and prefer men of Honesty, and Honor.
And for choosing of Parliament men and all public Votes in Corporations, it
were happy it were so; for great things are done in some parts of the World by
this little Policy. To the Fourth, [who shall pay him for his pains.] I say he
ought to have it out of the Lands Registered; but have a care of allowing too
much. And as to the Fifth, [what security,] get as honest and as rich a man as
you can, then the slenderer Security will serve. I have given you my thoughts,
but I am but a Country High-shoe. But there are three worthy Gentlemen of the
Long Robe who make it great part of their business to fit some papers to answer
all the ends proposed, and I have promised them I will get together what
materials I can fit for to raise the Fabric. And you see I have brought the
great p^st from Holland, and one side-piece from Germany, another side piece
from Scotland, and one (...) from T^un^^n ^^an* And I will find a great piece
to make Sparrs, and other finishing things, or else I will go into the Inner
Temple to the Registers office there, and write by the Copy of Sir Varmodens

Reader, by this time I hope I have convinced thee of the necessity of the
Free-lands being put under a voluntary Register; And I will now show to all men
the true Reasons of the bad Securities by Land at this day. Until about thirty
years past the Conveyances and Settlements of Lands were three ways, viz.
First, by a Deed enrolled in Chancerie, which creates a Possession. Secondly, a
Deed and Fine, which does the same. Thirdly, by a Deed executed ^ith Livery and
Seisin upon the Land. Two of these are upon Record, and the third was an Act
which was done publicly, whereby the Country might have notice of the
transferring the Land, and then there was possibility of Titles to be known.
But now by the occasion of the late Wars, and things relating thereunto, there
are three things that give liberty to all men to defraud whom they please, and
it is not in the power of man to prevent it. First the settlement by Lease and
Release, a thing that unhinges the whole Freehold Lands of England. For
whereas before the people had the other three ways to settle their Estates, two
of which were upon Record, the third of public Acts in doing of it, by which
the Country might take notice thereof; now this private pocket-settlement
called Lease and Release, may be done in any Corner privately, and shall be
good against all persons. The way is this: First, a Lease is made for a year of
the premises, which by the practice of the Law gives a possession; then in
another Deed the Lease is recited, and a Deed of Release made, both which
Convey the ^ee. This may be done in Ireland, and the Lease left in the hands of
the person whom it was made to; and the Grantor brings away the Release with
him. The year is expired, then the Lands are sold, and a Bill in Chancery is
preferred, and the party swears no Encumbrance, and gets a great sum of
Moneys; then delivers the Release to the party that had the Lease for the year.
Then the Title is vested in the Lease and Release. Then he comes and Ejects him
that bought for valuable Consideration, because he had the proper Title. I
could name six persons that were served so, and one of them not under the
degree of a Sergeant at Law. And pray now what Lawyer knows a Title? The Second
sort are the private Settlements made to persons before or in the War; they
were done by the Royalists to preserve them against the Parliament party; the
like did the Parliament party do to preserve them against the Kings party; the
like does the Romanist at this day. I have been a Commissioner in many of these
Titles, and they are still kept on Foot to play fast or loose as they please;
some of which are every Term heard of in Westminster Hall. The Third are Bonds
given to the King, although made in an Alehouse or Tavern, and never Recorded
in the Exchequer, nor in any Court else; yet these Bonds are a Judgment in Law,
and by virtue thereof will be first served, (and before all men else.) And at
this day many Gentlemen (and others that I know) have sold Land since they
entered into these Bonds, and the Bonds not satisfied. I speak this with honor
to the King's Prerogative, and affirm that it would be more for his Majesty's
advantage also, if Estates were Registered, for he would then see what Security
he has for his Money, whereas his Majesty himself is many times a loser, by
trusting upon insufficient Security. And it is now a common practice to convey
away all Lands before a man becomes bound to the King.

Besides all these Uncertainties of Titles of Land, it is brought so to pass at
this day, that whatever Moneys is or has been borrowed, by Companies
Incorporated, or upon the Credit, or under the Common Seal of Cities or
Corporations, none can be recovered by Law. I hope now no Gentleman of the Long
Robe can pretend to know a good Title from a bad, and therefore will be now
willing to let the Free-lands of England to be put under a voluntary Register.

But I hear some say, That for all that has been said in this Discourse they
are not satisfied, the Dutch will be beat without fighting. Well then, I will
give you some more satisfaction. I pray observe what the Dutch and English have
been doing for this many years; it has been courting and fighting for this
Mistress called Trade. And observe how the Dutch have fitted her with all that
she can desire; as with a Register of Lands, Banks, Lumberhouse, cut Rivers,
easy Ports in point of Customs, a Court of Merchants: And these give her
delights, and she has no mind to depart from them. And her long continuance
has made her Lovers vastly rich, and the Towns where she makes her abode,
both populous and great. And though in the Three Maritime Provinces they have
neither good Water nor good Air, yet are their Lands at fifty years Purchase.
Now observe, England lies within twenty Hours sail of Holland, and is stored
with many and much better Ports than Holland has: And our Ships by reason of
the deepness of our Rivers, can go out and come in with much greater Burdens
than theirs can, and we lie as well to the Baltic as they, and much better to
the Mediterranean, East and West Indies, than they do. And in England are Noble
Seats to be purchased, and a good Air. Now Reader, do thou think, that the
great Dutch Merchants and others rich in Cash, would stay there, if we had here
public Security for our Lands, that they might purchase safely here? I say
they would come over in Swarms, and would willingly give thirty years purchase
for Lands here. So that the great Merchants coming from thence, and buying
Estates here, will bring away the great Riches from thence, and so increase
Trade here; and thereby the Dutch will decline gradually every year more and
more, and within very few years their beloved Mistress will depart, and will
come and settle her self with us. And as we are an Island which God and Nature
has fitted for Trade, if we once fit our selves with Laws answerable, then the
greatest part of the Trade of Europe will be with us. And if this does not
convince the Reader, that hereby we shall beat the Dutch without fighting, and
pay our Debts without Moneys, I have no more to say.

Beside the Advantages aforesaid, let me tell you that I have found out two
places, one in Ireland, the other in England: In that in Ireland are great and
strange quantities of Timber to build Ships, and places to build them, and at
three fifths of the Rates the King now builds at, with convenient places to lay
up the Ships, and thereby to be ready upon all occasions. That in England is
convenient to build Ships at, and at very easy Rates, and is as good a Harbor
to lay them up in as any is in England, and in the very Eye of France. And I
desire it may be seriously considered. And that the truth may be demonstrated
of what I say, I have affixed two sheets in Maps to this Book, whereby the
truth asserted may be made the more clear.

About two years since, I was prevailed upon by some of the Money Bankers, and
some Gentlemen to go over into Ireland to Survey some Iron works, Woods and
Lands which they were in proposition for, with Sir Robert Clayton and Mr.
Morris, being Works, Lands, and Woods lying near the River Slane in the
Counties of Wexford and Wicklow, and formerly set on Foot by Sir John Cutler,
Sir Edward Heath, Mr. Abbot the Scrivener, Docter Yates of Oxford, and Mr.
Timothy Stamp, and from them Conveyed to Sir Robert Clayton and Mr. Morris, to
advance a sum of Moneys, and to manage the Works and to give an Account: But
the Parties differing, and some bad Titles made with suits at Law had so
unhinged and debased the whole affair, that nothing possibly could be done,
unless we could come upon some new Foundation. So my self and servants spent
some time in Surveying the Woods, Lands and Works, in which I did evidently
perceive the Design at the first was very rationally laid, but unfortunately
destroyed. I then considered what might be done. After I had surveyed the River
Slane, and the Brooks and Rivulets running into the same, and the Woods
adjoining unto them, with that noble great and good Wood called Shelela, I then
did perfectly see what a great shame it was that such quantities of Timber
should ly rotting in these Woods, and could not be come at, the Mountains and
Boggs having so locked them up, that they could not be brought to any Seaport
to be employed in building of Ships. But my self and those I employed having
spent much time in the surveying the said River Slane and the Rivulets running
into it, we found that they may be made so Navigable for Ten thousand pounds,
as all those Woods may with ease and at very cheap Rates be brought down the
Slane to Wexford, and to other places near thereunto, to build Men of War and
other Ships. And I know in the Woods near unto the Slane, that may come down
that River, (if once Navigable) there is Timber sufficient to make a hundred
Men of War (and some hundreds of Busses) and as good Timber as any is in
England, (I was going to say better) and not one stick wanting that Oak is
capable of doing: And the first lengths of Masts also, (and they will serve
well for that use.) And as now these Woods are (and as they will for ever be,
unless by some such way relieved) they will never bring the Owners Twenty
thousand pounds, (nor Ten I verily believe.) But if the Slane were made
Navigable and the Rivulets running into it, these great quantities of Timber
might be employed in building Ships for the Royal Navy, and may if his Majesty
please, be kept either in an Admiralty at Wexford, or in some Port near, or in
Milford Haven, and there they will be ready to sail upon any occasion, either
to preserve the West India Trade, or into the Mediterranean, and thereby give
great comfort to all Trade that is used in those Seas; as also encourage the
People, and drive away their present fears. And I am very well satisfied that
Ships of all Rates will be built at Wexford or thereabouts at three fifths of
what the King now pays for building; and there they may be also Gun'd and
Victualled. The Woods are the Earl of Angleseys, the Lord Baltimores, Sir
Laurence Esmonds, the Lord Arons, and Shelela the Earl of Straffords, with many
other small Woods. Here you have the Map of the River and Rivulets, with some
small Signs of the Woods before mentioned.

The Second place convenient for the building of Ships, is at Christ-Church in
Hampshire. About eighteen Months map since I was taken down by the Lord
Clarendon to Salisbury to Survey the River of Avon, to find whether that River
might be made Navigable: As also whether a safe Harbor could be made at
Christ-Church for Ships to come in and out, and lie safe. After I had surveyed
the River, I found it might with ease be made Navigable. I then with several
others went to Sea several times, to sound and find the depths, and to discover
what the Anchorage was. At last I found in the Sea great quantities of Iron
Stones lie in a Ridge. For in the Sea, pointing directly upon the Isle of
Wight, observing it at low Water, I found that Ridge of Iron Stones was the
cause that forced the ground Tide about the point, which had carried and lodged
the Sands so, as it had choked up the Harbor: But the Stones near the Shore
lay so great and thick, that they were the occasion of lodging the Sands by
them, near the Western Shore, and so of preserving a place which is very deep
and good Anchorage, and within one hundred Yards of the Shore, which gives unto
that River the advantage of making there as good an Harbor, as to the depth of
Water it will draw, as any is in England, where a Boy and a Cord two Inches
Diameter will be sufficient to hold a Ship; the Harbor being a great Inland
Lake or Pool, and well defended from all Winds. When my self and some were well
satisfied of the convenience of the place for a Harbor, I waited upon the Lord
Clarendon and some other Gentlemen to Sea, and there did discover to them the
Reasons at large, having convinced them upon the place, of the fitness and
convenience in making a Harbor there. They then proceeded to do something in
Treating about the River: At which time I observed two great things that place
was capable of. The First is, At that very place where the Harbor may be made,
there may at any time safely come in and quietly ride at least 50 or 60 fifth
and sixth Rate Frigates; and that which is more strange, within three hundred
yards of the place there is a Hill or Promontory, which was an old Camp of the
Romans or Saxons, as it is said, which will lodge a hundred thousand men, and
in three days may be made so defensible, that no Army (be it never so great)
will be able to annoy them, all parts of the said Camp being defended by Sea
except about three hundred yards, and that is entrenched by a very vast Ditch,
yet very useful; and Relief by Sea may be brought to this place every Tide, and
no Party by Land, as it is now, can give any opposition. And to me it is very
strange, that notice long since had not been taken of it, and some Forts built
there. The Second thing I there took notice of, was, The great Advantage his
Majesty might make of that place when the Harbor was opened, for the building
of fifth and sixth Rate Frigates. A place none can be better, with these
Advantages. First, Within the Harbor is a convenient place to build Ships.
Secondly, The Timber will be carried down Avon to the place for building, for
four Shillings the Tun or Load; the Timber coming out of New-Forest, the River
running by the Forest side, and at present His Majesty sends the Timber out of
the Forest to Portsmouth to build, and pays for a Load to Redbridge fourteen
shillings, and from Redbridge to Portsmouth by Water eight shillings the Load.
Thirdly, This place is and may be made by Art, with the laying out of two
thousand pounds upon a Fort, a full defense against any Enemy landing, and
secure all his Majesty's Ships that shall be laid in there from the attempts of
any Enemy whatsoever, and will there be fit and ready almost with any Wind to
sail out. It lies over against the very heart of France, and such Ships may
there go to Sea and be about their work, when others cannot come about, for
contrary Winds.

The Third great advantage is, that there the King may have all his Iron made,
and Guns cast at very cheap Rates. There is the Iron Stone in the Sea, by the
Harbor mouth, and the King has vast quantities of Woods decayed in New
Forest; of which at this time Charcoal is made, and Shipped away to Cornwall and
other parts. If two Furnaces be built about Ringwood to cast Guns, and two
Forges to make Iron, and the Iron Stone be brought from the Harbor mouth out
of the Sea up the River to the Furnaces, and the Charcole out of New Forest to
the works, there being sufficient of decayed Woods to supply four Iron-works
for ever; by these means the King makes the best of every thing, and builds
with his own Timber being near and convenient; whereas now the charge and
carriage makes the Timber 07 of no use to him. And having Iron Stone of his own
for gathering up, and Wood of his own for nothing, he will have very cheap Guns
and Iron. And all these things set together, this is a business befitting a
King to have. And as I said, this Fort will be made, and answer the ends I here
lay down, for two thousand pounds, and the Iron works built and Docks to build
three Ships at one time for eight thousand pounds. The discovery more
particular of the place of the deep Water and Fort to be made, and the Harbor
within, with a description of the Camp adjoining is here in the Map affixed.

Now Reader, I hope I have made good my promise of discovering two places
convenient to build Ships in, and at easy Rates, and also to lay them up safe,
and in places that are eminently convenienced for quick getting out and could
say much more of these two places as to public benefit, but it may be, and it
is not to be questioned, I shall meet with Enemies for saying so much, for I
know now almost all men are Sacrificing all things to their own Nets and Drags,
or to such Great ones as they lie under. However if his Majesty please to
Command me, I will go to Christ-Church with any knowing person, and there upon
the place show him all that is here affirmed, (and the Reasons:) the like I
will do as to the Slane in Ireland, and the Woods I so commend, joining
thereunto; and upon the place demonstrate and make out how the River Slane and
Rivulets running into the same, may be made Navigable; and show the great
quantities of Timber that may thereby be brought down to build Men of War, the
places convenient for building them, and that no King or Prince in Europe has
such an advantage to build Ships as the King of England may have with that
Timber in Ireland.

The Way to employ and set at Work all the Poor of England, both Man, Woman,
and Child, that are capable and able to work, and all to be done by improving
two of our own Manufactures (the growth whereof is all of our own Island;) the
one the Linen, the other the Iron Manufacture.
AS to Linen Cloth of all sorts, what vast quantities are yearly brought into
England, and here made use of, and by us sent unto our Islands, and to many
other places, the making of which sets at work abundance of People in other
Nations; as also Threads, Tapes, Twine for Cordage, and wrought Flax? Now who
makes the fine Linen Clothes, and where have they the Materials? I say the fine
Linens are made in Holland, and Flanders, that is, woven and whitened there,
but the Thread that makes them comes out of Germany from Saxony, Bohemia, and
other parts thereabouts, and is brought down the Elbe and Rhine in dry Fats for
Holland and Flanders; and there the Merchants have at this day, and so will
ever have, a vast Trade in these Commodities, unless that Trade of Linen be
advanced in England, and encouraged as I shall set down. But, First, Observe
that the People of Holland eat dear and pay great Rents for their Houses, and
so they do in Flanders; but the weaving and whitening of the Cloth is not above
the tenth part of the labor. For the great labor is in preparing the Flax, as
pulling, watering, dressing, spinning, and winding, and all this is done in the
upper parts of Germany, and thereabouts; there Victuals are cheap, and in all
these parts there is no Beggar, nor no occasion to beg; and in all Towns there
are Schools for little Girls, from six years old and upwards, to teach them to
spin, and so to bring their tender Fingers by degrees to spin very fine, which
being young are thereby easily fitted for that use. Whereas People overgrown in
age cannot so well feel the Thread. Their Wheels go all by the foot, made to go
with much ease, whereby the action or motion is very easy and delightful. And
in all Towns there are Schools according to the bigness, or multitude of the
poor Children. I will here show you the way, method, rule, and order how they
are Governed.

First, There is a large Room, and in the middle thereof a little Box like a
Pulpit. Secondly, There are Benches built round about the Room as they are in
our Playhouses; upon the Benches sit about two hundred Children spinning, and
in the Box in the middle of the Room sits the Grand Mistress with a long white
Wand in her hand. If she observes any of them idle, she reaches them a tap; but
if that will not do, she rings a Bell which by a little Cord is fixed to the
Box, and out comes a Woman; she then points to the Offender, and she is taken
away into another Room and chastised. And all this is done without one word
speaking. And I believe this way of ordering the young Women in Germany is one
great cause that the German Women have so little of the twit twat. And I am
sure it would be well were it so in England. And it is clear, that the less
there is of speaking, the more there may be of working. In a little Room by the
School there is a Woman that is preparing and putting Flax on the Distaffs, and
upon the ringing of the Bell, and pointing the Rod at the Maid that has spun
off her Flax, she has another Distaff given her, and her Spool of Thread taken
from her, and put into a Box unto others of the same size to make Cloth.

And observe what Advantages they make of suiting their Threads to make Cloth,
all being of equal Threads. First, They raise their Children as they spin finer
to the higher Benches. Secondly, They sort and size all the Threads so, that
they can apply them to make equal Clothes. Whereas here in England one Woman,
or good Housewife, has it may be six or eight Spinners belonging to her, and
at some odd times she spins, and also her Children and Servants, and all this
Thread shall go together, some for Woof, some for Warp, to make a piece of
Cloth. And as the Linen is Manufactured in England at this day, it cannot be
otherwise. And is it not a pity and shame, that the young Children and Maids
here in England should be idle within (...), begging ab^o^d, tearing Hedges, or
robbing Orchards, and worse, when these, and these alone, are the people that
may, and must if ever, set up this Trade of making fine Linen here? And after a
young Maid has been three years in the spinning School, that is taken in at
six and then continues until nine years, she will get eight pence the day. And
in these parts I speak of, a man that has most Children lives best; whereas
here he that has most is poorest. There the Children enrich the Father, but
here beggar him.

Joining to this Spinning-School are three more Schools, ordered as this spoken
of is. One is for Maids weaving Bone-lace, another for Boys making Toys, some
cutting the Heads, some the Bodies, some the Legs; the third is for Boys
painting the Toys and slit Pictures.

I know these Questions will be put or asked: First, Where would you have this
Trade settled in England? Secondly, How shall there be Flax provided for to
manage this Trade? And, Thirdly, Where shall be Stock at first, and where can
we have places to whiten? I Answer, Warwick, Leicester, Northampton, and Oxford
Shires are the places fit to set up this Manufacture, because in these
Countries there is at present no Staple Trade, and the Land there for Flax is
very good, being rich and dry, wherein Flax does abundantly delight. And I
affirm, that the Flax that grows in these parts, shall do any thing that the
German or any other Flax can do, provided it be ordered accordingly. As to the
second and third, (as to Flax and Stock) let each County begin with two
thousand Pounds Stock apiece immediately to provide Houses as before set down,
and employ it as is directed. And for places to Whiten, near all the great
Towns there are Brooks or Rivers where bleeching places may be made in the
Lands adjoining, as is in Southwark by help of the flowing of the Thames. And
for Men and Women to Govern the Trade, I know in every Country there are Men
sufficient to direct and order it.

I know it will be much inquired into by many, why Warwick, Leicester,
Northampton, and Oxford-shires should be the places fixed on for the Linen
Manufacture before all other Counties in England? I answer, there are no
Counties in England so capable of making the Commodity so good and so cheap as
these. First, their Land is excellent good to produce Flax. Secondly, they are
inland Counties, and have no staple Manufacture at present fixed with them;
whereby their poor are idle and want employment. Thirdly, they are Counties the
best furnished at all times with Corn and Flesh of any Counties in England, and
at cheapest Rates. Fourthly, they are in the heart of England, and the Trade
being once well settled in these Counties will influence their Neighboring
Counties in the same Manufacture in sending their Flax and threads with ease
and cheapness down the Rivers Thames, Avon, Trent, and St Eades: all which
Navigable Rivers come into these Counties. And I affirm it is not possible to
set up this Trade in any other part of England with success but in these
places, because in most part of England there are fixed Manufactures already
that do in great measure set the poor at work. In the West of England clothing
of all sorts, as in Gloucester, Worcester, Shropshire, Staffordshire, and a
small part of Warwickshire: In Derby, Nottingham and Yorkshire, the Iron and
Woollen Manufacture: In Suffolk, Norfolk, and Essex, the Woollen Manufacture: In
Kent, Sussex and Surry, some Cloth, Iron, and Materials for Shipping. Then to
Counties to raise provisions and to vend them at London to feed that great
Mouth, are Cambridge, Huntington, Buckingham, Hartford, Middlesex and Berks.
And if you rightly weigh and consider how England is fixed in all parts as to
the Growth, Trade, Manufacture, and vending thereof, there are no Counties in
England that this desirable gainful improvement of the Linen Manufacture
possibly can be managed in, with the like success, as in the forementioned
Counties. For as Common Honesty is necessary for Trade, and without it Trade
will decay: so any Manufacture fixed in any place where it may be better
accommodated, thither it will go, and so remove from the place where it was
first set up; and the discouragments it received there many times keep it from
fixing any where else. About seven or eight years since there was a Proposal of
setting up the Linen Manufacture in and near Ipswich, a Town of two hundred
void houses, to be had for little, and near the Sea: but I coming to that Town
was pressed hard to give my Opinion, whether the Linen Trade might be there set
up with success? After I had rid about the Town as far as Cattaway Bridge, and
observed the Influence that the Colchester Trade had there; as also the Stuff
and Say Trade, whereby the Poor were comfortably supplied: I then found it was
impossible to go on with success, and gave my reasons, upon which all was laid
aside, and my reasons approved of. I did also acquaint one of the Grandees of
the Linen Trade at Clarken-well, that that Trade would eat out its own Bowels,
Stock and Block would come to nothing. And so it shall do in the Countries I
name, and in all other places in the World, being a new Manufacture, unless the
Public Authority take care and cherish it, for at least seven years. The way
how, I will set down when I have finished my Discourse of this and the Iron
Manufacture; for it is as fit to be done for the encouragement of the Iron
Manufacture, as for the Linen Manufacture. And observe, I pray you, these
Counties I now name for the Linen Manufacture, employ more hands at work by
their growth, than any eight Counties of England do by the growth of theirs,
and all employed abroad in other Counties, not in their own. And the great
cause of Strength and Riches to England are those great quantities of Wool
which grow in their great Pastures, and are sent abroad into the West and other
parts, and there Manufactured, where they keep at work infinite quantities of
poor people, as Spinners, Carders, Weavers, Dressers, Dyers. Yet I have seen
two pieces in Print, each making great complaint, that by the late Enclosures
in these Counties, a Dog and a Boy do manage as much Lands as formerly employed
ten Teams, and kept forty persons at work all the year. Never considering that
the Land enclosed is treble the benefit to the Owner (after the Ministers and
Poors part was thrown out) over what it was before it was enclosed; and that
the product of the Wool proceeding from the same Land, does set at work five
times the number of people in other places of the Kingdom. And so it will be
with the Linen Manufactures, if once well settled in these four Counties, and
encouraged by a Public Law. Then these Counties will be as Germany is to
Holland and Flanders: There the Flax will grow, and be Manufactured easily and
cheap; part whitened there, and the Thread and part of the Flax sent down the
Navigable Rivers to the several Towns to be woven and spun. And so there will
be employ for the greatest part of the Poor of England. And in such Towns where
it meets with a settled voluntary Register, thence never will it depart.

But I must now name you some Lands in these Counties very fit for Flax,
thereby to make you know the fitness of the rest, with its quantities; as also
show you the quantities of Flax that may grow upon one Manor in Warwickshire,
and the number of poor people it will employ: by which Demonstrations you may
judge what may be done in the four Counties named in this Design offered at.

For this twelve years last past, I having my London Road through Warwickshire,
made my Observations of the Land there, and the fitness of it to bear Flax; but
more particularly of the Manor of Milcott, being the Earl of Middlesex's near
Stratford upon Avon. Which Manor is about three thousand Acres, and to the
value of three thousand pounds a year, as I am informed. The Land in this
Manor is sound, rich, dry, and good, and that is the true Land to bear Flax.
And in this Manor some years there are sown some hundred Acres of Flax: But if
the whole Manor were sown with Flax, it would employ nine thousand people in
the Manufacturing thereof, as to sowing, weeding, pulling, watering, dressing,
spinning, winding, weaving, and whitening. One part of which labor would be
done upon and near the place; the other would be done in remote parts, the Flax
and Thread being carried down the River Avon into Severne, and so conveyed with
ease to Bristol, Wales, and other parts, to set the Poor at work, which want
employment; and so the small Towns will set their Poor at work by the same Rule
as they do in Germany, and then there will need no Relief from the Parish for
the Poor, nor will there be any complaining in the Streets. One Acre of Land
will bear three hundred weight of Flax. This three hundred weight of Flax well
dressed and made fine, will make four hundred Else of Cloth, worth three
shillings the Ell, which will be in value when it is manufactured threescore
Pounds. You must observe, the finer the Thread is, the less Flax goes to make
it, and the more Cloth it will make. And so there being the labor of three
persons to manufacture the Flax that comes of this one Acre of Land, this
Manor will employ nine thousand persons. Now there are at least Ten thousand
Acres of Land besides this, very good for Flax in Warwickshire, and no less
quantity in any of the three other Counties, every way as good. Now, Reader, I
pray Answer me, whether here be not work sufficient upon the growth and product
of our own Land, nay in four Counties where no Manufacture is, to set the
greatest part of the Poor of England at work; besides the great advantage it
will bring to the Owners of the Lands; and the great enriching of the Country,
by fixing so great a staple Trade there, and bringing a multitude of People
also, which is, and ever will be a great enrichment to the place where they
are. Witness the West of England by the Woollen Manufactures; and Buringham,
Sturbridge, Dudly, Wassal, and thereabout, for the Iron Manufactures. And I
dare affirm, take Dudly to be the Center of ten Miles round, considering the
badness of the Land, it is there twice as dear as it is in the four Counties
here named. And within ten Miles round Dudly, there are more people inhabiting
and more Money returned in a year, than is in these four rich fat Counties I
mention. And by this Manufacture we should prevent at least two Millions of
Money a year from being sent out of the Land for Linen Cloth, and keep our
people at home who now go beyond the Seas for want of employment here. For
where ever the Country is full of people, they are rich; and where thin, there
the place is poor, and all Commodities cheap.

I could put something further into the Heads of the Gentlemen of these
Counties, wherein they may have much more added to this prescribed Linen Trade:
but then I fear their Neighboring Gentlemen will fall at Difference, why one
should have so much benefit and the other so little, as they did when I
surveyed Trent for them in the year one thousand six hundred sixty five, and a
Tax shall be laid upon the Stock settled, as they did upon mine and Partners,
as soon as I had made the River Avon Navigable, and brought Barges to Stratford.

I know many will say, This is a very good way to employ the poor, but what
shall they do for Looms, Slayes, and Wheels for to spin and weave this Flax,
and how shall we make our Flax fine, so that we may make fine Cloth, and what
shall we do for places to whiten it at, for it is said that no place will do it
well but at Haerlem in Holland, and that is because of the water in the Mere
joining unto the Town.

As to the first, thou may have the Looms, Wheels, and Slayes at first out
of Germany and from Haerlem: Two Looms, Two Wheels, and ten Slayes will be
sufficient to make others by; and all these thou may have for twenty pounds.
As to the Second, there is much in preparing and fitting of the Flax, so as to
make it run to a fine Thread. This is the way they do it in Germany, and thou
may write by their Copy. Thou must twice a year beat thy Flax well and dress
it well, and take out of it all the filth, and so for as long as thou have it
in thy possession, if it be ten years; and the longer thou keep it, the
finer it will be, for beating and often dressing will cause the Harle to open,
and at last it will be strangely fine. There must also be a Stove in the Room
where the Flax is, with Fire in it in all moist times, which keeps the Flax dry
and prevents Moistness, which is another great cause which makes it so fine. I
have seen Flax in Saxony twenty years old thus hous-wife't, which was as fine
as the hairs of ones head. It is true there what the old saying is here, That
Wool may be kept to Dirt, and Flax to Silk.

And as to the Second, It is true that their Hollands and Clothes are whitened
at Haerlem, and by the very sides of the Lake, and Cuts are conveniently made,
and the Lake is much of a height at all times, and so it feeds the Cuts with
water, that with ease they may Sprinkle the Clothes as there is Occasion; also
it is well fitted with Houses by the sides of the Cuts to boil the Yarn, and
prepare it the sooner to be white. These are good things, and by the situation
of the Place and convenience of the Mere it does much advance the business.
Rich Merchants are there seated, that drive great Trades, and there they have a
Bank, and their Moneys at three in the Hundred. But as to Haerlem Lake, it is
subject to be mixed with Salt Water, which is brought in the Ships daily from
Amsterdam, and there pumpt out into the Lake. And all that can be said for that
Water being better than any other Water in Holland is this, that it continually
stands in a Pool or Lake, and by the influence and heat of the Sun is made
soft, and so very fit for scouring, and the like is not in any part of Holland
else. But in England we have many places very fit, and by Nature convenient,
and with a little Art, as good as Haerlem, if not better. And for Instance take
two places, one at Stratford upon Avon, the other at Coventry. At Stratford
upon Avon near the Bridge in the Lands of Sir John Clapton, by virtue of the
Mills pounding high, or at a rise of Water, he may lead the Water along his own
Land, until it come so high that no Flood will reach. There Cuts may be made in
his Land, and Houses built with spare pieces to bleech the Cloth on, the Water
being taken into the Cuts about the end of March, and so continued therein,
whereby the heat of the Sun will more and more soften and fit it for bleeching.
The second place is Coventry; Almost round the City the Lands and Waters lie so
convenient, that it exceeds Haerlem; for Haerlem Lake lies but upon one
Quarter of the Town, and the Waters lie at Coventry about three parts of that
Town. And I am sure Coventry ought to be the chiefest place of this intended
Linen Manufacture, and in few years would exceed Haerlem; God and Nature having
fixed them right for it, both as to Land fit to bear Flax, good whitening, a
large City in the very Center of England, and their Woollen Manufacture being
now wholly decayed. And in this City a Bank, by virtue of a voluntary Register,
is absolutely necessary, and then the Gentlemen in the four Counties named may
make their Sons Linen Merchants, and thereby be a means to help to beat the
Dutch without fighting.

I have been something long upon this Theme, because I hope and believe I may
see something of the Improvement, by the Linen Trade, come to pass.

But some other Questions will here be asked: As, who encouraged you to make
this Discourse of the Linen Improvement, and who paid you for your pains in
traveling to find the things here writ? I answer, I was an Apprentice to a
Linen Draper, and so I knew something of Linen; and finding the Poor
unimployed, I with my Wife did promote the making of much fine Linen with good
success. And being employed and my Charges born by twelve Gentlemen of England,
to bring into England a Manufacture out of Saxony and Bohemia made of Iron and
Tin, there I did see what I here set down; and in Holland and Flanders I tried
and observed their way and manner of Trade in the Linen Manufacture: All which
take you for nothing.

The second Manufacture to be encouraged to set the poor people at work, being
the growth and product of our own Kingdom, is that of Iron. But now I am sure I
shall draw a whole Swarm of Wasps about my Ears. For say some (and many too who
think themselves very wise) it were well if there were no Iron-works in
England; and it was better when no Iron was made in England: and the Iron-works
destroy all the Woods; and foreign Iron from Spain will do better and last
longer. And I have heard many men both Rich and Sober often declare these
things; and it has been and is the opinion of nine parts of ten of the people
of England, that it is so, and by no arguments whatever will they be beat from
the belief of it, although there is not one word true. As to the First, The
Iron works at present in England are of the same value, and I believe much more
to the public than the Woollen Manufacture is, and is the cause of employing
near as many people, and much more Lands for Horses and Oxen to carry and
recarry those heavy commodities of which the Iron is made, and the Iron, and
the things made of the Iron. Therefore I will take the Kingdom half round, and
show you what the Iron works do contribute to the Public and to the whole
Countries.

And First, I will begin in Monmouth-shire, and go through the Forest of Dean,
and there take notice what infinite quantities of Raw Iron is there made, with
Bar Iron and Wire; and consider the infinite number of Men, Horses, and
Carriages which are to supply these Works, and also digging of Iron Stone,
providing of Cinders, carrying to the Works, making it into Sows and Bars,
cutting of Wood, and converting it into Charcoal. Consider also in all these
parts the Woods are not worth the cutting and bringing home by the Owner to
burn in their Houses: And it is because in all these places there are Pit Coals
very cheap. Consider also the multitude of Cattle and People thereabouts
employed that make the Lands dear: And what with the benefit made of the Woods,
and the People making the Land dear, it is not inferior for Riches to any place
in England. And if these Advantages were not there, it would be little less
than a howling Wilderness. I believe if this comes to the hands of Sir Baynom
Frogmorton, and Sir Duncomb Colchester, they will be on my side. Moreover,
there is yet a most great benefit to the Kingdom in general by the Sow Iron
made of the Iron Stone and Roman Cinders in the Forest of Dean; for that Metal
is of a most gentle, pliable, soft nature, easily and quickly to be wrought
into Manufacture, over what any other Iron is, and it is the best in the known
World: and the greatest part of this Sow Iron is sent up Severne to the Forges,
into Worcestershire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, and Cheshire,
and there it is made into Bar-Iron: And because of its kind and gentle nature to
work, it is now at Sturbridge, Dudly, Wolverhampton, Sedgley, Wasall, and
Burmingham, and thereabouts, wrought and manufactured into all small
Commodities, and diffused all England over, and thereby a great Trade made of
it; and when manufactured sent into most parts of the World. And I can very
easily make it appear, that in the Forest of Deane, and thereabouts, and about
the Materials that come from thence, there are employed, and have their
subsistence therefrom, no less than sixty thousand persons. And certainly if
this be true, then it is certain it is better these Iron-works were up and in
being, than that there were none. And it were well if there were an Act of
Parliament for enclosing all Commons fit or any way likely to bear Wood in the
Forest of Deane, and six Miles round the Forest; and that great quantities of
Timber might by the same Law be there preserved, for to supply in future Ages
Timber for Shipping and Building. And I dare say the Forest of Deane is, as to
the Iron, to be compared to the Sheeps back, as to the Woollen: Nothing being of
more advantage to England than these two are. And if Woods are not preserved in
and near the Forest, to supply the Works for future Ages, that Trade will
lessen and dye, as to England, and betake her self unto some other Nation or
Country. And now in Worcestershire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire,
and Derby-shire there are great and numerous quantities of Iron-works, and
there much Iron is made of Metal or Iron Stone of another nature quite
different from that of the Forest of Deane. This Iron is a short soft Iron,
commonly called Cold-shore Iron, of which all the Nails are made, and infinite
other Commodities: In which work are employed many more persons, if not double
to what are employed in the Forest of Deane. And in all those Countries the
Gentlemen and others have Moneys for their Woods at all times when they want
it, which is to them a great benefit and advantage; and the Lands in most of
these places are double the rate that they would be at if there were not
Iron-works there. And in all these Countries now named there is an infinite of
Pit Coals, and the Pit Coals being near the Iron, and the Iron Stone growing
with the Coals, there it is manufactured very cheap, and sent all England over,
and to most parts of the World. And if the Iron-works were not there, the Woods
(...) all these Countries to the Owners thereof would not be worth the cutting
and carrying home, because of the cheapness of the Coals and duration thereof.

I could say something as to Notingham and Yorkshire, (...) to Kent and
Sussex; but I leave that to some other ^en that knows the Countries better than
I do. And in these Countries now mentioned there are many and vast Commons,
very natural and fit to bear Wood, which at present are of very little use to
the public. And for that in these parts there never will be any want of Pit
Coals, to work and manufacture the Iron when once made into Bars, but Woods do
much decay; and this being a thing of such great benefit to the public, and in
the setting of the Poor at work; it were well that a Law might pass for
enclosing all Commons fit and apt to bear wood, which are and lie within twelve
Miles of the Town of Sturbridge in the County of Worcester; and that in such
enclosed Copices there may be provision made to preserve Timber, now much
wanting in those parts.

The next Objection is, That it was better when there was no Iron made in
England; But when that was, neither I nor the Objector knows. For in the Forest
of Deane and thereabouts the Iron is made at this day of Cinders, being the
rough and offal thrown by in the Romans time; they then having only foot-blasts
to melt the Iron Stone, but now by the force of a great Wheel that drives a
pair of Bellows twenty foot long, all that Iron is extracted out of the Cinders
which could not be forced from it by the Roman Foot-blast. And in the Forest of
Deane and thereabouts, and as high as Worcester, there are great and infinite
quantities of these Cinders; some in vast Mounts above ground, some under
ground, which will supply the Iron-works some hundreds of years, and these
Cinders are they which make the prime and best Iron, and with much less
Charcoal than does the Iron Stone. And certainly this being so, it will be
great policy for the Government timely to consider and weigh the great benefit
Iron-works are to these pla^^^ and to the Kingdom and People in general; and
therefore to begin to countenance them, in preserving Woods for their
continuation and duration.

The next thing is, Iron-works destroy the Woods and Timber. I affirm the
contrary; and that Iron-works are so far from the destroying of Woods and
Timber, that they are the occasion of the increase thereof. For in all parts
where Iron-works are, there generally are great quantities of Pit Coals very
cheap, and in these places there are great quantities of Copices or Woods which
supply the Iron-works: And if the Iron-works were not in being, these Copices
would have been stocked up, and turned into Pasture and Tillage, as is now
daily done in Sussex and Surry, where the Iron-works, or most of them, are laid
down. And in Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Warwick, Salop, and Stafford
Shires are vast and infinite quantities of Copices, wherein there are great
store of young Timber growing; and if it were not that there could be Moneys
had for these Woods by the Owners from the Iron Masters, all these Copices
would be stocked up, and turned into Tillage and Pasture, and so there would be
neither Woods nor Timber in these places: And the Reason is, Pit Coal in all
these places, considering the duration and cheapness thereof, is not so
chargeable to the Owner of the Woods as cutting and carrying the Woods home to
his House. And as to making Charcoal with Timber in those parts, so much talked
of, it was and is most notoriously false; for Timber in all these parts is
worth thirty shillings a Tun, and a Tun and three quarters of Timber will but
make one Coard of Wood. So let all rational men consider, whether an Iron
Master will cut up Timber to the value of fifty shillings, to make one Coard of
Wood, when he pays for his Wood in most of these places but seven shillings a
Coard?

Now I have showed you the two Manufactures of Linen and Iron with the product
thereof, and all the materials are with us growing; and these two Manufactures
will if by Law countenanced set all the poor in England at work, and much
enrich the Country, and thereby fetch people into the Kingdom, whereas now they
depart; and thereby deprive the Dutch of these two great Manufactures of Iron
and Linen: I mean Iron wrought into all Commodities, so vastly brought down the
Rhine into Holland from Liege, Gluke, Soley and Cologne, and by them diffused
and sent all the World over. And these two Trades being well fixed here, will
help to beat the Dutch without fighting. I pray consider the charge England is
now at with the poor, and observe what they now cost the Public; but if
employed in these two Manufactures, what advance by their Labor might the
public receive? Admit there be in England and Wales a hundred thousand poor
people unimployed, and each one costs the public four pence the Day in food,
and if these were employed they would earn eight pence the day; and so the
public in what might be gained and saved will advance twelve pence the day by
each poor person now unimployed. So a hundred thousand persons will be to the
benefit of the public if employed, one Million and a half yearly in these two
Manufactures of Iron and Linen. And as these two Manufactures are now managed
in Saxony, they set all their poor at work, I traveling aworter and across
Saxony did not see one beggar there; and these two Manufactures being
prudently, and by good Laws there supported and encouraged, they are become two
parts in three of the Revenue and benefit of that Duke, and they are sent into
England at this time in great quantities, all paying Customs in ten several
places before they come here.

And that the Linen and Iron Manufactures may be so encouraged here by a
public Law, as that we may draw these Trades solely to us, which now foreign
Nations receive the benefit of, there ought in the first place to be a Tax or
Custom at least of four shillings in the pound put on all Linen Yarn, Threads,
Tapes and Twines for Cordage that shall be imported into England, and three
shillings in the pound upon all Linen Clothes under four shillings the Ell; and
this Law to be and continue for seven years. And by virtue of this Tax or
Imposition there will be such advantage given to the Linen Manufacture in its
Infancy, that thereby it will take deep rooting and get a good Foundation on a
sudden, (the consequence whereof will do and bring to pass the great things
formerly mentioned.)

And as to the Encouragement of the Iron, and Iron Manufactures, there should
be three pound a Tun Custom, laid on all foreign Bar Iron imported, and six
pounds the Tun on all the Manufactured Iron imported into England; and by these
two ways, namely by a Tax being laid upon the imported Bar Iron, Iron Wares,
and Thread, Tape, Twine, and Linen Cloth of all sorts, all the Trade of these
things will be here, and all the Poor set at work, the Dutch robbed of one of
their greatest Flowers, and to the King and people in general at least six
Millions a year advantage. The reasons how and upon what grounds it will be so;
as also the reasons why the Commons in the Countries before mentioned ought to
be enclosed for Wood and Timber, you may expect in the second part.

But I know there will be a parcel of at least eight Anchor Smiths near London
that will make a great Noise against laying a Tax upon foreign Iron, and give
many wise reasons for it, and at last endeavor to knock all on the head,
urging that it will be of great prejudice to the King, for it will cause him to
pay dear for all his Iron that shall be made use of for his Naval Force. But
the King need not fear that, for he may if he please have sufficient of his own
at half the rates he pays now for it, (and good quantities to sell to others)
and made at the place before mentioned near Christ-Church in Hampshire. But
there is something that may be of worse consequence than ordinary, if the Iron
Manufacture be not encouraged. At present most of the Works in Sussex and Surry
are laid down, and many in the North of England, and many in other parts must
follow, if not prevented by enclosing Commons to supply them with Wood. And
when the greatest part of the Iron-works are asleep, if there should be
occasion for great quantities of Guns and Bullet, and other sorts of Iron
Commodities for a present unexpected War, and the Sound happen to be locked up,
and so prevent Iron coming to us; truly we should then be in a fine case!
Therefore if the Iron Design at Christ-Church go on, it may do well; for Store
will be no sore.

I hope now I have plainly made it appear, that by the two Manufactures of Iron
and Linen, being encouraged as is set down, all the poor People of England may
be set at work.

That nothing may be wanting that may conduce to the benefit and encouragement
of things manufactured, as in cheap carriage to and fro over England, and to
the Sea at easy rates, I will in the next place show you how the great Rivers
in England may be made Navigable, and thereby make the Commodities and Goods
carried, especially in Winter time, for half the rate they now pay. Therefore
you must know that the Thames and Severne are the two great Master Rivers, that
run farthest into the Inlands of England, and so into the Seas, and these
Rivers are both of them already Navigable; Thames as far as Oxford, and Severne
from the Welsh Pool (or within two Miles of it) to Bristoll: But one of these
Rivers running directly South, the other East, they are distant in the nearest
place forty Miles from each other, and so there is no advantage made of these
two eminent Rivers, in being helpful one to the other in point of Carriage. But
it was about ten years since projected (and a Bill brought into the House) to
make these two great Rivers communicable, by making a new Cut from Lechlode
along near Criclett into Avon, and so down Avon to Bath, and so for Bristoll.
And a Map was drawn for Mr. Mathews by Mr. Moxon to demonstrate the thing. Many
Lords and Gentlemen were engaged in it; amongst which were the Duke of
Albemarle and the Earl of Pembroke. But some foolish Discourse at Coffee-houses
laid asleep map that design as being a thing impossible and impracticable. But
this Summer my Son has twice surveyed the River Thames and the Charwel, and it
is very evident and clear that the Charwel may be made Navigable to Banbury,
and the River Stower from Shipton clear into Avon River two miles below
Stratford, the River Avon being already made Navigable into the Severn; and so
there will be by making the Charwel Navigable from Oxford to Banbury, and the
Stower from Shipton to Avon, a Communication of these two great Rivers for
Water carriage within eight miles. And that eight miles for Land carriage will
be of good hilly sound dry Land. And the making of the Charwel Navigable from
Oxford to Banbury will cost about ten thousand pounds, and from Shipton to Avon
making that River Navigable about four thousand pounds. These two things being
done, all the great and heavy carriage from Cheshire, all Wales, Shropshire,
Staffordshire and Bristol will be carried to London and recarried back to the
great Towns, especially in the Winter time, at half the rate they now pay,
which will much promote and advance the intended Manufacture of Linen in the
Countries before named. For these Countries will then have the head of the
Navigations in them; besides it will carry Corn and Malt from Banbury and
thereabouts to be sent for London; Banbury and near it being the only plentiful
place for goodness and quantities of Corn in England. The Map showing you the
advantage that may be made of these Rivers, and how they will be serviceable
one to the other, and answer the great ends of Trade and Commerce, is here
affixed.

But I hear some say, You projected the making Navigable the River Stoure in
Worcestershire, what is the reason it was not finished? I say it was my
projection, and I will tell you the reason why it was not finished. The River
Stoure and some other Rivers were granted by an Act of Parliament to certain
persons of Honor, and some progress was made in the work, but within a small
while after the Act passed it was let fall again. But it being a Brat of my
own, I was not willing it should be Abortive; therefore I made offers to
perfect it, having a third part of the Inheritance to me and my heirs for ever,
and we came to an agreement. Upon which I fell on, and made it completely
Navigable from Sturbridge to Kederminster; and carried down many hundred Tuns
of Coals, and laid out near one thousand pounds, and there it was obstructed
for want of Money, which by Contract was to be paid.

Rules to prevent Fires in the City of London, and in the great Cities of
England, taken exactly from the Method that is used in Saxony, and many other
parts of Germany.
THere Masons, Carpenters, Brick-layers and Joyners at their making Free, are
put into the List with the rest to be always ready to help to quench and
prevent the spreading of Fires; Fifteen of the Substantial Citizens
Commissionated for to look to the well ordering of all things relating
thereunto; an Engineer and his Assistants made and settled; two Sentinels
appointed with Houses built for to hold the Water Engines in, and to put in the
Engineers Ingredients, and Goods taken from all Houses on Fire or to be blown
up; Sleds and Copper Tubs made.

These things being made and done, then the Sentinel has a Place on the top of
the highest Steeple whereby he may look all over the Town; one is by Day, the
other by Night; and every two Hours in the Night he plays half an hour upon a
Flagelet, being very delightful in the Night: and he looks round the City; if
he observes any Smoke or Fire or danger of Fire, he presently sounds a Trumpet
and hangs out a bloody Flag, toward that Quarter of the City where the Fire
is. Immediately all the people which are for the quenching of the Fires, with
the Commissioners and Engineers, or as many as are in Town, run to the place;
and presently the Commissioners or any two of them with the Engineers give the
necessary orders for the suppressing of the Fire, either by pulling down or
blowing up the Houses. All the Laborers obey in assisting to pull down,
carrying the goods that must be removed to the Houses appointed, fetching the
Water being ready filled in Copper Tubs upon Sleds which is quickly done, for
that the Sleds, Tubs and Water with the place where they stand are ordered so,
a Horse may come at them; and there are two Cocks to supply with Water, one
upon the one side of the space where the Tubs are, and the other on the other
side: so the Empty Tubs are filled as they return, whereby no Water can be
wanting. And one side of the square are the Houses for the Water Engines; the
Rooms at the end of the square are for the Engineers Ingredients; and the other
side of the square is Rooms to put such goods in as they take from the Houses
that are blown up or pulled down or preserved from the Fire. The Copper Tubs
are fixed upon the Sleds in the open square; and all the Doors of the buildings
are made outward, by which the people may come to the Tubs of Water with
Horses backwards and forwards uninterrupted. And all other persons may come to
the several Rooms one not interrupting the other. And this is a square piece of
Land in some convenient place in the City. And things being thus fitted and
ordered, upon breaking out of Fire, immediately every man is at work according
to order; and it is very seldom that above three Houses are ruined by Fire in
any of these Cities. And if this prevention, Rule and Order were not, it is
impossible but upon the breaking out of Fire the greatest part of the Cities
would be destroyed; for that many Cities are built of Fir, which is very full
of Turpentine. Now with us in England upon the breaking out of great Fires, all
the Rabble runs crying Fire, Fire, to the great affrightment and amazement of
most people near where the Fire is, and makes it worse than really it is, which
causes the remove of goods to their great loss and detriment. Besides, these
sorts of sudden Frights cost many Poor Women their Lives; and sometimes it
goes near the Man too. And another sort of people run to Rob and Steal, and
it is feared to increase the Fires into the Bargain, that they may better bring
to pass their wicked ends. Then one cries, Pull down, and another cries, Blow
up this House, another cries, Blow up that House. So grows a confusion not to
be paralleled. One stands in the way of another. Many Poor Souls do their best
to prevent the spreading abroad of the Fire, and for want of Judgment are many
times destroyed. Then comes some person in Authority or other and he cries,
Fetch Powder to blow up this House or that House; and no Powder at present is
to be had; at last when the Fire has got great head, then the Powder comes;
Blow up this House, says the Gentleman, the multitude cry, no, no, Blow up
that House. There they are as it were at the building of Babel, all in
confusion. But pray you write by this copy here set you, and then the Fires may
be prevented, the peoples fears allayed and their minds quieted, the great and
miserable Calamities that Fires occasion, prevented, and all people lie quiet
in their Beds except those employed. And then in such a great City as London
is, many Fires would be over and quenched, before the twentieth part of the
people in the City did know there were any Fire at all. And certainly if ever
such a thing as this take place, it is high time now it were done. I have here
annexed the Houses built, Tubs upon the Sleds, and if you would have me to do
more, I cannot. Only I can tell you for London and the Suburbs this Rule would
do well in three places; Viz. in St. Martins Steeple in the Fields one
Sentinel, in St. Sepulchers Steeple another, and in the Monument another. And
all things done as is here prescribed, your fears would be quickly gone, the
Houses would raise Rents, and men would purchase Houses that would now sell
those they have if they could.

Houses for the Goods.

Houses for the Water Engines.

^^^ses for the Engineers Materials.

diagram

You will ask me by what Authority this shall be done, and who shall pay the
charge? I say it must be done by Act of Parliament, and the several Cities and
great Towns must bear their own charges in providing Houses and setting all in
order. But you will say, Our Parliament men will not do it for us. I cannot
help that, but if they will not, in my second part I will draw the form of the
Bill which shall fit the purpose.

A Dialogue betwixt a Clothier, a Woollen-draper, and a Country-Yeomen, at
Supper upon the Road.
Dr. WHat News from London, old Friend?


Cl. There Is no News, but the old news, A bad Trade still.


Dr. It is impossible it should be otherwise; for you Clothiers, and we
Drapers, are both betwixt one and the same pair of Milstones.


Cl. What do you mean by that, Friend?


Dr. Why, do you not know? I mean the Factors, Drawers, and Packers, are now
turned Merchants, and the Trade is ruined by them: Formerly it was you
Clothiers, and we Drapers, ^^d now it is another thing.


Cl. Indeed, Sir, you say true, it is so; and I have been often thinking of it,
and speaking too, as loud as I durst, to my Neighbor Smith concerning it.


Dr. What do you mean, by saying you speak as loud as you durst? Are you afraid
of them?


Cl. Indeed Sir, they are now become to us, as the Lawyer is to his Client; we
dare not say what we know.


Dr. Why? I know you are a rich Man, and need not fear; and by telling the
truth, you may relieve many a Man, and do good to the Trade.


Cl. I would be willing to do what good lies in my power, but men of our Trade
are so much divided, and the poorer sort are so afear'd of the Factors, if they
should offer to relieve themselves, and seek out any other way, the Factors
would join stock together, and set up our Trade in some other place, and so
undo our Town.


Dr. No, no, that is impossible; surely no Men will be so base, especially those
that have been your Servants.


Cl. But what I say is true: And in a Town in Worcestershire this present time,
I know it is their condition.


Dr. I pray, what Town is that?


Cl. It is Kidderminster in Worcestershire, where they make the Stuffs for
Hangings.


Dr. I know the Factors that belong to that Town, they are very honest men, and
will not do any such thing.


Cl. It is true what I say, for lately some friends of the Clothiers of
Kidderminster, and some Upholsterers, consulted how to bring the Kidderminster
Trade to be good to both, it being a Trade that is much debased and spoiled by
the Factors; and having brought it near to pass, the best of the Factors sent
Letters to the Clothiers, and acquaints them, that the Stuffs may be made
elsewhere as well as there, (and much more) which did so affright the
Clothiers, that they durst not agree to fix their Trade in two hands, although
it might have been Five or six thousand pounds a year in the Trades way.


Dr. Does any one know this besides you?


Cl. Yes, all the Town will tell you it is so; and I can bring you to a Man in
London, can tell you the whole Story, who treated the Upholsterers, and got two
Merchants to lend the Trade Five or six thousand pounds to help to drive the
Trade, that so it might be done with profit and ease.


Dr. Well, old Friend, I do believe you; for Kidderminster Factors have spoiled
the Weavers and the Upholsterers Trade, as our Blackwell-hall Factors, Packers,
and Drawers, have spoiled your Trade and ours.


Cl. Indeed, Sir, it is even so: and what can such a one as I do, seeing a
whole Town stand in fear of Three or four Factors?


Dr. Friend, you know when you and I dealt together first, when I. A. was a
good Clothier, and I. of Leck a good Wool-man, it was not so; then the Factors
were your Servants, and the Packers and Drawers were ours: Will you Clothiers
join with us Drapers, to see if we can reduce the Trade to the old good
condition it was in formerly?


Cl. I will with all my heart, and so will all the Clothiers in our Country
too; I will undertake for them: for we are almost at Beggars-bush, and we
cannot tell how to help our selves: And our Trade grows worse and worse, we
make no profit of our Commodities.


Coun. Gentlemen, I understand you are discoursing of your Trade, of making
Cloth, and selling Cloth; as I have club'd with you for Supper, so I pray let
me club a little with you in Discourse; for I am as highly concerned in the
thing you Discourse of, as you are; for every Acre of my Land rises price,
according as the Woollen Manufacture flourishes: If Wool be dear, my Tenants
Wife and Children have work in Spinning and Carding, and Rent's paid at the
day, and none left in arrears: And then we have a merry Sheep-sheering, and
with Two years Wool, I can Marry Jugg, or Bess.


Dr. Sir, You speak like one that has a Fellow-feeling in our misery; I shall
be, and am very heartily glad of your good company, and shall with this old
Friend of mine, join in any thing that may be for all our goods, so as the
public good of the Wool, Cloth, and Trade, may be advanced.


Coun. Sir, I shall do as much as I can; but you must know, we in the Country
are ignorant men, and do not know how to do much; but we know where the Shoe
pinches us: My Brains shall go with yours a Wool-gathering this one bout.


Cl. Friend, I am glad we have so happily met with this honest Countryman: I
hope we may amongst us Three, consider (after one Bottle more is off) how
things may be mended; what say you Country man, will you make one with us in so
good a work?


Coun. Pray what Countryman are you? I live at Salisbury. Indeed a fine Town
of Trading in the Woollen Manufactures, but much decayed of late years. What
Countryman is this Gentleman, your Friend? He lives at London. Well must he.


Dr. Come Countryman, what say you, will you make one with us?


Coun. I will not join with the Salisbury Clothier: for I thought all Clothiers
had of late removed to Tanton-Dean, and there-abouts; because that place is
under a Register, and Moneys may be had at Five in the Hundred at any time, to
drive their Trades with ease, comfort, and profit.


Dr. Sir, I confess they are at a loss, and yet they have the wisest Bishop of
late that has been there a great while; and some good things have been doing
of late for that City, as making the River Avon Navigable, and they are
preparing to come under a Register, and all the Free-land within Ten miles of
the City likewise.


Cl. Look you there Countryman, you talk of Tanton-Dean under a Register; you
see Salisbury and Ten miles round is to be under a Register likewise.


Coun. Now* I am well satisfied with corresponding with the Clothier; Salisbury
hanging Register fashion, that is a bit I love.


Dr. Come, come, now let us fall too, and consider of some good things to
advance the Woollen Manufactures; I will acquaint the Drapers, and you must the
Clothiers, and you the Countrymen; and so every one use his interest with the
Authority, to amend what is amiss.


Coun. Hold, hold, you drive too fast; there is a snake in the Bush; although I
live in the Country, yet I come to London sometimes, and at the Coffee-houses I
heard strange News, which made me stare: And now we are to set forward so good
a work, let us see how to clear the foundation, and take away the Rubbish.


Dr. Pray, Sir, what is the strange News you hear at Coffee-houses? It is
generally idle Twit twot Discourse, not worth ones minding.


Coun. I heard at the Rainbow Coffee-house, That the people in, and near
London, have of late years lent about One hundred thousand pounds without
Interest, for Four years, to be employed in the Woollen Manufacture near
Conmell in Ireland; and by the strength of that Moneys, to carry away our
people out of the West of England into Ireland, and there make Cloth and
Stuffs; and when made, then carried to Spain, France, Holland, and Germany: And
there, with cheap Wool, and cheap Victuals, Manufactured, and so do mighty
things.


Cl. You live in London, and you know whether there be any such thing as this
is; if it be so, we Clothiers may go hang our selves; Moneys without Interest
for Four years, cheap Wool, and cheap Beef, carried to Holland together, and
made Cloth there: If this be so, I Will never weave more: I will burn my Beam,
and run away by the Light.


Dr. No, no, Old Friend, our Countryman is under a mistake; be not in such a
passion, he told you he heard so in a Coffee-house.


Cl. I pray, Sir, is there any thing like it? for there cannot be such a smoke
as this is, and no fire.


Dr. I will tell you what the thing is he means. There are a certain number of
persons, who they say, have employed some such Sum as is spoken of, to set up
the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland; and indeed now it comes into my mind, I
remember I have heard of their taking over many People (out of the West of
England) and sending the Cloth and Stuffs when made, to Holland and Germany,
and also Wool and Beef with it.


Cl. I pray, had they the Moneys without interest for Four years, to do England
(and the Clothing Trade) this good turn?


Dr. No matter upon what terms, so the thing be done.


Cl. Friend, Now I see this Countryman was near the mark; and I will even burn
my Loom and Beam too, for I see all the World are mad. Here is the Moneys gone
(and taken out of Trade in England) and carried into Ireland; and our People
too, with this Money, make Cloth, and serve it cheap in all places where we
send our Cloth; and carry to Holland cheap Wool, and cheap Victuals, and pay
the Moneys back again in Four years: I will go to London, and tell my Lord
Mayor of this fine Jig, let who will go to Salisbury for me.


Dr. Old Friend, the worst is over, do not trouble your self; That which is
past, cannot be helped: But you will see no more such doings as has been of
late.


Coun. Heaven grant it prove so. There is now a great Art in trade as they say
at Coffee-houses, and we must do as we may, or else not trade at all.


Cl. Do as we may! pray speak out, What is that we must do?


Coun. Get great sums of Money upon credit, and employ it hoodwinkt, Have at
this, have at that, and have at the other; and if we lose all, we lose none of
our own.


Dr. You my two Friends, let us see how we may proceed to do the Trade some
good, for it is high time.


Cl. Is it not over and past? is it not too late to set out?


Dr. No, no, Let us prepare a Bill for the next Session of Parliament, and
Petition for prohibiting of Irish-Wools Transportation, and the Inspecting of
the Allnagers Office: And let the Factors, Packers, and Drawers, be put in
their right places: And let the Western-Cloths be Shipped of at Plymouth, to
prevent the charge of carriage to London; and let the Fullers earth be secured,
and let all Cloth and Stuffs be made to the Standard, and let all the Free-land
in and near the Clothing Towns and Cities, be put into a voluntary Register:
And then nothing will be able to harm our Woollen-Trade any more.


Cl. Friend, Now I like you; I will do any thing I can; but pray, what is that
you say of putting our Houses and Free-land under a Voluntary Register? what
good will that do to our Trade?


Dr. it will strangely advance Trade, and bring Moneys to Four in the hundred;
and your Lands Registered will be ready Money at all times, as you have occasion
to use it; and your Land rise purchase to Thirty years, and then you may at any
time have Spanish-Wool in London, or Wool in the Country, or Moneys to answer
your occasions, and all upon a Ticket upon your Lands Registered. So there will
be no need of Friends to be bound, or Lawyers to make Conveyances, or hindering
your business (and then the Tables will be turned): For you Clothiers will be
then the Bankers; for now all Money runs out of Trade; then all Money will run
into Trade, because your Land is Registered; and your personal Estates together,
will be firm Security for all Moneys borrowed.


Cl. Sir, This, as you say, is already at Tanton Dean; and People say it is in
Holland and Scotland too; but if we shall have it at Salisbury, I will keep
Loom and Beam too, and put Tom and Jack to my own Trade; I thought to put them
to Sea, for I could see nothing for them to do with me as things were: But when
shall we have this Office of Voluntary Register set up? For I like one word
very well as you say, A Voluntary Register; I like that mavelous well, and I
have nothing to say against it; for it seems he that will Register may; and he
that will not, may choose: This is no more in plain English, then give us leave
to be honest. Sir, This is good News, I will tell all our Trade of this; for
now we may be honest if we will, I am sure it is high time; for as things are,
the Lawyers cannot make us honest. But still I beg to know when this must be?


Dr. The Bill is to be carried into the House the next sitting of Parliament;
and some Lords, Parliamentmen, and Gentlemen and some honest and great Lawyers,
are for it, because it will pay the Gentleman's Debts without Money, and beat
the Dutch without Fighting; and bring Honor, Honesty, Riches, and Strength,
and a great Trade to England: And it is said, it will double the Kings Revenue,
and make him Potent and Strong.


Cl. Bores, this is the best News that ever I heard: I Will go home to Salisbury
now, and tell all my Friends of this; and I hope to see then this good
Voluntary Register brought to pass.


Dr. Well Old aquaintance, I am glad to see you so well satisfied now: If you
once get a Voluntary Register, you will want Men of your own Trade in
Parliament, to let them know what is best to be done for the good of the Trade,
which Lawyers and Gentlemen cannot tell how to do: For in Queen Elizabeth's
time, a Cobbler taught the Council how Leather might be Ordered, Tanned, and
Dressed for the good of the Public: and thereupon many good Laws were made
for that purpose; you may see the Story in Print; It is a Discourse between my
Lord Burley and a Cobbler.


Cl. Now you speak to the purpose; for what you say, has been in my Noddle
these Six or Seven years; and I am sure I have told a Neighbor of mine I did
not like it: and I feared our Parliament Men did not know where our Grief lay.
But now I see the Old saying is true, Every Man is a Fool when he is out of his
own way. Come, let us Clothiers be all for the Good Old way again: And if ever
it should so fall out, to have Men of our own Trades, for Members of
Parliament, then up goes the Golden-Fleece again.


Coun. I like your Discourse very well; and now you have brought your Discourse
to something. I was the silenter, because I did see all tended to the good of
the Wool, and the Trade, and Manufacture. And all these things being upon the
Wheel for the Public good, truly I will give my Clothing-Friend home with him
to Salisbury, two patterns of Falling-Mills, one to go by Water, to be set up
in a Barge upon the River Avon at Harnam-Bridg, by the City, to Scour and
Thicken their course-Clothes; and another to go by Wind, to be set up near the
Town-side, to Full and Thicken the fine Clothes, which will much outdo all
other Mills now in use in England, as to make the Cloth feel fine and soft. The
Pattern of the Windmill for thickning fine Clothes, is taken from the Dutch at
Harlem in Holland; the Pattern of the Mill in a Barge to thicken and scour
course Clothes, is taken from one upon the Elb, near the Bridge at Draisden in
Saxony.


Cl. Sir, I am now infinitely beholding to you; and this you say of a Windmill
to Scour and Thicken our fine Clothes, and make them feel fine and soft, will
do our business; for indeed, they are the Dutch that outdo us that way: and
you say it is so done at Harlem; and I hear at Blackwell Hall, that the fine
Clothes were made at Harlem. Good Sir, how are these Mills made, and in what
manner? and what do they do when the Wind ceases blowing, the Cloth being in
the middle of its thickning? and what do they do for Water to come into the
Cloth, when it is Thickning and Scouring?


Coun. Sir, I will acquaint you with all particulars, and then I will give you
afterward, the description of the Mill in the Barge, and the Mill that goes by
Wind. At Harlem in Holland they have Windmills to thicken and scour their fine
and super-fine clothes, built close by the City-side; the Mill is are made in
all points, as the Saw-Windmill on the Bank-side in Southwark, over against the
Savoy; and it turns round, that is, the whole Fabric turns; whereby it catches
the Wind at all points: And there are Six or Eight Fallers (or Feet) which are
taken and lifted up by the Axle-tree, which the Fanns are fastened in, and so
fall downright into a Box, or Chest, wherein the Cloth lies; and the Chest is
so made and ordered, and the Fallers so fitted, that the Cloth turns round in
the Chest, and the Square or hole the Faller drops into, is so curiously and
close made, that a Man cannot get his Knife into the Chest betwixt the Wood and
the Faller; and all other parts of the Trough and Chest where the Cloth lies,
is made close and tite, and thereby the Wind and Air is kept from coming into
the Chest when the Cloth is thickning; and in case the Wind ceases blowing,
they do either take the Cloth out of the Chest, and lay it on drift, whereby it
takes no harm; or else keep it close in the Chest, that no Air can come to it:
But the Mills are so ordered, that they are made to scour more Clothes than
they thicken; and if the Wind ceases, they let the Fallers that are to scour,
stand still: And for Water, it is pumpt up by force of the Wind to a good
height, and so conveyed into the Chest, to the Cloths, by little Spouts, as
there is occasion. In Germany, near Poland, by reason of the dryness of the
Country, and smallness of the Rains, in Summertime most Rivers are much
wanting in Water; Therefore the Mills for grinding of Corn, and thickning of
Clothes, are made and fixed in Barges, upon the Elbe near some Bridge (or in a
quick stream); And near the Bridge at Draisden in Saxony, there they scour and
thicken their Clothes in Barges; the Mill is fixed in a Barge, and in some
Barges are Two Mills. Observe the Pattern, and I will save my labor of
Writing; for by it you will see how it is in every particular.


Cl. Sir, Now I thank you a Thousand times: for now we shall be all Made at
Salisbury; our River Made Navigable to fetch Mills from Holland and Germany;
and our City, and the Lands Ten Miles round it, put into a Register, and one
Fulling-Mill made at Harlem-Bridg in a Barge, to scour our Clothes, and a
Windmill to thicken our Cloth, set up by the City-side, so that it may be as
fine and soft as Dutch Cloth. Well, if I see you at Salisbury, you shall be
made Free of that Corporation, and pay nothing, and Dine with our Bishop too,
for he loves all those things we have so much discoursed of.


Dr. Friend, Now we see we have met with a Traveller, and one that has given
us good Discourse, and he speaks as though he were practical in things; when I
saw him first, I did not expect this from him: And this last Discourse is
convenient for all the Clothing-Towns in England to know, as well as Salisbury;
for all Towns have need of these Fulling-Mills. And I will get it Printed.


Cl. No, no, good Friend, do not Print it: for we will have all the benefit of
these Mills to our selves at Salisbury; for I have beat my Noddle a good while,
considering of the reasons, why the Mills by Wind, should make the Cloth look
the more fine, and feel more soft, than if Fulled with our Mills by the open
fleet (or Fullers): And I have it now, and I will send some Queries to the
Virtuosoes about it; but I will tell diagram you how the Trick is: And if I had
not been an old Clothier, and a Fulling-Boy when I was young, I could not have
learnt it out. And it is sure, our Fulling-Mills that we now have, our Fallers
are taken up a great height, and so fall down into the Stock upon the Cloth,
and in its quick motion down, it contracts Wind, and brings it down with it
into the Stock where the Cloth is, and so the Wind and the Air being forced
upon the Cloth, makes it hard, and cools it; and the Stock being open, and the
Cloth in it turning round in the Stock, does also by the Wind and the Air it
attracts, help to cool and harden the Cloth; whereas the Mills that go by Wind,
the Fallers, or Feet, fall down perpendicular into the Stock, through a square
hole, where the Cloth is, and so attracts no Wind, nor can any Air get into the
Stock or Chest where the Cloth is; and therefore the Cloth is always kept in a
constant heat and temper, which must of necessity bring it to good proof, and
make it look very fine, and feel very soft. I am resolved, now I have got this
knack, I Will pay the Reckoning.


Dr. Now Friend, you are not a good Commonwealthsman, if you do not give me
leave to Print this; for it will be a general good to the Clothing-Trade.


Cl. Sir, Then print it all together, all that we have discoursed of this
Night, and I will pay Five pounds toward the charge, and send the Printed
Papers all over Wilt-shire, Dorset-shire, and Summerset-shire, except Taunton
Dean: For they ought to have no benefit of Mills, because they have had such a
benefit of a Register.


Dr. Good Old Friend, it shall be done; and I will get it put in, and bound up
in a Book, which an acquaintance of mine is printing concerning Trade, and
there is something in the Book that will suit well with this discourse of ours
at this time.


Cl. I Will pay the reckoning, and quit this honest Countrey-mans Charge this
Night, and to morrow too. And when I come to London, I Will tell our Friends all
our good Fortunes, how we should rout those that carried our Trade to Ireland,
Holland, and Germany; and how we shall outdo the Dutch in fine Cloth by a
Fulling-Mill to go by Wind; and that we shall never want Moneys again: and that
Salisbury Clothiers shall have no more need of Lawyers. A Voluntary Register! a
pretty Trick! we now may be honest if we please: I would I had met this
Countryman Forty years ago, it had been Five hundred Nobles in my way, and my
Fathers. Now we shall make cheap-Cloth, pay nothing to the poor, set all
a-work, and carry our Cloth to Christ-Church by Water, and so for Sea; and pay
nothing to Lawyers, and have Moneys when we want it. We will agree quarterly
with the Parrator, that will be but little. Come Boys, a brave Trade again!
Come, here is three Healths in good SACK; here is our Countrey-mans Health:
Here Is a Health to the Man that makes the Windmill; and a Health to him that
brings this Voluntary Register to Town. Come Landlady, to pay and to Bed, a
good days work I trow!


Dr. Nay, hold Old Friend, I must be gone early in the Morning: therefore let
us agree where to meet in London, to set forward the good things we now so
warmly have treated upon; for if we do not follow it close, all this will come
to nothing. Interest will not lie, every Man will be for his own Interest.


Cl. I am glad you say Interest will not lie; Then I am sure you Clothiers, and
we Drapers, and all the Gentlemen in England, their Interest is to set the poor
at work, to have their Lands rise Rents, and be at Thirty years purchase, and
to have a great Trade. Well, we will meet at the Booksellers house that prints
our Discourse; and then draw up what is fit to be done. So farewell honest
Countryman for to night.


Dr. Good morrow, good morrow, Gentlemen; I hope you have slept well to Night.


Cl. Slept well! no, for I did not sleep at all; for I have abundance of
Wind-Mills in my Noddle now, sufficient to send all the Clothiers in our Town,
and many more, to Holland and Germany, whither as I understand, several of them
are packing already; but that way will never do our business to carry cheap
Wool, and cheap Victuals into Germany and Holland, out of Ireland, and there
make it into Cloth, and sell it there to whom they please; and a Register, and
a Bank, and Moneys at Four in the hundred, and Mills in Barges to thicken the
course Cloths by the very Town-side; and Wind-Mills to thicken, and full our
fine Clothes; nor will it do our work to sort and choose out the best Wool in
Ireland, and send it to Holland and Germany, with good Beef, Butter, and
Cheese, Irish-Tongues, and Tallow to light us to work by Nights, and to have
good part of the course Wool spun in Ireland, and brought over to us in Yarn
ready to Weave, and to set on Foot on the outsides of our Town, the making of
Beudley-capes, for they are made of Irish-Wool, and then sent into Holland (to
be Sold); and I hope Wool from Ireland, and cheap Victuals with it, will do
that business well there, and all the Stuffs that are for hangings, now made at
Kidderminster, shall be made in Holland with Irish-Wool, and spun Linnen-Yarn,
out of Saxony and Bohemia; for they make these Stuffs of Irish-Wool, and
German-Yarn: and I am sure some of the people of these Towns will quickly go
away.

Another trick there is, of carrying Fullers-earth from Woborne to Lynn in
Norfolk, as they pretend; and then Ship it to be carried to the Clothiers in
the West: And when at Sea, a West-wind blows the Ship into Flushing in Zealand.
And we will have more Fullers-earth carried from Arundel in Sussex, to
Portsmouth, or to Chichester, and there Shipped, to secure the Clothiers in the
North of England: And when that Ship is over against Hull, a West-wind shall
blow her over to the Brill, or into the Texel, into Holland. And these two
Ladings of Earth, with a little that shall be brought over for Ballast for
Ships, will do mischief enough: For Trade will go where it is most encouraged,
and where the Merchant and Clothier can get most by it.


Dr. True, old Friend, these tricks there are, and there are bad men enough,
that will be apt enough to leave the Land where they were born; but let us see
to help these matters: For if you should be one of them, all the Poor of the
Country will be bound to curse you, and so will the Rich too; for we have had
men bad enough of our own Trade (but it will not become me to name Persons),
who have provoked many Clothiers to sell their estates, and Transport
themselves into the lower Palatinate, and other parts of Germany, and there set
up the Clothing-Trade, which has already quite spoiled our Course-Cloth-Trade
Eastward, and the Trade at Hamborough too; for if their Trade be spoiled in
England, they must try if they can make it out somewhere else; as in Ireland,
Holland, and Germany, etc.


Cl. Well Friend, for the conclusion of this Discourse, we have no more to do,
but to endeavor the redress of these grievances, as far as in duty we may; and
humbly to represent to Authority the great advantage it may be to the public
to prevent the carrying of Fullersearth out of the Land: To provide that all
Factors, Packers, and Drawers, may be put in their proper places; That the
illegal Transportation of Wools may be hindered, and the Trade of Ireland
regulated: It would be of great ease and advantage, if our Western Clothes
might be Transported from Plymouth, beyond the Seas, to save the charge of
carrying them to London. Many other particulars might be added, but this for
the present, till we meet next.


NOW I have discovered to you the way, manner, and method of setting all the
Poor in England at work, with the growth and product of our own Nation; with
the particular means for bringing the same to pass; And Places assigned for the
doing thereof; with the situation and conveniences that are by God and Nature
fixed in these Counties. Next, I will show you, That by the means and ways
hereafter prescribed, all the poor people that are employed in these
Manufactures, shall be in the same Counties fed with Bread sufficient, without
any charge to the Public; and thereby the Commodities will be Manufactured
cheap. The like benefit and advantage, infinite of the poor People of England
in other parts will receive, by the way here-after set down, taken exactly from
the same things done in other places; whereby they work cheap, and send
infinite of their Manufactured Commodities into many parts of the World: And
were they not fixed in these places beyond the Seas, in those Manufactures and
Policies, the Princes of those Countries, and their subjects would be strangely
poor.

My design now is, to speak of Granaries to hold Corn, and to be filled in the
time of plenty; and the advantage they are of, being well fixed in convenient
places (with the benefit the Poor will receive by them, and the Rich also): And
where ever Trade and Manufacture is intended to be set on foot, so as to bring
it to perfection, Granaries must be made, and built in places convenient, to
answer the ends designed.

The Great Duke of Saxony has three great Manufactures; one of Iron, Tinn and
Copper; another of Linen, and spun Threads of all sorts; the third of Sawed
Timbers of all sorts: He has convenienced them thus; As to his Iron, Tinn, and
Copper, he has fixed these works in the Valley, running from Segar-hutton,
clear a-long by the Cities of Anaburgh, Sneburgh, and Mareauburgh, and down as
far as Awe; and in the Hills and Mountains are his Minerals: In the Valleys are
the Rivers, whereon are set the Works. The Hills and Mountains, and at least
Ten Miles round, are full of Woods to supply his Works; not one Acre of
common-Land lies waste: At the descent of the Hills, are infinite of Saw-Mills
that go by Water, which Saw all manner of Firr and Oak; and in the Summertime
it is dragged to the River Elb, and so sent down to Hamborough. And things
being thus fixed, with all advantages that Trade can desire, that Place is
strangely populous, and vastly Rich, and yields to the Duke a great Revenue:
And it lies as Wales, and as the Forest of Dean does to England.

Next to these Wood-land Countries, lies the delightful Plain Country, wherein
is the famous City of Lepsick, very Rich in Corn and Flax; and so it holds to
Dresden upon the Left Hand of Myson, with some Vineyards: And in these
delightful Countries, there is no waste Lands, but all under improvement. In
all the great Towns, there are great Granaries for Corn; and in the Time of
Plenty, they lay up for a Rainy-day: And so there is sufficient for the Poor at
easy rates at all times; whereby the Manufacture is always cheaply done, and
thereby has the advantage of sending it to foreign Markets, and under-sell
others.

The next Country joining to Saxony, is the Prince of Hainaults, the Prince of
Parmburghs, with the Bishopric of Hall; wherein stands the Cities of Salts,
Wadell, Shenibank, and that brave old City of Magdenburgh (destroyed by Fire
and Sword by Count Tilly): These Countries for Corn, as to Rye and Wheat, are
so plentiful, that no part of Europe can go before them, there being much Corn
to spare: In the Two Cities of Shenibank and Magdenburgh, are many Granaries,
they lying upon the side of the Elbe: And in the City of Magdenburgh, I was
credibly informed (being Twice in that City), that there were Three hundred
Granaries of all sorts; wherein Corn is kept sweet, and safe from vermin, to
admiration. The manner of the Granaries built, with the way of ordering of the
Corn, and the benefit which is received thereby, you shall have, when I speak
of Granaries setting up in England. From hence the Brunswick People fetch their
Wheat they make there Mum of; and down the Elb to Hamborough, is sent infinite
of Corn out of the Granaries; and from thence to all parts that stand in need
thereof: In these Countries there is very little Manufacture, only some course
Linen, and Linnen-yarn: These Granaries preserve the Corn Six, Eight, or Ten
years, as good and sweet as when it was first put in: There are great Merchants
for Corn, and the Farmers lay up their Corn at easy Rates, and so have the
benefit of their Straw yearly, and not Rick it up, as we do in England, to be
devoured by Rats and Mice. There, Men and Maidservants, and all other persons
that have Moneys, buy Corn when it is cheap, and lay it up till it be dear: And
in these public Granaries, the Corn is kept safe, sweet, and well, a whole
year, for a Halfpenny a Bushel; and the Granary-Man gets by it. The like may be
done in England; and that which now feeds Rats and Mice, and otherways
consumed, will supply the greatest part of the poor People of England with
Bread, being preserved in Granaries.

Now I am for saving the Corn in England, and keeping it safe and sweet in
Granaries (which is consumed at present by Rats and Mice) until there shall be
want and necessity for it to be delivered to the Poor: In the Four Counties I
name for the Linen Manufacture, Oxford, Warwick, Leicester, and
Northamptonshire, there ought to be Granaries to lay up Corn; these Counties
being great Corn-Counties: And at the head of the Navigable Rivers, are the
places fit for such Granaries; and first Wellinborough in Northamptonshire, or
thereabouts. Secondly, some Town in Leicestershire, within Four Miles of
Kings-Mills; unto which Place Trent is Navigable. Thirdly, Banbury, if the
River Sharwell be made Navigable to Banbury; or else about Bleckington, the
Earl of Angleses Land, near Anslo-Bridg. And fifthly, Stratford upon Avon in
Warwickshire. If Granaries were built in those Places, to hold Corn there, it
would be brought in with ease; and when want and scarcity of Corn comes, it is
then ready to be sent down the Navigable Rivers, or to be dispersed for the
benefit of the Poor in the Country. Leicestershire is abounding in Corn, and
when plenty there, it is very cheap, having no Navigable River near to carry it
away; the like is Northamptonshire: But if Granaries were well settled in these
Places near Trent, and St. Ives River then it is ready for a Market, when it
offers it self.

Lechload, at the Head of the River Isis, Ten Miles above Oxford, will be a
very fit place for a Granary; for in thither will come great quantities of Corn
out of Oxford, Gloucester, and Berkshire: And there it will be ready upon all
occasions, when wanted, either for the Poor, or to be transported down the
River to London, and other parts.

Stratford upon Avon, in Warwickshire, will be a very good place to build
Granaries to receive Corn; and I will affirm, if there were Three or Four large
Granaries built in the Lands of Sir John Clapton, near the Bridge at Stratford,
and well managed for the good of the Poor, and Linen Trade; That on that side
the River, there would be in a very short time as great a Town built, as
Stratford now is; and there have as great a Trade as any City in those parts of
England ( Bristol only excepted): And these are my Reasons: First, the River
Avon being made Navigable to Stratford, the Barges that come up with Coals, and
Merchants goods; by them, Corn will be taken back to Bristol, and up the River
Severn, as far as the Welsh-Pool. And Secondly, the Country near Stratford, as
far as Banbury, Ayno-Dedinton, Bister, and so to Brakley, and round ot
Daventry, is very full, and abounds with good Corn; and the Carts that come to
Stratford for Coals, would never come empty down, but bring Corn with them, if
there were Granaries sufficient to receive it: So you see all things would be
fitted for sore and back carriage: And I will affirm, No place in England can
expect the benefit or advantage by any such Granaries, as Stratford upon Avon
may; for that great and vast quantities of Corn is raised in those parts, and
when cheap, they cannot tell what to do with it, the ways being so dirty and
deep. But the advantage of the Navigation will send it to serve Somersetshire,
Wales, Shropshire, Cheshire, and other parts, in wet and unseasonable years.

But the third and great Reason why this place shall exceed all others in
England, is this, There may as much Mum be made there, as at present is made at
Brunswick: And there Mum may be made and sent into Ireland, West Indies,
France, Spain, and into the Mediterranean; And these Granaries will be the
occasion of getting away the Mum-Trade from Brunswick: This shows as like a
Romance as does the Title Page of my Book, unless I do give you reasons for
what I say, and show you how it may be brought to pass, the which I will do:
Observe, the Mum at Brunswick is made of Wheat and the Wheat that it is made
of, is brought from the Granaries at Magdenburg, and Shenibank, and it grows in
the Vale of Parinburg; when it comes to Brunswick it is Malted, and so made
into Mum; and when made, then sent by Land to the River Elb, and so to
Hamborough: and from thence disposed by Merchants unto all Parts: But the Mum
at Brunswick is a Medicine, and drinks very nauseous, and is not there
drinkable at all; but that which makes it good, palitable, and strong, is its
being long at Sea; There it is forced into a fermentation, and that keeps it
working, whereby it alters the very property of the Liquor; and were it not to
be sent to Sea, that Trade at Brunswick would not be worth any thing; and to
convince you further of the reason of what I say, take this one thing, and that
will confirm you in the Truth of the rest. Our English Beer Brewed at London,
and carried to Sea, and Landed at Hamborough, and so carried up the Elb, as far
as Draisden, the Duke of Saxonie's Court, and in those Parts, it is sold for
Six pence a Quart; and it is not like the Beer either for Taste, Strength, or
Pleasantness, as it was when here; the Sea having put it into a fermentation,
causes it to drink pleasant, strong, and delightful, even comparable to
March-Beer in England four Years old, which is well-brewed, and grown very
Mellow; Hundreds of Merchants can affirm what I say to be true. Now I will show
you the reasons why the Brunswick-Trade will come to Stratford in course; and
when I have Published these reasons now given in Print, the Trade of making Mum
will begin in some short time to be set forward there; and that River being a
Brat of my Brain, when I contrived it, the Trade of making Mum there, was a
thing I much hoped to see come to pass; and I believe it is now not far off.
And therefore I beg that worthy Gentleman's leave, Sir John Clapton, that I may
give Name unto a Town that will certainly rise and be built in about thirty
Acres of his Land near Stratford-Bridg, wherein Granaries, Mum, and other
Brew-houses will be built, as also some part of the Linnen-Trade there
Manufactured: The place being so conveniently situated, that Cuts may be made
in the Land for Barges to come and go to each Backside, thereby to unlade all
goods with ease, and little charge; And I name that Town, whereof some part is
now built, New- Brunswick; for in Brunswick in Germany the Trade is Mum,
Linen, and Linnen-Yarn; and I hope to see before I die, as much Moneys turned
and wound in Mum, Linen, Linnen-Yarn at New- Brunswick near Stratford-Bridg,
as is now at Brunswick in Germany. Now I will demonstrate. and show you the
reasons, and how easy it is to bring the Mum-Trade to New- Brunswick. New-
Brunswick lies at the Head of a Navigable River, and within twenty Miles round
there is as good Wheat as any is in England (and I think the best), and always
the cheapest, the place is well situated for that purpose; and all materials
are ready at hand. The Wheat in these Parts is a much better Corn, than is the
Wheat at Brunswick; for the Wheat at Brunswick is a flat small Wheat, and
thick Husked; the reason of that is, the Climate where it grows; the Sun is
very hot in the two Months of July and August; and so the heat of the Sun does
not give it leave to fill and ripen kindly. Our Wheat is large, full-brested,
and thin-rined, and none in England to compare with the Wheat near Banbury,
and upon the Hills thereabouts. Now at New- Brunswick, build Granaries, and
take in Wheat when it is cheap, as it will be this Year: and write by the Copy
of the Granaries in Germany, and then the Mum-Brewers at New- Brunswick, will
have the same advantage, nay, and much better than the Mum-Brewers have at Old
Brunswick; for at New Brunswick, there Granaries will be in the Town where they
Brew, and better Corn, and at the Head of a Navigable River, to be transported
down to Sea, and so for any part of Europe, without paying so many Customs and
Taxes, as does Old- Brunswick for their Mum. Also the Wheat is much better, and
no Land-carriage for the commodity; and at New- Brunswick are Coals to be had
cheap and plentiful to maintain the Fire; whereas at Old- Brunswick, VVood is
dear, and very chargeable.

From New- Brunswick, Mum will be carried down the River Avon, into Severn, and
so into King-Road, and there Shipped for London: And the charge of carriadge will
be but twenty Shillings Per Tun to London; from New- Brunswick will be sent
down vast quantities of Mum, and sold to the Merchants of Bristol, and by them
sent and diffused into all Parts; and then Bristol will be unto New- Brunswick,
as Hamborough now is to Old- Brunswick; for Trade will go and creep into any
part where it can be best and cheapest done. And I say New- Brunswick,
considering all circumstances, will make the Mum cheaper by four Shillings in
the pound, than Old- Brunswick can: But I know some will object, and say, that
it has been tried here several times to make Mum (and it will not be so good
as the German Mum): My answer is, That the Sea is the occasion of its being so
good, it puts it to a second working, or Fermentation, which is the absolute
cause.

But New- Brunswick will have a better advantage by Sea, than has the Old; for
the Mum being sent down the River, and Shipped for London, and carried about the
Lands-end, and so up the Channel to London, will have much more tumbling at
Sea; and be commonly thrice as long coming about for London, as they are coming
from Hamborough to London; one Wind serves from Hamborough to London, Five or
Six several Winds will but serve to fit a Vessel to come out of King-Road to
London. So you see New- Brunswick will have a better and more large passage at
Sea, than from Hamborough to London: and then all Mum sent to Bristol, will by
the Merchants be sent to Sea; and the Sea will give it the advantage of a
Fermentation. And in the Western-Seas, it will do much more to benefit the Mum,
than in the Eastern. In the Eastern-Seas, the Climate is cool until May; but in
the Western-Seas the Climate is warm in March: and as the different heat of the
Climate is so the Liquor shall ripen and grow quick and fit to drink: And in
that particular, New- Brunswick will infinitely outdo Old- Brunswick; But if
there be not Granaries built at New- Brunswick to take in Wheat when cheap, and
all other things well settled, the benefit proposed, must not be expected; for
it must be made of cheap Wheat, and such Wheat for a Stock must be taken into
the Granaries in a cheap time; and when it is cheap, at least, three years
Wheat Malted beforehand fit to make Mum. The older the Wheaten-Malt is for that
purpose, the better it will be; and the more profit will be made of it. Now I
leave this to the serious consideration of that worthy Person Sir John Clapton,
in whose Lands New- Brunswick will be built; As also to Mr. Brishop, and my
Friend the Town Clerk of Stratford upon Avon, seriously to consider what a
great thing it will be to the Public, and to the Country near Stratford, if
the Linen and Mum-Trade be settled there. No part in Europe is comparable, as
to situation, materials, and soil to that place. And you may observe me in my
whole Discourse now Printed, that I show you, that Trade will go to the place
where it can be made cheapest, and soonest at Market. For you may observe my
Maxim, Honor and Honesty brings Riches: And these three bring Strength and
Trade. So places made by Art convenient, as there is by Avon being made
Navigable, gives the advantage to this great and rich design of setting forward
the Mum and Linnen-Trade at New- Brunswick. I pray observe; before you had that
River Navigable, you were locked up in the Inlands, and could not come to any
Navigable River under twenty Miles; And in all times when Corn was plenty, the
ways being very deep in VVinter, and in some Summers it was there very cheap;
whereby the Tenants could not pay Rents to the Landlords, and the Lands put to
keep Sheep: So all improvements were wholly out of their Power. But see now how
the case is altered, by this new River coming to your Town. Now all
Improvements offer themselves to you; as the Mum-Trade, the Linen, and
Thred-Trade: Nay you will be to the West of England, Wales, Shropshire, and
Cheshire, as Dantzick is to Poland; you will serve all those Parts, when Corn
is wanting; you have the advantage of your Navigable River to send down your
Corn, and so by the help of Severn it will be carried into all Parts that stand
in need thereof.

At New- Brunswick, Granaries may be built for the holding of Corn, and there
to be stored up, as in Germany; and there all things being done by the same
way, method, rule, and order, as it is at Marenburgh, all the Countrey-round
for Thirty Miles, will have many and great advantages; and to the Public, no
Tongue can express the several and strange benefits it will administer: As
first, It will preserve the Corn from Rats and Mice, and what was formerly
destroyed by them, now will be kept to feed the Poor. Secondly, It gives the
Husbandman a great advantage; for he may Thrash out his Corn, and carry it to
be kept safe in the Granaries until he has occasion to sell it, and so the
Consumption occasioned by Rats and Mice is wholly prevented; and that which fed
Rats and Mice, and other Vermin, and which other accidents destroyed, will be
preserved and kept to feed the Poor; which is at least the third part of the
Wheat of England, if kept Four years in Ricks, Stacks, Barns, Houses, and
Lofts: Also the Husbandman will, by having a place always ready to lay up his
Corn safe, have the benefit of his Straw to feed his Cattle, and make Muck,
Chaff for his Horses, and light Corn for his Pigs and Poultry, and his
Husbandry will be in a regular motion, and answer his just and laborious ends;
whereas if his Corn be Rickt up Three or Four years, his Husbandry is out of
order, sometimes nothing for his servants to do, his Pigs half famished, his
Cattle lean, want of Muck that this Straw should produce to bring his Husbandry
about as it ought to be done; The poor Farmer, nay, Freeholder looks upon his
Ricks with sighs and a heavy heart, he sees there are Vermin in them, which
are not to be prevented; some owe Moneys upon Interest, some to their
Landlords, but Men will not stay long; the Tenant prays patience, Time is
given, but still a Plenty is continued, and the Ricks not pulled down; but at
last neither Userer, nor Landlord will stay longer: Then the Lawyer is set at
work, Suits are brought, and there is no standing, but trouble, and misery, all
ruined; and into Prison he must, if the Moneys be not paid immediately; and a
large and long Lawyers Bill into the bargain.

I pray, where is now the poor Farmer, and many Freeholders also? what must
they do? what shift must they make? Shall they fly to the King's Bench, or run
away? something must be done: I tell thee what, immediately pull down their
Ricks, and Thrash without doors and within, as fast as they can send the Corn
to Market, although never so cheap, and the doing thereof at that time never so
much to their damage; and at Market, part of the Moneys made of this Corn, paid
for charges at Law; great part of the Corn before the Ricks were pulled down,
eaten and consumed by Rats and Mice. Now observe the consequences of these
things: The poor honest Laborious Countryman being thus pursued by Suits in
Law, Rats and Mice devouring his Corn when in Ricks, and sold cheap, and at
unseasonable times; Servants seeing his necessity, raise price of their
Labors: This forsthast puts his Teams to carry his Corn to Market, and that
causes the neglect of that years Husbandry; and truly the end of all this is,
no more than this; The Lawyer is paid his Bill, for he will, or else no Team
nor Master neither must come to Market; the Servants wages paid that Thrashed
out the Corn; the Userer paid what the Farmer owes him; but you will say, what
shall the Landlord have? I will tell you what, he will be sure of his Farm
thrown upon his hands, and that present years profit lost; nay, and when he
comes to stock it himself, he may possibly lose his Rent, and the interest of
his stock put upon the Land; and when he sets it again, lose Twenty in the
Hundred, and glad to get a Tenant to take it so: But that which is worse, The
Tenant and Landlord are then in the worst condition, and their Families and
Estates out of order. Moneys is most wanting, and Trade most dead in times when
Corn is very cheap; and the Reason is, That the Corn lies in Ricks, and no Man
can, or is benefited or secured by it; only there is a merry Feast for Rats and
Mice: And if it hold cheap for Three or Four years, the Tenant lays the Key
under the Door, and then the Wolf is knawing a hole in at the Landlords Door; I
am sure his head is in already, therefore I say, timely prevent him from
getting in his body: For after death there is no redemption.

Secondly, The Landlord seeing his Tenant in this way, sending his Corn into
the Public Bank-Granary, and there lodging it, will know the quantities, which
must be affixt, and set up in a Catalogue in some place of the Granary, thereby
to be viewed and taken notice by any that think they are, or may be concerned
therein; and such Corn being in Granary, the Tenant may transfer it to the
Landlord, or any part thereof; and so the Landlord will always be in such a
condition, as to preserve himself, and to prevent his Farms being thrown upon
his hands; for if the Landlord feeth his Tenant a good Husband, and does the
best he can to live, then he will forbear, and give him time, and no danger,
because he is able to give his Landlord Bank-Credit in Corn for his Rent; and
so the Corn is kept and preserved for a good Market, and at last the Landlord
paid all his Rent, and the Tenant enabled to maintain his Family, and to
Husband his Farm to the best advantage: And I think here is no harm done,
unless the prevention of Lawsuits, and the miseries attending them, and
cheating the Rats and Mice of their large feasts, that last commonly Three or
Four years, be injustice; besides the Landlord has his advantage clearly
before him, he may fee at all times the condition of his Tenant; for if he will
not come to the Public Granary with his Corn, whereby the Landlord may be
secured upon the Ticket thereof for his Rent, but keep it to make the Rats and
Mice feasts; then he may Command present payment of his Rents, or take a new
Tenant: But I believe many Gentlemen, and others, will after reading of my Book
twice over, see it so much their Interest to have Public Granaries, that they
will be upon building some in many places in England, before any Law passes to
put them into a posture: and observe, when this Corn is in the
Publique-bank-Granary in the Country, immediately it is to be Registered at the
Guild Hall in London. So it will be immediately good credit to inliven Trade,
and fetch out all Moneys now unimploy'd, and prevent Law, and the trouble of
attending it: The Tenant, Landlord, and Trade will have their ends answered;
and there is no way under Heaven at present to inliven Trade, preserve Landlord
and Tenant, and bring the unimploy'd Moneys out, but this way.

Thirdly, The Corn being lodged safe, and kept in the Public Granary, will be
the occasion immediately of fetching out, and bringing forth most of the Cash
of England, now wholly unimploy'd. All people near the Publique-bank-Granaries
will immediately be dealing to have some Corn in Bank-credit, for that cannot
miss of finding an increase and benefit to them in the Rise of Corn. There will
also tumble into the Publique-bank for Corn, all the Moneys round the Country,
now in the Servants hands, both Men and Maids (which at present lies dead in
their Chests); and then John and Joan will make a merry bout when Corn rises,
praise and pray for the Man that brought the Public bank to New- Brunswick,
and drink his Health in Burnt-Clarret: In Holland and Germany it is thus with
all Servants. And there is no way that mortal man can invent to fetch the
unimploy'd Moneys into Trade with speed, but this only way. The Titles of Land
now are so uncertain, and personal security so bad, Moneys will grow scarcer,
and scarcer, and Trade deader, and deader: and our Neighbors beyond the Seas,
are so linkt and fastened with our Merchants here, that the poor Country
people, and Landlords also, shall be but Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water,
unless by this way relieved. Consider, Into this Corn-bank will be laid all the
Moneys of all poor laboring people, who keep no Teems; for here is their great
advantage, they laying by Corn when cheap, in the Granary, there kept safe,
sweet, and good; it is possible, and very probable, these poor men, nor their
families, never eat dear Bread after in all their lives; so here will be no
poor in the Parish, nor complaining in the Streets for Bread: And as I formerly
said, here is no harm done, but cheating the Rats and Mice.

Fourthly, Consider, Corn being lodged in cheap times in these Public
Granaries of New- Brunswick, will cause the Linen and Thred-Trade upon a
sudden to come to perfection; for there will be Bread and Drink always cheap;
and that being so, there is sufficient encouragement for men to venture upon
any new Trade; But if Victuals, as Bread and Drink, prove dear, and uncertain
in its Rates and Prises; from thence Trade will depart, and find out some place
that shall fit and please her better: For as Honor, and Honesty, brings
Riches, and Strength, so cheap Victuals, and good, with all things necessary
and cheap, to be employed in the Manufacture, will thereby be the occasion of
strengthening of the place, and making of it Rich, and cause Trade in process of
time to leave the place where she was formerly, and come where she may be
better entertained, and more advantageously accommodated: I find that Mistress
called Trade, will bow and bend to every just and good thing, wherein she may
be preserved, and not in danger to be famished; and therefore I have provided
her good Granaries to hold her food, which is good Wheat and Malt, to make her
Bread and Drink; I have also given order for the preparing of good Flax, to
make her fine Linen; I have provided her a fit place, with good Merchants, to
make that delightful Liquor called Mum; I have also provided her a Navigable
River, with Cuts to be made to her Backsides, so that Barges may carry and
re-carry her Goods and Riches up and down, to Sea, and from Sea; I have
traveled to Magdenburgh, to see to fit her with Granaries, as good, if not
better than there is; I have traveled to Brunswick, to find a way to fit her
with her dedsires, as to good Mum; I have traveled into Saxony and Bohemia, to
see her fine-spun Threads, Wheels and Looms, that so she may want nothing; I
have traveled into Holland and Flanders, to see her Weaving and Whiteing, with
all its advantages. And now dear Mistress, I certainly must court thee in thy
flight, to fall down into New- Brunswick, near Stratford upon Avon, and into
New- Harlem in the Manor of Anilcot; and there thou shall be attended with the
Riches of Brunswick, as to Mum; as also with the Riches of Dantzick, as to
Corn; thou shall also be attended with the Riches of Saxony, as to Flax and
fine Threads: And to complete all, thou shall have on the Backside of thy Towns,
places to Bleach and Whiten thy fine Linen, being the Lands of the Earl of
Middlesex; equal to Harlem in Holland for all conveniences, if not better.

Fifthly, I call all those People to be Judges, who have great quantities of
Corn, and are forced to keep it Two or Three years in Ricks, whether it loses
not at least one fourth part of the Corn by Vermin, Rats, Mice, and other
accidents: and if kept Four or Five years, many times the one half is consumed;
besides the miseries before spoken of, that attend the Landlord, Tenant, and
Creditor. Now this Public Granary is the cause of preserving all this Corn,
that otherwise would have been consumed by Rats and Mice; and as I said in my
Book, That we may beat the Dutch without fighting, now I say, and affirm, That
all the poor People of England will be fed with Bread sufficient, without being
chargeable to the Public for any thing: For they have the Corn to supply them
for Bread, which the Rats and Mice did destroy.

Now Reader, I pray thee seriously consider, whether the Seed of a Voluntary
Register, is not convenient to be with all speed sowed upon this surfeited
English Field; all People that know any thing, know that Seed long sowed on the
same Land over and over, brings the Farmer at last to Beggary; I question not,
but thou art convinced this Public Granary well ordered, with the Corn put
into it, will feed all the poor People of England, taking nothing but what
would be eat and destroyed by Rats, Mice, and other accidents: All you that
Read this, consider what cheap Victuals, and certain, will do to most
Manufactures; and the cheapness, will preserve it with us: So here is good Corn
and cheap, and much Plenty; here is excellent good Land to bear Flax, and great
quantities of it; here a covenient place may be made to draw Water out of Avon
River, to supply the Bleaching and Whiting: Here is at present, no settled
Trade, or Manufacture, nor any settled within Fifteen Miles of the place; here
you are in an excellent plentiful Country of Flesh, and all other provisions;
but that which crowns the design, you are at the Head of a Navigable River, by
which you will have with ease and cheapness, all the Flax, Cloth, Thread, Tape,
and other things, sent down the River Avon into Severn, and so for Sea,
Bristol, Wales, Shropshire, and many other places; and all things you stand in
need of will be brought up the River Avon, to New- Brunswick: And I say, God
and Nature, with the River Avon being made Navigable, has so strangely
accommodated New- Brunswick, and New- Harlem, and fitted it for this Linen,
nay, I say, fine Linen Trade; that certainly, no part in Europe can compare
with it.

As to the Third, That which is to be the Public Granary to keep the Corn for
all Gentlemen, Merchants, and Farmers that please to send it thither, that so
the destruction and damages occasioned by Rats and Mice may be prevented; I
say, in this Granary, Corn at all times shall be taken in, from all persons
that please to send it; and the Corn so sent; must be preserved sweet, safe,
and in good order, for one Penny the Bushel for a whole year, and the owner at
liberty to take it out at his own will and pleasure; or to sell, transfer, or
assign any part of the said Corn to any Person or Persons, for the payment of
his Debts, or in Mortgage to pay his Landlord his Rent; and the Granary-keepers
to give good security, that all things should be faithfully done and
discharged. Now the Corn being brought into the Public Granary, and there
Registered in the Register Book, to be kept for that purpose; and the Person
that has put in the said Corn, taking a Note under the Hand and Seal from the
Granary-Register, of the quantity of Corn brought into the Granary, with the
time it was delivered, with the Matter and kind of the Corn; Then these
advantages will ensue.

First, The Farmer will have all the advantages I spoke of before, as
preservation from Rats and Mice, Straw to supply his Cattle, the Chaff for his
Horses; and the light Corn to feed his Pigs and Poultry, and the Muckhill in a
regular constant quantity; his Husbandry Managed with rule and order to his
advantage, no forc't-hast; but Thrashing, and carrying the Corn to the Granary
in times wherein his Servants have leisure; so in Seeding-time, and Harvest,
all People are freed for that, and only that employ: The Corn being in the
Granary, prevents the misery of Law, and the charge attending it; the Landlord
secured his Rent, or part thereof, by receiving a Ticket from the
Granary-Register, of a certain quantity of Corn there lodged, the property
being Transferred from the Tenant to the Landlord, and entered in the Register;
this Corn in Granary gives the Tenant Credit to take up Moneys to furnish his
occasions, so as he may manage his affairs, and Husband his Land to the best
advantage, and prevent the sad effects that commonly attends the want of
present Moneys for his necessary occasions; and for want of Credit, many times
the laborious honest Country Farmer is undone, and forced to come and live
upon the Parish; and the Land he was Tenant to must now help to maintain him;
whereas, if prevention had been timely found out, against the Rats with Two
Legs, that so charge of Lawsuits had been prevented, the Corn kept safe in a
Granary, and preserved from the Rats and Mice with Four Legs, then the Landlord
had been paid his Rents, the Tenant preserved, the Userer paid, the charge and
trouble of Law avoided, and all miseries now upon Landlord, Tenant, and
Creditor, not so much as heard of: And for that all these sort of Miseries may
for the future be prevented, and sufficient means and remedies prescribed for
the doing thereof; I shall here give you the ways, means, rules, orders,
methods, directions, and policies, whereby they certainly will be with ease
accomplished; for they are exactly so done in Germany, and have most strange
advantages in these parts, in the advance of Trade, and procuring of Riches:
And it will be with us (if once accomplished) as if one were raised from the
dead.

I propose, and hope to see Three large Granaries built at New- Brunswick; one
whereof to be appropriated to the Persons that set up Brewing of Mum, one to be
appropriated to, and for the keeping of Corn for a stock for the poor of the
Country, and for to supply the People that work in the Linen Manufacture; and
one to be a public Granary for all Gentlemen and Farmers to send their Corn
into, when Thrashed, to prevent the destruction which is made by Rats and Mice,
when it is in Ricks, Barns, Chambers and Lofts. And of the advantage that these
Granaries will be, I will speak particluarly.

First, The Granary built to take in Corn for the use of the Brewers of Mum,
will be the life of that Trade; and without such Granaries, it is impossible to
set on that Trade: For Corn must be bought in such times as this year is, it
being not only now very good, but cheap also; and in a cheap year they may take
in Four or Five years Stock, as they do at Magdenburgh and Shenibank: Then
suppose the Wheat now cost two Shillings Four-pence the Bushel at New-
Brunswick, and that be kept Four years in the Granary at Twopence the Bushel
for Granary Rent; then the Corn will lie the Mum-Brewers in Two Shillings
Sixpence per Bushel, and that is cheaper than it is sold in any time at Old-
Brunswick; and it is seldom, but once in Four years, there is a plentiful year
of Corn in England, and in this year the Brewers may supply their Granaries
again: And as I said before, here is cheap Corn, good Corn, and a multitude of
it, the place of Trade fixed at the Head of a Navigable River, good and cheap
Fuel to be made use of, with a quick passage to the East and West Indies,
Ireland, Mediteranian, Spain, France, Holland, and a large passage at Sea to
bring it to London, to help and make the Mum good, by putting it into a second
fermentation: And I say, here this Trade of making Mum may be fixed with very
great advantage; and if once well fixed, from thence it cannot depart, no place
in England being of that advantage to answer all the ends, as this place is.

The Second Granary, which is to be supplied by the Country with Corn, and
there to be kept safe for the benefit of those that work in the County in the
Linnen-Manufacture, and to supply the Poor when a dearth comes; Corn will be
kept Four years in the Granaries, and the Rate then will be but Two Shillings
Sixpence the Bushel; and with this cheap Corn the People will be supplied with
Bread, whereby they will make and perfect the intended Linnen-Manufacture very
cheap; and this constancy of Bread, and at cheap rates, will certainly be a
great and certain means of fixing the fine Linen Trade at New- Brunswick, and
New- Harlem: And the Reasons are these, near the very Place are great
quantities of Land excellent good to bear Flax, and very good places may with a
little art, be made by the Town-sides to Whiten and Bleach Linnens; and within
one Mile of New- Brunswick, there is the Manor of Milcot, being the Lands of
the Earl of Midd^^^^^ ^^on which Manor there will be sufficient Fla^ (...), to
employ Ten thousand People to work it into Manufacture: And there are in these
Lands, by the River Avon side, convenient places to make Bleaching^ and near
Milcot-House very plain good Land to build a City for the fine Linen Trade,
with good places to set up Engines to Weave Tape, to go by Water. The Maps of
the Two Cities, with the Granaries, are annexed, the one being New- Brunswick.
the other I name New- Harlem.

Now I will demonstrate and show you the length, breadth, and height the
Granaries ought to be of, to hold this Corn, as also the charge of building one
of them at New- Brunswick, being the Land of Sir John Clapton; as also I will
demonstrate the way how it should be built for the best advantage, with the way
of ordering and managing the Corn, that it may keep good, sweet, and clean,
Eight or Ten years. The Granaries must be Three hundred foot long, Eighteen
foot wide betwixt inside and inside Seven stories high, each Story Seven foot
high, all to be built of good, well-burnt Brick, and laid in Lime and Sand very
well; the ends of the Granaries must be set North and South, so the sides will
then be East and West, and in the sides of the Granaries there must be large
Windows to open and shut close, that when the Wind blows at West, the Windows
may be laid open, and then the Granary-Man will be turning and winding the
Corn, and all filth and dross will be blown out at the Window on the East Side;
and in all times when the Weather is fair, and open, then throw open the
Windows to let in Air to the Corn at (...) end of the Granary; and in the
middle there (...) ^toves to be kept with fire in them, in all moist (...), or
at the going away of great Frosts and Snows, to prevent moistness either in the
Brick, Walls, Timber, Boards, or Corn; there must be in each side of the
Granaries, Three or Four long Troughs or Spouts fixed in the uppermost Loft,
which must run about Twenty foot out of the Granary; and in fine weather the
Granary-men must be throwing the Corn out of the upermost Loft; and so it will
fall into another Spout made Ten foot wide at the top, and through that Spout
the Corn descends into the lowermust Loft, and then wound up on the inside of
the Granary, by a Crane fixed for that purpose; and so the Corn receiving the
benefit of the Air, falling down Thirty foot before it comes into the second
Spout, cleanses it from all its filth and Chaff: These Spouts are to be taken
off and on, as occasion requires, and to be fixed to any other of the Lofts;
that when Vessels come to load Corn, they may through these Spouts convey the
Corn into the Barges without any thing of labor, by carrying it on the backs
of Men.

The charge of one Granary Three hundred foot long, Eighteen foot wide, Seven
Stories high, Seven foot betwixt each Story, being built with Brick at New-
Brunswick, or New- Harlem, in the Manor of Milcot: Six hundred thousand of
Bricks builds a Granary, Two Brick and half thick the Two first Stories, Two
Brick thick the Three next Stories, Brick and half thick the Two uppermost
Stories; and the Brick will be made and delivered on the place for Eight
Shillings the Thousand, the laying of Brick Three Shillings the Thousand, Lime
and Sand Two Shillings the Thousand; so Brick-laying, Lime and Sand, will be
Thirteen Shillings the Thousand: One hundred and fifty Tuns of Oak and Elm for
Summers, Joists and Roof, 100 and 70 l. Boards for the Six Stories: Sixty
thousand foot at 13 s. 4 d. the One hundred foot, and Ten thousand foot for
Window, Doors, and Spouts at the same rate, 48 l. Laths and Tiles 100 l.
Carpenters work 70 l. Iron, Nails, and odd things 60 l. So the charge of a
Granary will be 820 l. built either at New- Brunswick, or at New- Harlem. There
will be kept in this Granary Fourteen thousand Quarters of Corn, which is Two
thousand Quarters in every Loft, which will be a Thousand Bushels to every Bay;
Six laboring Men, with One Clerk, will be sufficient to manage this Granary,
to turn and wind the Corn, and keep the Books of accounts; Fifteen pounds a
piece allowed to the Six men, and Thirty pound a year to the Clerk, or
Register, will be wages sufficient; so the Servants wages will be 120 l. per
An. Allow Ten in the Hundred for Moneys laid out for building the Granaries,
which is 80 l. So the charge will be yearly 200 l. Now observe, if the Country
Man pay 6 d. a Quarter yearly, for keeping his Corn safe and sweet in the
Granary, Fourteen thousand Quarters will come to 350 l. for Granary-Rent
yearly. The Pattern of the Granary to be built, you shall have in the Map of
New- Harlem and New- Brunswick, taken exactly from one built in the City of
Shenibank, in the Vale of Parinburgh, upon the River Elb, which is a
Storehouse for Wheat to be sent to Brunswick; whereof Mum is made.

Serious Reader, Here is a way plainly lined out to cheat the Rats and Mice, to
feed the Poor, to preserve the Tenant, to pay the Landlord, to bring to us
several Manufactures, to prevent Lawsuits, to fetch out all Moneys now
unimployed into Trade; and it will be, if done, as the Blood in the Body, it
will so circulate in a few years, that Corn will be to England better than
ready Moneys; and to have this so, is undoubtedly every Man's interest in the
Kingdom: Therefore Corn Registered in the Public Granary in each Country, and
so entered in the general Register at the Guild Hall, will bring to pass these
things now Treated of, and many more most strange advantages to the People of
England; which you may expect in the Second Part.

7. Consider what great quantities of Iron-Reads, Wrought and Cast, is brought
into England from foreign parts, which might be made and cast here; thereby
employing the same number of People here, as are employed in other parts, in
making thereof; and all of Materials of our own: A Tax laid upon all wrought
Iron, would bring and force this Trade to us.

8. Consider, there are few Gentlemen in England, but out of their Woods make
some considerable revenue yearly; and many of them by selling it to the
Iron-works, thereby have certain Rents for their Land: And whatever is of our
own growth, ought to be cherished, and countenanced, and then we shall reap the
benefit.

Considerations of the benefit of a Register, and the disadvantage of not
having one.

First, Consider, He that has Two hundred pound a year in Free-land, and Eight
hundred pound a year in other Land; his Two hundred pound a year will be as
ready Money at all times, to supply his just occasions, to Marry his Sons and
Daughters, and to help to manage his Eight hundred pounds a year to the best
advantage, in Planting, Watering, and in all other good Husbandry his Land is
capable of.

Secondly, Consider, For want of Three or Four thousand pounds at command, by
many men that have One thousand pound a year, how they are tossed and tumbled,
Procurator and Continuator, Usurer and Lawyer, Under-Sherifs and Baylifs, his
Land unimproved, his Wives heart sorrowful, Children want education, grow
disobedient and headstrong, Tenants and Baylifs take unjust and unlawful
advantages, by reason of the Landlords necessities.

Thirdly, Consider what Credit and Reputation the Gentleman is in, that can at
any time take up Four thousand pounds; and what advantage he may take, either
of a good Bargain when it is offered, or to prefer a Child when he sees it
convenient.

Fourthly, Consider, That he that has but One hundred pound a year, and of
that Twenty pound a year Free-land, what that will do to his benefit; it will
support him at any time to take up Four hundred pounds to manage his affairs to
the best advantage: But as things are now, he must go to Council with his
Writings; but it is possible, he dare not produce them, and may stay Twelve
Months, or longer, before he gets Moneys; and in the mean time, Suits are
multiplied with charges and loss of time, his Family distracted, and many times
undone.

Fifthly, Consider the great Cruelty that is now used to Men that have not
ready Moneys to pay their Debts, by Attorneys and under-Sherifs, Baylifs and
their Creatures, as though Man was made to be torn in pieces alive; and what
ruins come to one Friend from another; by being Bail, and bound for his
relations, even the ruin of infinite numbers of Families in England every year.

Sixthly, Consider, The comfort of this way, of having ready Money upon Land,
does administer to the Wife content, to the party safety, and safety to all
related to him; and thereby, a Man may upon his deathbed, justly provide for
his Wife and Children, and it will be safe and good.

Seventhly, Consider at this day, the Land-security being not good, many
Gentlemen pay Eight, Nine, and Ten in the Hundred for the Moneys they take up,
and go upon the Tick for all Commodities; and when they pay, it is double the
value as if bought with ready Moneys: The very bane of many estates.

Eighthly, Consider, that no great thing can be done without ready Moneys, or
Credit; Lands Registered will be both, and Land will rise purchase, and Trade
encouraged.

Ninthly, Consider, it will pay the poor Gentleman's Debts without Moneys, a
thing just now wanting.

Tenthly, Consider, A Register will set on foot the Noble business of Fishing,
about England and Wales; and enable persons to make the great Rivers of England
Navigable, and thereby raise great numbers of Seamen which may be wanting; and
all persons receiving the general benefit that will come thereby, will be of
Ten times more to the Government, than these Rats and Mice that are now
privately devouring all that is good.

Twelfthly, Consider, of what sad consequence it is with us in England at this
day, that we cannot have Bonds and Bills Transferred by Assignments, so as the
Property may go a-long with the Assignment; thereby one Bond or Bill, will go
in the nature of Bills of Exchange: And so A. owing Two hundred pounds to B. he
Assigns him the Bond of C. who owed him Two hundred pounds, and C. owing D. Two
hundred pounds, Assigns him the Bond of E. who owed him Two hundred pounds; and
so one Bond or Bill, would go through Twenty hands, and thereby be as ready
Moneys, and do much to the benefit of Trade, and prevent infinite vexatious
Suits, and prevent the ruin of some hundreds of Families: For as the Law now is
practiced at this day, although the word Assign be in the Bond, yet the
Property of the Bond passes not; but the party Assigning, his Heirs, Executors
or Administrators may discharge the Bond by a Release. And pray observe the
miserable calamity that the poor People lie under for want of this being not
done; now A. owes B. Two hundred pounds, the Bond being Four hundred pounds,
for the payment of Two hundred pounds. B. sends a Writ into the Country, and
arrests A. he cannot get such Bail as the Sherif will accept: So perhaps lies
a Month or longer in Prison, his Wives heart almost broke, Children and Friends
sorrowful; At last the Wife importunes Friends of hers to be bound for his
appearance; but he cannot get special Bail above; then the Attorneys and
Sherifs harvest comes in; they presently make three Suits of one, and fall on
the poor Security. At last Bail is put in above; then Common-Law-Tryals,
Demurrers, Writs of Error, Chancery. So Plantif and Defendant many times ruin
one the other. Whereas if a Bond were Transferable, and the property to pass
it, being a Bond, and good Men bound in it; this Bond would run from Man to
Man, from Hand to Hand, from one Tradesman to another; and so one Bond would
pay twenty Men; for people at this day would be glad to have payments made them
in such Paper rather than go to Law for their own; and often undo their
Creditor, and sometimes themselves to. It would be a mighty benefit to Trade
and Commerce to have Bonds transferred. A poor man in England that has a
Thousand pounds in Bonds with good Sureties bound, cannot pay one hundred
pounds of his Debts with them. Our Free-lands being put under a Voluntary
Register, and the property of Bonds being made Transferable by assignment, will
be a great profit to the Nation.

As things are now, we have not one fourth part of Moneys sufficient to drive
the Trade of England, and set up the neglected Fishery, improve our own
Manufactures, and to answer peoples just, honest, and lawful occasions. But if
the Free-lands were Registered, and Bonds Transferable, then we should have
three parts in four more Cash than we should have occasion to use: For the Land
Registered, will do what Money now does; and this is credit equal to Moneys; and
then we shall do what the DVTCH now do, never want Moneys to do any great
thing. But we must submit our selves in all things to his Majesty's Gracious
Pleasure and Authority.

Twelfthly, It will by its credit, be the cause of setting at work all the poor
of England in the Linen and Iron-Manufacture, and so convenience the
Woollen-Manufacture, that it will be as one that were risen from the dead.

Thirteenthly, Consider, That the want of a Register will make us in few years
like unto a Wheat-rick, that has stood many years; when it is opened, all the
Corn is consumed by Rats and Mice, and nothing left but the Straw and Clothings.

It would be well if those worthy Virtuosoes that intend the good of the
Public, and have real intentions to improve Mecanick Arts, that they and all
such Lords and Gentlemen that wish well thereto, with speed would advance a Sum
of Moneys to build an University for the Improvement of Art in England, and to
maintain Six persons continually Traveling to find out such Improvements; and
the way of bringing them to pass, as may be for the real good of the Public;
the pattern how to settle such a University, for Art, they may have from one
long since settled near Newringburg in Germany: The consequence whereof has so
imyroved the Mecanick-Art in Germany, that no place in the World comes near
them for Art.

Considerations upon the advantages and disadvantages of the Manufacturies of
Linen, Thread, Tape, and Twine for Cordage.
1. COnsider what quantities of fine Linnens are made in Holland and Flanders,
and here worn and consumed, and how many hands it imploys in work to
manufacture it, and the great benefit the Dutch gain, being the great Masters
of that Trade.

2. Consider, that if these fine Clothes were made here, how it would employ
the Poor, raise the price of Land, and keep our Moneys at home; for the Dutch
take nothing from us in exchange, wherein the benefit is any way considerable
to the public.

3. Consider, of all course Linnens brought from France, as Canvases, Lockrums,
and great quantities of coarse Clothes, which have of late years so crowded
upon us, that it has almost laid aside the making of Linen Cloth in England,
and thereby the people are unimploy'd, and the Land lies idle and waste.

4. Consider, the French take nothing of any value from us, but it is ready
money for their Linnens; so we keep their people at work, and send them our
moneys to pay them for it, and our own Poor are unimploy'd: But if a Tax were
laid upon their coarse Linen Clothes, then what is brought out of France into
England, would be made here of our own growth, to the Nations great enriching.

5. Consider the Twine and Yarn ready wrought and brought out of the
East-Country to make Sail-Cloth and Cordage, which has taken off the labor of
multitude of people in Suffolk, and thereabouts, and has so lessened that
Trade, that it is almost lost: But if a Tax were laid upon the threads brought
over ready wrought, then the labor of all such things would be here to supply
our Poor at work, and raise the price of our Lands.

6. Consider what vast quantities of narrow coarse Clothes come out of Germany
down the Elbe, Weser, and Emes, and transported into England, and here vented
and worn; the cheapness whereof has beaten out the Linen Trade formerly made
in Lancashire, Cheshire, and thereabouts, and carried and sold at London,
(about forty years since it was a very great Trade, and tended much to the
relief of the Poor in them parts:) A Tax being laid upon these Easterling
Clothes, would occasion the reviving of that coarse Cloth-Trade again with us,
which would set multitudes at work.

7. Consider, the Foreign Bed-ticking coming hither cheap, has almost
destroyed that Trade in Dorcetshire and Somersetshire; and so the Spinners are
Idle, and the Land falls price; and in this, as in other things, we send our
Moneys into Foreign parts, to keep their Poor at work, and support them; and
here we starve our own, and lose that Trade: A Tax upon Foreign Bedticking
would prevent all this.

8. Consider the vast and infinite quantities of Thread ready spun, that comes
down out of Germany into England, and here made use of, and all the labor of
such Threads are there done, the Government and People there have the advantage
of it, and here we make use of them in many of our Commodities: It is of late
discovered, that the cheapness of these Threads will eat out the very Spinning
in most parts of England. -- Consider, and take this president at Kidderminster
in Worcestershire; Formerly the Clothiers made use of Linnen-Yarn Spun in that
Country to make their Lynsey-woolseys; but now the cheapness of the Foreign
Threads has put them upon making use of Germany-Yarn; in which Town there is
One hundred pound a Week in Yarn made use of; great quantities of Thread also
are used at Manchester; Maidstone, and in other parts of England to mix with
Woollen, with infinite other Commodities, and all the benefit of the labor of
these Threads, is applied to Foreigners; a Tax being put upon the Threads, would
put the Wheel to work in England again. This is of great consequence to the
Public, to be taken into consideration; for in this very thing of Spun-yarn,
no less than Thirty thousand People would be here employed, if by Law it were
encouraged.

Considerations upon the Iron Manufacture.
1. COnsider, That the best Iron in the known World, is in the Forest of Dean,
and in the Clay-Hill in Shropshire; and the Iron made of these minerals, will
work most easiest and quickest into Commodities, of any Iron; and at present
let there be one Tun of this Bar-Iron made of Forest-Iron-Stone, and one Tun of
Spanish Iron delivered to a Smith to work into Sythes, Sickles, and other
Commodities; he will work the Forest-Iron, and give Twenty pounds the Tun for
it; but will not give Twenty shillings for the Tun of Spanish-Iron to work into
Commodities: The Forest-Iron works easy, pliable, and soft; the Spanish works
tough, churlish and dogged.

2. Consider, If there be not timely course taken by the Parliament, to provide
for the enclosure of the Commons in these parts, which lie convenient to these
Iron Mines and Works, to increase Woods; in a very small time, the Manufacture
will be much lessened, and will prove the great impoverishing of the Countries
where now they are, and of much damage to the Kingdom in general.

3. Consider, that in Worcestershire, Stafford and Darbyshire, there are great
Mines of Iron-stone that makes Iron, not very good for use for all things; but
of excellent use for Nails, and many small Commodities: The benefit of which
Trade, is of great advantage to all the Country round about. And in these
Countries there are great quantities of Pit-Coals, which are in all places near
the Iron-works, and by the help of the Coal the Iron is Manufactured with ease,
cheapness and advantage; whereby we have the Trade of good part of Europe for
these Commodities: And so set infinite of poor People to work.

4. Consider, the Woods in these parts decay and look thin, and will not last
long, and when gone, the Iron-Stone and Coals will be there of no value, the
People unimployed, the Trade lost; therefore the vast Commons in these parts
enclosed for Woods, would prevent all: As the Duke of Saxony has done near
Anaburgh, and Sneburgh, where this politic preservation of Woods, in Lands
joining to his Iron, Tin, Silver, and Copper-Mines, has made them a very great
branch of his Revenue; and all the Country round about, by the multitude of
People employed, are become very Rich; and there things in point of
convenience, as to Iron-works, Tin-works, with Mines and Woods to supply the
works, are so ordered, that there are at present Manufactured many Commodities
in Iron, and sent into England: If these Woods had not been preserved by a
politic Law, all his Mines had been nothing worth, and the Iron Trade and
Works would have continued near Newringburgh, from whence they now are
departed; and that great benefit is now wholly enjoyed by the Duke of Saxony.
The like it will do in few years, if the Commons are not enclosed; for Woods in
the Countries I name, where there is Iron-Stone, and Pit-Cole plentiful, are as
the Breast is to the Child; let that cease, all dies.

5. Consider, A Tax being laid upon bar Iron, and wrought Iron, will increase
the Iron Manufacture here, whereby the Prices of VVoods will be increased, the
Lands rise price, and the Poor employed, and all Materials both Mine, Pit-Cole
and VVoods, are of our own growth and product.

6. Consider how many Iron-Works are laid down, both in Kent, Sussex, and
Surrey, and many more must follow; The Reason is, the Iron from Sweadland,
Flanders, and Spain, comes in so cheap, that it cannot be made to profit here;
and observe how the Gentlemen and others in the Countries, for want of Moneys
for their Woods, are forced to Stock up their Copices, and turn them into
Tillage and Pasture, the People unimployed, and their Lands fall Rents: To
prevent all, a Tax upon Foreign Iron is absolutely necessary.

Considerations upon Bank-Granaries.
1. COnsider, that the Corn carried into Bank-Granaries, and there kept safe
for several years; for one penny a year, for each Bushel, will be for Landlord
and Tenant of great benefit: the Landlord in all likelihood has his Rent then
secured, the Tenant his credit preserved, the Husbandry in a good and Regular
way.

2. Consider, the Landlord may at any time have moneys upon Bank-Corn,
transferred from his Tenant to him for Rent; and thereby enable the Landlord
upon that Credit, to take up moneys at all times to answer his just occasions:
and the Corn being Registered in the County, and also at the Guild Hall in
London, will infinitely enliven Trade; and Bills for Corn in Banks will be as
good as ready moneys, and thereby prevent infinite of mischiefs that attend
want of present moneys.

3. Consider, that Bank-Granaries will prevent the poor peoples miseries, for
want of food, in some wet and unseasonable years; and will be the occasion of
taking infinite poor people off the Parish, and prevent others falling upon the
Parish.

4. Consider, it is the true interest of all Gentlemen that have many Tenants
in great Corn-Countreys, to build Granaries upon their charges, and take in
their own Tenants and Neighbors Corn, and receive from them payment for
keeping thereof: And if this comes to be put in practice by the Gentlemen, the
next thing they will then be at, Is to set their Sons upon Employ in the Linen
Manufacture; for it will be then perfectly discovered, that Bank-Corn may
always be delivered out to the poor, in payment for their work: As now Iron,
Wool, Silk, Threads, any Wier, is delivered out to the Smith, Clothier, Weaver,
Pin-maker, in part of payment for the Manufactured Commodities,; for at this
time most payments are made to the poor Handicraft-man, part Moneys, and part
such Materials as the Commodity was made of which he sells, and he is forced to
take the Materials at such Rates as his Chapman pleases to impose, or put upon
it.

5. Consider, These Bank-Granaries will bring out all the Moneys now
unimployed, and at present out of Trade, and prevent the keeping of such
quantities of Plate which is now made use of by many People; for the Bank-Corn
being ready Moneys at all times, there will be no occasion of such quantities
of Plate as most People keep by them; which at present is made use of by many
persons for their immediate Credit.

I being at Dublin in the Month of November, One thousand six hundred seventy
four, there happened a great Storm, which very much shattered the Ships lying
in the Harbor, and blew one to Sea, where Ship and Men perished; and blew
another upon the Rocks, near the point of Voth, where she was staved and broke
to pieces, her lading and part of the Men perished; at which time I heard many
and frequent complaints, by Merchants and Seamen, of the badness of that
Harbor, and the danger that attended the Ships lying there at Anchor; by reason
of hard Sand, low Water, and the continual hazard the Ships were in when the
Winds blew hard; there being no Hill or Promontory to defend them from great
winds: I also found by discourse with the Lord Mayor Brewster, and many others,
that the badness of the Harbor did occasion the decrease of Trade and was of
great prejudice to it, and the City also. I then acquainted the Lord Mayor of
my thoughts, As to the making a very good Harbor at Rings-end: Upon which he
did Importune me to bestow some time in a Survey, and discovery thereof; the
which I did, and spent about three weeks time in finding out what is here
asserted. First, As to the damage of Trade, by reason of the badness of the
Harbor. Secondly, The advantage it will be to Trade, if a safe Harbor were
made. Thirdly, The way how a good Harbor may be made; with a large Citadel,
and a place for all Magazines, and Naval Stores. And Fourthly, What it will
cost the doing.

As to the First, The Ships that lie at Anchor, a mile below Rings-end, lie
upon very hard Sands when the Tide is out; and thereby much damnifying the
Ships, if either old or weak built: And the goods are littered to and from the
Ships, and many times the Ships receive very great Damage by Storms and great
Winds; and so the Ships Crew must always be on Board for fear of foul weather:
and the Harbor being so bad, causes Trade to weaken at Dublin.

As to the Second, If there were a Harbor made at Rings-end, as in the Map
described, this advantage would be gained: At present there is at least five
hundred pounds per Annum, paid to persons that carry and re-carry people in the
Rings-end Coaches to and from the Ships, all that would be saved. And all the
labor and pains that is now taken by Merchants, Owners, and Seamen, going
from Dublin to the Ships, saved: the great charge at present, by carrying and
re-carrying goods by Litters, to and from the Ships, prevented; much more Trade
brought, if the new Harbor were made for Ships, that cannot lie upon them hard
Sands: And in the new Harbor the Ships will always be floating, the water
being by art with Sluices kept to thirteen foot depth; and thereby any weak or
crazy Ship will lie there safe, and receive no damage at all. A Boy and a Dog
in the new Harbor will look to a Ship: And the owner staying any considerable
time for Lading, will in the mean time permit part of the Ships Crew to go
short Voyages, to Chester, Leverpool, Bristol, and the West of England; which
will be for the benefit of Trade, and thereby Mariners will not be wanting: And
all the sad and dangerous perils now suffered by the Ships in the Bay where
they now lie, prevented: And by the Ships coming up boldly to Lasey Hill, there
Trade will be made easy; the Merchant, Owner, and Ships, all being together.
The wise and knowing people in Dublin, say, If the new Harbor were made, there
would be Ten thousand pound per annum advance in the Kings Customs yearly.

As to the Third, There may be made a good Harbor near Rings-end, in the spare
piece of Ground that now is every Tide covered with water, which lies betwixt
Rings-end and Lasey-Hill: And in that piece of Land Cuts may be made, as in the
Map described, and Merchants Houses built in one piece, and Houses for the
Slaughter-men, Seamen, and Fishers, in the other piece. And in these Cuts all
Vessels will lie with that ease and safety, that it will be to the owners of
great advantage, and prevent the present charge they are put unto by
Multiplicity of men; and so make Trade Easy, Cheap, and delightful; and at the
upper end of one of the Cuts, there may be made a very strong Citadel, and
Houses for all manner of Stores, which may prove of great convernment to that
Kingdom; for there is an old Saying, Two strings are better than one: For this
Citadel may be made in that place, with so great advantage, that none can be
stronger or better answer the ends for which it is intended, then this may do;
for at present the Castle of Dublin is in a hole in the middle of the Town, and
so may many ways miss of the ends that it was intended for; besides, in the
Castle there is very little room for any Military Stores, which would be here
very well supplied: And the way for making this Harbor to answer all the ends
here prescribed, is by making the Cuts as you see in the Map, with building two
great Stone Locks or Sluices to let down and bring up the Ships; and for
supplying these Cuts or Trenches with Water, the Brook coming from Rofarnham,
and Robuck, must be made use of; and the Brook now running by Dublin-Castle
must be taken up at the side of the Castle, and carried across Georges Lane,
and so through a waste piece of Land of Sir. William Petties, and so down to
Lasey Hill, to help to augment the Trenches in dry times when Water is scarce:
If this New Harbor were made, no place in Holland were answerable to it, for
its advantage and convenience; and as to the Citadel, certainly none would
exceed it, no not Delfsee that strong Fort, being made by the very same
advantage, as this may be; which is by the little River that comes from
Groningen to Delfsee.

As to the Fourth, which is the charge of making the Harbor and Citadel, I
have taken a great deal of pains when I was there, casting up what it might
cost; and I believee it may be completed for Twenty thousand pound: and
certainly as that Harbor now is, and as that piece of Land is overflowed with
water every Tide, and under the very sides of the City, it is a very great
detriment to Trade and Commerce, and of as great dishonor, because it is
relating to the Metropolis of a Kingdom; and no place possible can offer it
self with more advantage, as to Harbor and Citadel, with ease, and increase
of Trade, than this place does, if good practicable Art were rightly employed
upon it, and well backed by a good Law, well made and fitted to answer so great
and noble a design as this would be: The Map of the New Harbor, with the
several Cuts for the Ships to lie in, with the Citadel, is hereunto affixt.

I know writing Books of Trade, where present profit is not within the reach of
the Readers understanding, puts a silence unto the whole History, be it never
so good; for all men are governed by what they understand, in matters relating
to gain or loss: But it shall be my way to come as near as possibly I can to
the understandings of the parties I intend to appropriate this Discourse unto.
Therefore I will now try my Pen, to see whether I can get it to beat an Alarm
unto all the poor Handicraft People in Three places, viz. Herefordshire,
Worcestershire, and London; and I question not, but if they give attendance,
and observe the first word of Command (which is Silence) they shall hear in one
hour such things uttered, as will send them home rejoicing: And first I shall
speak of Herefordshire. Secondly, of Worcestershire: and, Thirdly, of London.
I have said in my former Discourse, wherever there is cheapness of Victuals,
good Laws, and a Navigable River, there Trade may be most advanced.

For Herefordshire, part of that County is already well improved; First, it
has a Navigable River unto the City made by Art; but imperfect at present, and
ought to be mended. Secondly, all Vrchinfield is now under a great improvement
by Clover, which improvement I sent into them parts, by sending the seed, with
Books fully directing the Husbandry; and all persons at first had liberty to
receive Seed from Mr. Belamy of Ross, and Books of Directions: If the Husbandry
did take, and the profit made, as in the Book was prescribed, then they were to
pay Seven-pence a pound for the Seed; if not, nothing: By this way the Seed was
put into the Husbandmans hand, and no venture to him; and there was no other
way to force that Husbandry upon the People, all former people failing in that
design for want of good directions: And at present, certainly Vrchinfield is
doubled in the value of their Lands by the Clover Husbandry.

The second improvement Herefordshire is under, is sending their Sider to
London ready Bottled; which Husbandry, or Art, I and my Partner several years
since put there on foot, and caused vast quantities to be Bottled up and sent
to Gloucester, from thence to Lechload, and so to London by Water; we had not
been in that method above two years, but others did begin to tread the same
steps, and now it is a great Trade, and a great number of persons are now
driving great Trades with Bottle-Sider; and it has been the occasion of
erecting Five or Six Glass-Houses in them parts. And in Worcestershire, I
having been succesful in putting that County under Two improvements, I shall in
its place venture at a Third; I know it is very capable to receive it: there is
one public spirited Man lately come into that Country, who has several times
desired me to acquaint him which way the Country might be improved, and
Manufacture settled, and declared that he would lay out Moneys and his pains for
the good of the Public.

At present there is no settled Trade at Hereford, but the Poor of that Town,
and the Country round have little employ, notwithstanding they have there very
great conveniences, and a Navigable River to the very City, with much Corn, and
that excellent good; and in all such times as this is, Corn is there very cheap
and plentiful; and when cheap, they have no Market to go unto thereby to vend
their Corn: Formerly Wales took away their Corn when plentiful, but since the
Welsh took to break up their Mountains, and sow them with Corn, they have Corn
sufficient for themselves, and much to spare; so that County shall be always
under a plenty, unless some settled Manufacture be there fixed, thereby to bring
People, and employ the Poor which are there already: But it is impossible ever
to fix any New Manufacture with success, unless all things that are required
for the doing thereof, be well ordered, as to cheapness of Victuals, and all
other conveniences.

Therefore at Hereford, in the first place, there must be Granaries built to
hold Corn, and there stowed in the time of plenty; and this Corn must be
apropriated wholly for the use of these People that work in the Manufacture;
and thereby they never will eat dear Bread, or drink dear Drink; and the
Granaries must be made as I have directed: And the best Trade that I know which
will most fit that place, because it can never miss of a plenty, as to Bread
and Drink, will be fine-spun Threads and Tape; and my Reasons why that will be
most fittest for that place, are these; First, Hereford is at the head of a
Navigable River. Secondly, It is on the Borders of Wales; and if they want
hands, and the Trade should enlarge it self, from Wales there would pour down
People upon them, when they see there is Moneys to be gained. Thirdly, By the
advantage of the Navigable River, all things will be carried to and from them,
to supply the Trade with ease and cheapness. Fourthly, At present there is no
settled Manufacture. Fifthly, That place will answer well to furnish with their
Commodities all Wales up Seavern, Bristol, and Ireland: And where that Trade
is settled in foreign parts, the Places are very Rich; witness Friburgh in
Germany, and Dort in Holland: These Two Towns are the great Masters of these
Trades; Friburgh for Tape, and Dort in Holland for Threads: And certainly at
Hereford these Commodities may be made as cheap as in any part of Germany or
Holland: But still regard is to be had to these things, cheap Bread and Drink,
and always certain; Moneys at low interest, with Spinning-Schools, as I have
directed in this Discourse; with Four shillings in the pound advance of Customs
to be laid upon all Threads and Tapes brought from beyond the Seas.

I know there are some Gentlemen of the Country I now treat of, will be very
inquisitive, and desirous to know how this Trade shall be fixed at first; and
when fixed, how to govern it, that it may not miscarry, as did the Linen
Manufacture at Clerkenwell, and many other Public Linen Manufactures formerly
set up in England.

I will give them my thoughts at present, which is the best and convenientest
way for the ordering of the Thread and Tape-Trade at Hereford.

1. Build your Granary, and Stock it with Corn and Malt for Three years,
sufficient for so many People as are to be employed; then build a Brew House
and a Bake-house both together, close by your Granaries, for your Manufacturing
People, and to be delivered to them as they spend it; for it is a great Error
with us in England, that Public Bake houses and Brew-houses are not fixed for
the supply of the several Handicraft Trades, thereby to save all the time now
spent in providing Bread and Drink for the family, which time might be better
employed in their several Trades; and having the Bread and Drink at all times
provided to their hands, will prevent the laying out of Moneys for such uses,
and Houses of less Rent will serve their turns; and then all the People in the
Family will be in the constant employ of the Trade.

2. Send for one Man from Friburgh, to put you in the true way and Method of
making of the Tape; and to bring over two Engines, one to Weave Narrow Tape,
and the other to weave Broad Tape, with Wheels to Spin.

3. Send for one Man from Dort in Holland, to put you in the true way of
ordering the fine Threads.

4. Send for a Spinning Mistress out of Germany, to order and govern the little
Maids, and instruct them in the Art of Spinning.

5. Send for a Man from Harlem in Holland, to Whiten your Tapes and Threads.

This being done, with all things before specified, That Trade cannot miss
taking great root at Hereford, and in process of time will be the staple Trade
of that part of England and Wales; and no place, as to cheap Victuals of all
sorts, with multitude of hands unimployed, exceeds those parts we treat of: And
the thing we now treat of, will be no laborious business; but may in time prove
of great advantage, for the younger Sons of Gentlemen to fall to, and prevent
the idle habit that many are now accustomed to: And this Trade must be of great
benefit to the Public, for at present they are Foreign Trades, and the whole
benefit does accrue to them, and the consumption and loss to us.

This Tape and Thred-Trade to be fixed, is of much more difficulty to be brought
to perfection, than if there were some small Trade in the place already; but
the comfort of that place may be, if they once fix well in that Manufacture,
then they will deter all others setting up the same, and so consequently be at
last the great Masters of it, as Manchester is of all things it Trades in.

I must acquaint the Gentlemen of Herefordshire, that the River Wy must be
mended, and made more convenient than now it is, that so Barges may pass and
repass with ease, and without hazard; for Trade will not admit of such delays,
as of necessity there must be, if the River be not timely mended; and
Herefordshire must never pretend to come under a great improvement, if that
River be not fully completed, and the River Lugg made Navigable as high as
Hampton Court, or one Mile or two further: And if that were done, then Hereford
would be to great part of Radnor, Brecknock, Cardigan, and Moumouthshire, as
Shrewsbury is to North- Wales: Shrewsbury lying upon the Navigable River, has
all things brought up to the Town, and thereby invites North- Wales by the way
of Barter, and otherwise, to trade with them. The like will be at Hereford to
those Welsh Countries I name, if once Hereford were settled in a constant Trade;
and that may be with ease done, when the River Wy is completed, for then it
will have the advantage of joining its communication with other Rivers: As for
Example, it will have all its goods and Siders carried to London, and Goods
from London back by Water to Hereford, and so the charge of Carriage will be
much lessened, and Trade much more improved; for at the Head of Navigable
Rivers there must and will be Trade, provided the River carriage comes once to
be made certain and cheap: You may observe in the Map of Rivers in the Book,
there is a kindness intended to Hereford; for it is taken into the association
of the Rivers, and why it should be so, there are many Reasons may be given.

First, Hereford will suck in all Trade of the Welsh Counties before named; and
there are vast quantities of Sider to come for London; provided the way take,
of making the Rivers of England communicable, as in the Book and Map directed:
Then Hereford will have a great benefit, for the Barges at Hereford may be in a
constant motion, carrying and re-carrying Goods, and all such commodities the
Country sends out, or has occasion to want, and at very easy Rates; and I am
sure it is a pity, and next unto a shame, that a Country that has the best of
Wool, the best of Sider, the best of Fruit, the best of Wheat, and the best of
Rivers, should until this time be unimproved: But so it must for ever be,
unless these things be done; A voluntary Register, Public Granaries, your
River Wy completely made Navigable, Schools as in Germany for young Maids to
Spin, Bake-house and Brew House to supply all People that are in the
Manufacture; for Trade will go where she is most courted, and best provided
for; witness Holland, Legorn, Hambrough and Dantzick: So much for Hereford.

I am now for demonstrating the benefit that may come unto the poor decayed
Clothiers of Worcester and Kidderminster, as also to the Cappers of Bewdley in
their several Trades, provided they had Granaries to hold Corn in time of
plenty; and that such Granaries were fitted and settled, as in my Book is
directed: And I shall discover the great miseries each of these Trades now
groan under, for want of certain and cheap Victuals at all times, as Bread and
Drink, with Moneys at low interest when they need it, to drive their Trades.

And first, as to the Trade of making Caps at Bewdley, it is grown so low, that
great part of the Ancient Cap-makers in that Town are wholly decayed, and the
rest at this present are in a very low condition; and the great poverty that is
upon them, renders them to be at the mercy of the London-Factors which deal for
Caps, that Trade being got into two or three Factors hands, and thereby force
the makers to accept of such Rates as they please to give; whereby that Trade
is much decayed in that Town, and like in few years to fall to the ground: And
at present there are but Two ways to relieve the People that make Caps in
Bewdley.

The one is, to get themselves Incorporated by Act of Parliament, and therein
get such a Law made, as may be for the benefit of the Trade in all particulars;
and the Bill must, be so drawn, that the Traders and Makers of Caps may come
under such a Regulation, as may conduce to the benefit of the Trade in general:
If they prepare their Parliament Man to be their Friend, to carry in the Bill
next sitting of Parliament, it will do well.

The second way to do that Trade good, is by their joining together, and
procuring part of a Granary at Stratford upon Avon, to put in Corn and Malt
when it is cheap, and there to remain for food at all times when they have
occasion to use it; and at Stratford or thereabouts is always the best and
cheapest Wheat and Malt in all them parts of England; and from Stratford to
Bewdley it will be carried for one Penny the Bushel, they having free passage
through the Locks and Sluices upon Avon, without paying any Tax for the same;
the which shall be granted, provided I can prevail with my Partners in that
River to remit their shares: And when there is Corn in Bank, there is a Joseph
in Egypt; and Corn and Malt being taken into Granary when cheap, as this year
is, then the Capper and his Family cannot possibly eat dear Bread, nor drink
dear Drink, and thereby he will be able to drive his Trade with ease and
Comfort: But I must tell the poor Cap-makers not only the benefit of the Corn
in Granaries laid up in cheap times, but I must also tell him, because he is my
Neighbor, That there is another piece of good Husbandry to be used after the
Corn is fixed in the Bank, and that is a material thing to Tradesmen, and to
poor men that work in all sorts of Handicrafts; at first you will look upon it
as a slight thing, but when you have well weighed and considered of the
Reasons, you will say it must be: And when you once have it in use, neither you
nor any that come after you, will let it fall.

You must have a Bake-house and Brew House of your own, appropriated for your
Trade, which must be fixed and set up both together, with some small Granaries
to hold your Corn and Malt; and from this Bake-house, and Brew House, at all
times you will receive such Bread and Drink as you have occasion to use, or as
your part of Corn and Malt comes unto, which you have in Granary: and the
benefits of this Bake-house and Brew House will be many.

First, The Corn out of the Granary at Stratford, will be brought and lodged in
Granary at the Bake-house, as there is occasion to make use of it, and thereby
prevent the loss and damage that it would be liable to, being taken into every
Man's private House.

Secondly, All Bread and Drink being made and provided in this Public
Bake-house and Brew House, will cause the Trades-mans Wife, and Servants, to be
at much more leisure to attend their Trades; for great part of the Woman's time
is taken up in providing Bread and Drink, getting Fuel, running about to get
Yeast or Barm, as they call it, and sometimes stay to crack a Pot or two with
the good Host that allows them Yeast.

Thirdly, This way of a Bake-house and Brew House to be used for the benefit of
the Trade, will prevent all the charge that Tradesmen in the Country are put
unto in buying, and providing all things wanting for these purposes; as also
the Tradesmen will not be necessitated for so great a House, as now he must of
necessity have; nor to sit at so great a Rent as now he does: But I know this
Public Brew House and Bake-house, will meet with a smart objection from most
of the Cappers Wives that now Brew their own Beer, and that is this, Sir, we
Brewing our own Beer, we have Grains for our Pigs, and we cannot be without a
Hog or Two. My answer is, That from the Public Brew House, they will have
their proportion of Grains according as they put in their quantities of Malt;
and if you Brewed your Beer your self, you could have no more: But I know I can
please the Cappers Wives, in telling them what will come to pass, if they have
Corn in these Bank-Granaries, and Public Brew-houses.

1. The Malt Brewed in great quantities, makes much more, and better Drink,
than if Brewed in many and small parcels.

2. When you have Corn and Malt in Granaries, neither*you nor your Family need
to eat or drink dear Bread or Drink.

3. Bank-Corn will always be ready Moneys in your Purses, it being a thing that
you may Transfer, and so alter the property, by entering it with the Clerk of
your Company.

Thirdly, When there is good store of Corn and Malt in Bank, if the Man dies,
leaving Five or Six Children, the Widow shall not want for a Husband; for there
being sufficient Bread and Drink for Three years in Bank, the Children and
Apprentices will be a great benefit to the party that Marries the Widow, and so
go on comfortably in their Trades: But let a Man as things now are, leave his
Wife a Hundred pounds, and dye, and leave her Six Children, she may stay long
enough for a Husband; for this Hundred pound possibly is at interest, and as
things are now with us, a Man cannot get one Debt in Three without a Lawyer,
and not one in Three to be had without apparent hazard: Now this Bank-Corn
Credit will never be questioned: so the Man being sure of that as undeniably
his own, he will be the easier induced to take the Widow, if she has a few
faults; but to take a Widow with indifferent conditions, many Children, and her
Husbands Estate very hazardous, and uncertain to be recovered, is not prudence.

Fourthly, Your Corn in Bank is free from all encumbrances, and so frees you
from Lawyers, or the charge attending it, and thereby it will give you credit
of taking up Moneys at all times to drive your Trades; Corn in Bank is Money in
Purse, nay better.

I will give you one instance: suppose Mr. Wowen of Bewdley has One thousand
quarters of Wheat in the Bank-Granary at Stratford upon Avon, which now is
worth but One thousand pound; Mr. Women has occasion for Moneys to drive his
Trade, he gives notice in Town he wants Five hundred pounds, and will give
Bank-Credit in Corn for it; immediately tumbles out the Moneys unimployed, and
is lent to Mr. Wowen, and the property of Corn by way of Mortgage is
Transferred to Five Persons that lent the Moneys; one of the Persons that lent
Mr. VVowen one of the Hundred pounds, ows Mr. Simon VVood One hundred pounds,
Mr. Wood calls for his Moneys, his debtor says he has no Moneys, he must
stay: No, says Mr. Wood, I will not, I will sue you for it: Then the Debtor
proffers his Ticket of Bank-Corn to Mr. VVood, Mr. VVood accepts of the
security, and Transfers the same to his Creditor in London whom he owes Money
to; the Creditor accepts of it; Why? because he finds it Registered at the
Guild Hall, and it is to him ready Moneys any hour in the day, if he want
Moneys; but if he does not want Money, then he suffers it to go on, increasing
in Bank, until he has occasion to use it: And I hope here is no harm done. But
I will drive this Nail a little further: Suppose this Creditor in London of Mr.
Simon VVoods, Marries a Daughter, Do you think that this Bank-Ticket of Corn in
Granary will not pay part of the portion? Or suppose Mr. VVoods Creditor dies,
and leaves to his Wife and Children a Thousand pounds in Tickets of Bank-Corn
in Granary, do you not think it is the best visible security extant? Yea it is.
Do you not think that his Widow may Marry again to a better advantage, than if
this Thousand pounds were owing by several Persons by Book-Debts? I pray, do
you think this security by Bank-Corn in Granary, would not of a sudden enliven
Trade, and make it quick? I say it will, and will be the only security of
England: And if ever any such thing were desirable, just now is the time; for
all Trades are in a consumption, all securities of Lands uncertain, and
personal-security very difficult, and Suits of Law daily multiplied with great
charges, and miserable spectacles, Prisons full, and many near perishing.

Now good Reader observe what benefits and advantages are here received, by
this way of Bank-Corn in Granary; The poor Handicraft Man, Wife, Children, and
Servants, are always fed with cheap Bread and Drink, and may be at leisure if
they please, to follow their Trades the closer; because the whole trouble of
buying Corn, Grinding, Brewing, Baking, and getting Fuel, is taken off their
hands: It also prevents the laying out Moneys in many things, which otherwise
they must have done, if this Public Brew House and Bake-house had not been
provided for them; it does also give him ease in his Rent, for now a small
House will serve his turn, and so a small Rent paid.

Observe how the party that has this Bank-Credit in Corn does convenience
himself with Moneys when he wants it, and how the Ticket of his Bank-Corn pays
the Country Mercer, and with the same Ticket, the Mercer pays the London
Haberdasher, and with the same Ticket, the Haberdasher takes up Moneys at any
time, if he pleases; or if he thinks fit, he Marries his Daughter, and gives
Bank-Corn in lieu of a Portion; or if he dies, it is a good firm settled
maintenance for his Wife and Children; and One thousand pound thus settled, may
prove better to the poor Widow and her Children, than Five thousand pounds of
any other of her Husbands Credits that lies out.

And here would rise a Miracle, if the Cappers of Bewdley should turn Bankers;
What? the poorest Trade of England! Yes, they may, and prove a truer, and
possibly, a better Bank than ever was seen in England; for all Banks which have
good Anchoridg and Foundation, into such Banks will tumble all unimployed Cash.
If the Cappers come once to have Corn in Bank, to the value of Two thousand
pounds, immediately their Neighbors will desire to come into their
association: And I know there are some near Bewdley, that have Moneys good
store. What is here set down for the Cap-makers of Bewdley, is also intended
for the Weavers of Kidderminster, who are in great fear of the Factors, as they
say; but I will tell no tales.

But this I know, if the poor Weavers of Kidderminster, had a propriety in a
Granary at Stratford upon Avon, and a Brew House and Bake-house at
Kidderminster, and Corn and Malt in time of plenty laid up, Then I am, and so
they may be satisfied, that it was impossible for that Trade, ever to depart
from that Town; for cheap Drink, and cheap Bread at all times, will make cheap
Commodities: And then the poor at Kidderminster need not fear being crushed or
kept under by such as have great Stocks; for in England at this day, in many
places, the Richer sort of Men in the handicraft way, who have great Stocks, do
so order their affairs, that it is impossible for a poor Man to raise or advance
his fortunes, or get any thing to leave his Wife at his decease, or Portions
for his Children; because he that has the great Stock, buys all his materials
at the best hand, and is able to keep his Goods for the best Market; but the
poor Man is forced many times to buy his Materials he makes his Commodity with,
of some of his own Trade, and is thereby forced to buy dear, and sell cheap;
and certainly that way must make them poor, and very poor.

I have heard several times many of these great Dealers in the Handicraft-way,
wish that somebody or other would take their Poor off their Hands, and
seemingly bemoan the sad condition they were in; I have enquired into those
men's estates, and I have often found, that they were Merchants as well as
Mechanics, some of them buying Silks at the best hand, and selling it to the
poor Weavers; others buy Wire, and then sell it to the poor of their own Trades
to make Pins, and afterward take off the Commodity when Manufactured, and give
them part Commodities unwrought, and part Moneys; by which way, the poor
Handicraft Man is forced to let part of that which is gained in the Commodity,
go to one of his own Trade; and the cause of all this, is want of present Money
or Credit, with cheap Bread and Drink: But I have heard of the other hand,
great complaints by the laboring Mechanic, that the great Dealers of their
own Trades did undo them. I will believe both parties, and take all for truth
that is said of both hands; but seeing the great Masters of the Mechanic
Trades, desire their Poor may be off their hands, I am resolved to take them at
their words.

And now all you poor Men in England, that work or labor in Mechanic Arts,
you are mine: I know now I shall have many questions asked me, and amongst the
rest, What will you do with all these poor People which you say shall be yours?
My answer is, I will make them all rich and happy, and their Families also.

I will now begin to show them the way; but when they are Reading my Project,
as most will call it, I order them to act like Soldiers, and command Silence;
Suffer not your Wives to use any Twit-twat, nor ask questions by the way; but
Read it over and over again, and then lay all your Heads together, Wife,
Children, and Servants, and it is possible the younger Fry may live to see it
Crowned with a beautiful Blazing-head, as the Monument near London-Bridg is
with the Urn.

Now my Children: for so I must call you, for I now will take care for you all
(I will begin): Art thou for Revenge? I know thou art; for thou know where
thy Shoo has pinched thee long: Well, in this case, I think Revenge is lawful,
because I know what thou will be at; but I ask thee this question, What is the
Revenge that will best fit thy temper, and by thee is most desired? Sir, I
desire to be revenged of some of the great Men of our Trade; but it is no
further, than I may have some part of the benefit of the Trade as well as they;
for it is not fit that some should have so much, and others so little, for it
is we poor Men that have most Fingers. My Child, thou shall have thy desire, if
it be not thy own fault; I know you and such as you, with your Families, are
the Persons that work, labor, and toil to make others Rich: Now let me entreat
thee to do the same for thy self, as thou did for others; then believe me the
work is done.

Now Child, I charge thee be a good Husband, for without that, all will be in
vain; and that being performed by thee, here will be thy condition; when thou
come to have in thy possession Twenty pounds, either from thy Friends, or by
thy own labor, then lay it into the Bank-Granary, some for Wheat, some for
Malt; admit thou wast now to begin, for thy Twentypounds thou shall have
Six-score Bushels of Wheat, and Threescore Bushels of Malt: This Corn and Malt
shall serve thee Three years, being Seven in Family, thy Self, Wife, a Man, a
Maid, and Three Children. Now my dear Child, here is Bread and Drink
sufficient, and that is a comfort; and thy self, Wife, Servants, and Children,
at perfect liberty to follow your several and respective imploys; and certainly
thou art a very bad Husband, if thou do not on a sudden advance thy estate,
and get Moneys in Bank-Corn; because thou have nothing to pay for Bread and
Drink: But here lies a great objection to be answered, What shall I do for
Moneys to buy some Materials to set our fingers at work (for now all is in Malt
and Corn)? I answer, thou may at any time take up Ten or Twelve pounds, or
more, upon a Mortgage of thy Bank-Corn, to buy Materials to work into
Manufacture. Child, I charge thee tell this to thy Wife in Bed, and it may be
she understanding the benefit that will be to her, and her Children by this
way, she may turn Dutch-VVoman, and endeavor to provide some Moneys, which she
will save to buy Corn: And by these two ways of having cheap Bread and Drink,
and Credit out of the Bank, to take up Moneys at any time when wanting;
certainly here thou will have sufficient Revenge of thy former Taskmasters.
Consider, thy fingers and hands are thy own, and now they are employed for thy
benefit and advantage, and not for others, with cheap Bread and Drink, with
Moneys at all times when wanted; and if thou dyest, leaving a VVidow behind
thee, assure thy self, my Daughter need not stay long for a Husband; for thou
leaving her Bank-Corn, and good store of hands to work, there will be old
striving for her, as there is for Widows that have many Children in other
parts, where this just, delightful, profitable, saving, and honorable way is
practiced.

Secondly, Thou will unavoidably ruin Pawn-Brokers, and it is high time, or
else they will by their great Interest ruin all the Poor; and to me it is no
less then a Miracle, that the Pawn-Brokers had not long since ruined all the
poor People in and about London, by high Interest, Marshals-VVrits,
Imprisonments, and the dreadful effects now practiced. Now Children, if you
will pawn your Clothes, and take them out on Saturday Nights, and carry them in
on Monday-Mornings, or pay Thirty or Forty in the Hundred for your Moneys, I
shall take no pity of you.

Thirdly, Thou will have no occasion for a Lawyer, but may follow thy
business quietly if thou will, and be in a condition to augment the number of
thy Hands, and so increase thy Estate, and be able to set at work the idle Poor
which now Beg and Steal; then thy Neighbors will love thee for taking their
Poor off them, and thou will increase in Riches, and at last it will be Strive
as strive can, who shall have the Poor, even as now they strive at the
Sessions House for Persons to carry to Barbados or Virginia. -- But my Child,
remember, it is thy Corn and Malt in Granary, and the Credit which that Corn
and Malt gives thee, which is the cause of all this.

I will now leave this subject, only I must lay a charge upon all my Daughters,
whose Husbands work in Mechanic Arts, That they force their Husbands to eat
good Wheaten-Bread, made of Corn that is taken out of the Bank-Granary; and
also that they force them to drink good Ale and Beer, that is made of Malt
taken out of the Bank-Granaries: But I know many will say, Here is a new way
which was never heard of before, to prevent poverty, and the increase of
beggary. No Friend, it is not so, there is a great City beyond the Water, in
the Civil-VVars was much destroyed, where this Rule, Order, and Government is
now practiced; and it was high time for that place to fall on this way, for the
Wars had wholly beggared them: Necessity many times brings good things to
pass; I pray God this may be the time with us. Necessities force hard, and
decay in Trade comes posting on. I must now mind all my Children, who labor in
the Mechanic Art, who are resolved to have Corn for Bank-Credit, of a Story,
being a worthy Man's observation in Holland, which the Bank at Amsterdam sends
to the Parties who lent them Moneys, Sir William Temple.
to come and fetch their Moneys lent, with Interest, they come with Tears in
their Eyes, desiring them to continue it longer: If this Bank-Credit by Corn
Granaries were here well fixed, the very like would be with the Mechanics who
have Corn in Bank, there being no Security at present to be had, comparable to
what this would be.

I must desire my Children, or some of them which can well spare Moneys, to buy
a Book of Trade, lately set out by a worthy Gentleman, wherein you will
perfectly see, Mr. Roger Cook.
That all Trades must, and will flourish, according as the means is used in
promoting them; and that Rule, Order, and Policies in Trade, by Sea and Land,
Ease, Cheapness, with conveniences for Trade, have been the means of setting up
the Dutch to this great growth and strength they are now at: And in Reading
that Book, you will perfectly see, as in a Glass, your own condition as now it
is; as also what it would be, if the thing I treat upon were here well fixed by
a good Law.

Now I will take a step to Worcester, and Discourse the poor Clothiers there;
but I know they are all of one Lip, a bad Trade, and they do not know when it
will mend, neither do they know which way it may be mended; well, because they
are Neighbors, and Contrymen, I will take in the Clothiers of Worcester,
with the Cap-makers of Bewdley, and Stuff-Weavers of Kidderminster; and as
they are Neighbors in one County, and deal all in the Wool, so I will fix
them all together in One Granary at New- Brunswick, near Stratford upon Avon:
And for that they shall have equal benefit in all things relating to the said
Granary, I have here drawn the form of the Bill to be presented to the
Parliament, for the building and ordering the Bank-Granary, and the Corn at
New- Brunswick which shall be put therein, with all persons thereunto related.

BE it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the Incorporated-companies of Clothiers of the City of Worcester, and
Town of Kidderminster, with the company of Cappers of the Town of Bewdley in
the said County, to erect and build one or more Granaries at New- Brunswick,
near the Bridge at Stratford upon Avon, in the County of Warwick, being the
Lands of Sir John Clapton Knight, to hold and keep Corn of all sorts, for the
use and benefit of the said companies of Clothiers and Cappers; and that the
said companies may have and take Lands sufficient to make a good and sufficient
Highway for Carts and other Carriages, to come to and from the said Granary,
or Granaries, provided the said companies of Clothiers and Cappers first pay,
or cause to be paid to Sir John Clapton, or his Assigns for so much Land as
they shall use, or have occasion for, not under Thirty years purchase; and in
case there shall arise any difference about the value of the Land so to be made
use of, then it shall be in the power of the Mayor of Stratford upon Avon, and
any two of the Aldermen of the said Town, to set down and award how much Moneys
shall be paid for the quantity of Land to be made use of; and such order being
made, Signed, and Sealed, by the said Mayor and Aldermen, shall bind all
Parties concerned, and their Heirs.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Corn and
parcels of Corn in Granary, shall be affixed, and writ in a plain Table, and in
the said Granary hung up to be viewed by any that desire to see the same; and
that all such Corn when in Granary, may be transferred by the party owning the
same, with the Register of the said Granary, being fairly entered into a Book to
be kept for that purpose.

And be it further enacted, that no Sale, Mortgage, or any other Act shall be
good for any Corn brought into Bank-Granary, unless entered with the said
Register.

And be it further enacted, That all Corn or Malt laid up in the said Granary,
or Granaries at New- Brunswick, which is the proper Corn of the said companies,
may pass down the River of Avon, into the River of Seavern, through all Locks,
Sluices, Wears, or Turn-picks, without paying any Tax or Tunage for the same,
provided that they the said companies of Cothiers and Cappers first get License
under the Hands and Seals of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Windsor, Andrew
Yarranton Gent.) and the rest who have an Interest in the said River of Avon to
pass as aforesaid, and after such License obtained, free and quiet passage
shall be and remain unto the said Companies of Clothiers and Cappers, and to
their Successors for ever for all such Corn as shall be taken out of the said
Granary.

Now my Loving Countrymen I must leave you, and at Christmas when you have time
to Chat by the Fire with your Wives, then let Nic. Baker at Worcester, Sim.
Wood at Bewdley, and Ned Momford at Kidderminster be your Oracles, and
discourse of this Affair of Corn in Granary. And in the mean time I will fetch
a March up Avon and so up Stower to Shopson, and from thence to Banbury, and so
down the Sharwel to Oxford, and so down Thames to London, and I will see
whether Thames River may be so perfected as Trade by a Water Carriage may be
made Communicable and Easy, and I will Do my utmost endeavor to find out some
convenient place upon the Sharwel to build Granaries.

But I must Beg leave, in the first place, that I may give some Reasons, which
have occasioned the Abatement of Trade in the City of London, and when I have
done with them, then I will apply the best Remedies that lie in my knowledge,
how the Trade may be recovered into the City again, whereby it will clearly
appear, that Trade will be forced to come and take her abode in the City of
London as formerly.

1. Reason, In the Building the City of London, there were two great Errors
committed, one was of Omission, the other of Commission; That of Commission is,
The Buildings being made so great, thereby the Rents were very High, (at first)
and when a Tradesman had paid his Fine, fixed his Counters and Presses, and
furnished his house, according as his Wife pleased to have it, or as he thought
fit to have it furnished to get a Wife, that great Charge being at first
Contracted, did so lessen the Tradesmans Stock, that many were forced to go
into the Suburbs, and some into the Countries. The thing of Omission, was the
Neglect of putting Houses to be new built under a Register, when the Act past
for Building the City, the Credit of which if done, would have been better than
Ready Moneys; for by virtue of such undeniable Security as Registered Houses,
Banks (yea many just Banks) and Lumber Houses would have sprang up, which had
so enlivened Trade, and preserved the Poor out of the hands of the Usurers, and
pawn-Brokers, that the City would have been like a Be Hive, all would have
crept in as long as there was any room, and when no more room, then they would
have swarmed abroad.

II. Reason is, The very great Charge which some Companies put their Members to
in the City of London proves many times the ruin of some poor Tradesmen.

III. The severe customs and practices that some of the greatest Traders in the
Mechanic Arts, use unto some of their own Trade, by scruing and pinching them
in such things they sell them in their necessity. But I will say no more of
that, here being Relief to be had in that case, for all the poor that work in
the Mechanic way, if it be not their faults.

IV. There is no care taken for the amendment of the River Lee, which runs from
Ware to Bow, in all dry times much out of order, nor any notice or regard taken
of the great defects that are in the Navigation* upon the River Thames, from
Oxford to London, which River would be the best Servant the City has, if
completed as it ought to be. If I were a Doctor, and could read a Lecture of
the Circulation of the Blood, I should by that awaken all the City: For London
is as the Heart is in the Body, and the great Rivers are as its Veins; let them
be stopped, there will then be great danger either of death, or else such Veins
will apply themselves to feed some other part of the Body, which it was not
properly intended for: For I tell you, Trade will creep and steal away from any
place, provided she may be better treated elsewhere. Consider the two great
Rivers of England (viz.) Severne and Thames, they must be the occasion of
administering the benefit of Trade to London; but as things now are with these
Rivers, under their several defects and imperfections in their Navigations,
these Rivers administer very little benefit to London, or the Trade therein.

My whole Design at this time, and in this Sheet, is to relieve the honest poor
laborious Handicraft Tradesman in the City of London, and thereby invite Trade
into the City again, and also line out the way how it may be done, whereby it
shall evidently appear, to be his own fault, if he be not rich and happy, and
his Wife and Children after his Decease be left in a comfortable condition,
with the great Advantages it will administer to such as shall be their
Apprentices and Servants. But all you Handicraftsmen, whose Cause I here plead,
must take especial notice of my Maxims: First, Remember Honesty and Honor is
as necessary for Trade, as Discipline is for an Army. Secondly, Remember that
Honor and Honesty bring Riches, Riches bring Strength, and Strength brings
Trade. Thirdly, Observe and consider that all manufactured Commodities, made
with cheap Materials, cheap Victuals, with Moneys at all times when wanted at
easy Interest, and beneficial Laws, well made and well applied to the proper
just ends of things manufactured, will make cheap Commodities, and thereby
increase the Manufactures to great quantities, and so increase the Trade. I
have already showed you in five several particulars, some of the Causes which
have forced Trade out of your City, some of them are not within the power
either of the Law or your Magistrates to prevent, but some are; and these which
may be done with ease, I question not but your Magistrates will use their
endeavors to bring them to pass. The which are, putting all the New Buildings
in the City of London under a Register, and procuring a Law to pass, to enable
the several Companies of Handicraft Tradesmen in London, hereafter mentioned,
to have power to make the River Sharwell Navigable from Oxford to Banbury, to
build Granaries to hold Corn, with Mills or any other Engines to go by Water,
to be made use of for the good and benefit of the several Companies, whereby
Art will be encouraged, and Trade convenienced. The Names of the Companies are
as follows; and the Copy of the Bill to be carried into Parliament, for the
accomplishing of the same follows after; The Company of Weavers, the Company of
Pin-Makers, the Company of Turners, the Company of Watermen, the Company of
Silk-Throwers, the Company of Felt-Makers, the Company of Pavers, the Company
of Cloth-Workers, the Company of Plasterers, the Company of Joyners, the
Company of Embroiderers, the Company of Brick-Layers, the Company of Smiths,
the Company of Armourers, and the Company of Carpenters.

The Form of the Bill to be carried into Parliament, for the making of the
River Sharwell Navigable from Oxford to Banbury, and for building Public
Granaries near the said River, with liberty to set up Mills and Engines to go
by Water, for the use and benefit of the several Companies of the Handicraft
Trades in the City of London, called by the Names of Weavers, Pin-Makers,
Turners, Watermen, Silk-Throwers, Felt-Makers, Pavers, Cloth-Workers,
Plasterers, Joyners, Embroiderers, Brick-Layers, Smiths, Armourers, and
Carpenters.
WHereas it is evidently made appear, That all Manufactures in England may by
the advantage of having constantly good and cheap Uictuals, as also ready
Moneys at all times, to drive their several Trades, live comfortably, and
thereby provide plentifully for their Wives and Children: And whereas it is
lately found out and discovered, that the said Benefits may with much ease be
made applicable unto several of the Companies of Handicrafts within the City of
London, and the way for the doing thereof, is to have liberty to make the River
Sharwell Navigable from Oxford to Banbury, and to set up public Granaries, and
Engines near the said River, for the use of the said Companies. Therefore be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the Incorporated Companies of Meavers, Pin-Makers, Turners, Mater-men,
Silk Throwers, Felt-Makers, Pavers, Cloth-Morkers Plasterers, Ioyners,
Embroiderers, Bricklayers, Smiths, Armourers, and Carpenters, to make the River
Sharwell Navigable, from the City of Oxford to the Town of Banbury in the
County of Oxford, and to build Granaries for holding of Corn, with liberty for
making of Mills for grinding thereof, with License and leave to set up Engines
to go by Matter, for the use and benefit of the several Trades mentioned in this
Act. And for that it shall not be any ways prejudicial to the Owners of any
Land which shall be Cut, or made use of for making the said River Navigable, or
building the said Granaries, Hills, or Engines; Therefore be it Enacted, That
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor of
England, to grant a Commission under the Great Seal of England, thereby
Authorizing Fifteen of the knowingest able Gentlemen of the County of Oxford,
to be Commissioners to set down and settle, what and how much shall be paid for
the Lands so to be Cut or made use of, and the Moneys to be paid before there
is any act or thing done, in cutting any of the said Lands so to be made use
of: And it is further Enacted, That any Seven of the said Commissioners shall
be sufficient to make or do any act, according to Justice and good Conscience;
and all Rules, Orders and Decrees being so made and done, shall bind all
Parties concerned, and their Heirs, and all other Persons whatsoever. And be it
further. Enacted, That all the Benefit of the said River Sharwell, and the
Barges and Boats employed thereupon, with the Granaries, Hills, and Engines to
be built, shall be and enure to the several Companies named in this Act, and to
their Successors for ever. And be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Companies, and their Successors, to put Corn in the
said Granaries, and the same to be Registered with the Clark of each Company, as
to the time it was put in, and the nature, kind, and quantities of the said
Corn: And from and after such time the said Corn is in Granary, no Sale,
Mortgage, or Conveyance shall be good, but such as is Entered with the Clark of
the particular Companies, and at the Guild-Hill with the Register there
employed for that purpose: And in case any of the said Parties dye, having Corn
in Bank, it shall go and enure one Third part to the Midow of the Party
deceased, the other two Third parts thereof, to be dirided share and share
like, amongst all the Children of the Party deceased, only the youngest Child
excepted, which shall have one share and a half being in most necessity, the
better to help to breed him or her up: And that the Husband is, and shall be
for ever disabled to make any Encumbrance upon the said Corn in Bank, without
the consent of his Wife, and she joining with him under her Hand, and Entered in
the Clark of the Companies Book, and with the Register at the Guild Hall, then
the property of the said Bank Corn shall be legally altered, and not otherwise,
any Law, Statute, Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

In reading my Book of England's Improvement by Sea and Land, you will see the
Causes laid open and plain of the decay of Trade, and Manufactures in England,
and the Reasons of the low Rates, the things must of necessity be sold for. I
have already set and appropriated, the Clothiers of Worcester, the Weavers of
Kidderminster and the Cappers of Bewdley, to have the benefit of a Granary near
Stratford upon Avon; Now I am for fixing the several Companies of London who
work in the laborious Arts, in Granaries upon the River Sharwel, near Anslo
Bridge in the County of Oxford, about seven Miles from Oxford. The Arms of the
several Companies are in the Map of Rivers in this Book affixed, wherein you
may plainly see, That if the River Sharwel were once made Navigable from Oxford
to Anslo Bridge, and the Granaries built in that place for the several
Companies, then all the Rich Corn Countries toward Banbury and Brackley, would
be on the Backside of the Granaries, and would at all times supply the
Granaries with good Corn, and at cheap Rates, those Parts being the only places
for good Corn and plentiful in England, and the Corn may be ground at Mills to
be built close by the Granaries, upon the River Sharwel and the Meal and Malt
carried down by Water to London, and there baked and brewed into Bread and
Drink; and the Corn and Malt taken and put into Granary, in times that Corn is
cheap, will cause the poor Tradesmen never to eat dear Bread or Drink dear
Drink, and upon the Credit of his Bank Corn he will be able to take up Moneys
at all times, to drive his Trade. And then by virtue of cheap Bread and cheap
Drink, with Credit out of Bank, with the advantage he may have of employing
many hands, both Children and Servants, the Mechanic Artificer must then of
necessity (if a good husband) advance his Fortunes: And this way, and this way
alone is the true way of bringing the Trade again into the City of London. And
the Granaries being once well settled, and Corn therein well fixed, happy is he
then that can get the Poor of S. Gyles or Cripplegate to be by him employed. I
will now give you one Instance what this way of Corn and Malt in Granary will
do, if once well fixed at Anslo Bridge in Oxfordshire, with Mills to grind Corn,
and Engines set up there to go by Water, to accommodate Trade. Suppose I were
to make Pins, I know that is the smallest Manufacture that is now made, and
there are many Poor of that Trade, that make hard shift to live, I think I
could make Pins three pence in the Shilling cheaper than they can now be made
in London, by the greatest Dealers in that Trade, and all done by the Poor
People that are now chargeable to the Parish. The manner and way of making the
Pins so cheap, is or may be very obvious, if People are not ignorantly blind.
First, the Wire must be bought at the best hand, and sent to Anslo Bridge, and
there drawn and made sizeable and fit to make all sorts of Pins; and this to be
done by the force and power of a Water Wheel, which will draw more Wire in one
day, than six men can by the way used by arm labor in the same time. Secondly,
These Poor to make Pins must be fixed and settled near the Granaries at Anslo
Bridge, there to work by good Rules and strict Orders. Thirdly, There they must
have a public Brew House and Bake house, then all Bread and Drink will be made
very cheap; and when the Pins are made, they are in the heart of England, and
may be sent down the River Avon into Severne, and so for Bristol, Ireland, and
Westchester; and in the way of barter, the Pin-Makers may have Cheese from
Chester, and Bacon from Shrewsbury for Pins; and the Cheese and Bacon may be
brought down the River Severne, and up the River Avon, and so to Anslo Bridge
by Land, to feed the Pin-Makers. And all this will be performed at far easier
and much cheaper Rates than Cheese and Bacon are sold for at London. Now if
Bread and Drink may always be had at half the Rate at Anslo Bridge, for the
Pin-Makers, as they pay at London for it, and if the Wire be drawn cheaper at
Anslo Bridge than now it is at London, and if good Cheshire Cheese and Bacon
can be had at Anslo Bridge, at cheaper Rates than at London, and House Rent at
half the Rate as at London, all these things being put together will certainly
be the means of making Pins three pence in the Shilling cheaper at Anslo
Bridge, than now they are, or can be made in London: And for hands to work,
every Parish abounds in Poor; and would willingly be freed of them. But
observe, if bread and drink were always certain and cheap at London, for the
benefit of the Mechanic Trades, and well settled, to be at all times delivered
to the Members of the several Companies, then in London could be no Poor, nor
want of Trade; for then men would strive who should employ most hands, he that
employed most would get most. Suppose you were at this time to begin to put
your Corn and Malt into Granary at Anslo Bridge, there you may have sixscore
Bushels of Wheat, and threescore Bushels of Malt for twenty pounds; and such
quantity being laid in will maintain a Family of seven Persons with bread and
drink for three years, which is but twenty Shillings per year for each Person.
And as things are managed in London, and near London, take three years
together, one year with another, it is not less than three Pounds per year that
maintains a man in bread and drink. But you will say, these are good things,
but we shall never see them come to pass, but (if done) I confess it would
relieve all the Poor in the City, and increase the Trade, and draw Trade into
the City again, and would be the great benefit of the Widows, and the
Fatherless, and prevent the Pawn-brokers from Raking and Screwing the Poor as
now they do: Well I will acquaint you, that there are some Persons that have
for some years last past foreseen the Misery that would unavoidably come upon
the Mechanic Trades in the City of London, and there has been much Pains
taken, and some Moneys expended by surveying the River Thames, and the
Sharwell, to find if they might be so made Navigable, and Communicable with the
River Severne and Avon, that thereby a large Trade might be brought to the City
of London, and all Poor Mechanics fed with cheap bread and cheap drink; and it
is very evident, that if the River Thames were perfected, and made completely
Navigable, as it ought to be, and the Sharwel made Navigable, as is prescribed,
only to Anslo Bridge, then the great things here mentioned would come to pass
for the benefit of the City, as to the enlarging of its Trade, and
accommodating the persons working in the Mechanick-Arts; and relieving the
whole Mass of Poor that are in and about the City of London, who now want not
only work, but bread also, which is a great reproach, besides the damage it
brings to the Public. You have here a Copy of the Petition, which is now in my
hands to be delivered to the Kings Majesty, for perfecting the Navigation upon
the River Thames, as it ought to be done; with the Water men's Grievances, which
are many. I having this Summer surveyed the River Thames from Oxford to London,
and my Son twice, and the River Sharwel also, we find the Watermen much
abused, being forced to pay several Taxes, at several Sluices betwixt Oxford and
Burcot, that part of the River being made Navigable in the 21. of King James,
and by that Law all People and Barges are to pass and repass without Tax. And
we find that the great defects in not completing the said River, with the
charge, trouble, and delays occasioned thereby, is a great hindrance to the
Trade of London, and many other parts also: The Damage whereof to the City of
London, Bargemen, Countrymen, and Trade, is at least fifty thousand pounds
yearly; The particulars how, I will make out, (if desired or commanded.) And it
is a misery that the Barges should lie on ground a Month or six Weeks, as they
did this year, and the poor Barge-Masters should be forced all that time to
maintain so many men, as of necessity they must; besides, the Tradesman in
London wants the Commodity to sell.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the humble Petition of the Barge-Masters
Westward upon the River of Thames, and their Servants, humbly shows,

THat in the one and twentieth Year of the Reign of King James of blessed
Memory, there was an Act of Parliament passed, upon the humble Petition and
desire of the City and University of Oxford, for making the River of Thames
Navigable, from the said City to Burcott, and for maintaining the same at the
charge of the said City and University; and by the said Act liberty is given,
for Bargemen and Watermen to bring Barges and Boats up the said River, to
carry and recarry all manner of Goods and Merchandises, for the good of the
City of Oxford, and the Public; And of late years the Right Honorable Thomas
Lord Windsor, and others, have made Navigable the River of Avon, in the
Counties of Worcester, Gloucester, and Warwick, and are about making some other
Rivers Navigable, which when finished will tend much to the benefit of Trade
between Cheshire, Shropshire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire,
Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Oxfordshire, Bristol, and most part of Wales to
London, by carrying Commodities down the River Severne, and so up the River
Avon, and from thence to Oxford by Land, and so to London by Water, whereby the
Highways and Bridges will be preserved, and the Goods carried and recarried at
two thirds of what they now pay by Land, which will be of great advantage to
Trade. But may it please your Majesty, so it is, that the River Thames is not
as yet made perfectly Navigable as it ought to be, and as it was intended by
the Act of Parliament, whereby the City of Oxford, and the rest of your
Majesty's Subjects and Barge-men are deprived of the benefit intended them by
the said Navigation, and many times the Barges lie on ground three Weeks or a
Month together for want of water, which might be prevented by making three
Holds for water in the River Sharwell near Oxford, to be let down as flushes in
dry times, as also one Lock to be made at Swift Ditch, one pair of Gates at
Sutton, one Turnpike a Mile below Sutton, with two Flushes to be taken out of
the River Kennet, with two places to be made for Flushes, one near Windsor, the
other near Chersey, all which being done, will so plentifully supply the River
with water, that not only the Barges coming from Oxford and Abington, but many
other places, will have the benefit thereof, and bring them clear to London
without stay. The Premises considered, your Petitioners most humbly pray, that
your Majeshy will be graciously pleased to appoint Mr. Robert Yarranton, a
person able in that Affair, to survey the defects of the said Navigation, and
to make Report thereof from time to time, to the Commissioners appointed for
the same: And that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to signify unto the
said Commissioners your pleasure, that so good a Work may be forthwith
perfected, according as is directed in the said Act; and that your Majesty's
Subjects and Barge-men may have the benefit of passing and repassing with their
Goods and Barges up and down the said River from Oxford to Burcott, without
paying any Tax or Imposition for the same, unless by Law due; and that Orders
and Rules may be made by the Commissioners, for the good and well Governing
both of the Navigation, Millers, and Bargemen, as is by the Act directed: And
your Petitioners, as in duty bound, shall daily Pray, etc.

When the River Thames is perfectly made Navigable to Oxford, as it ought to
be, then to make the River Sharwell Navigable unto Anslo Bridge, will cost
about 2500 l. the building of four Granaries, each Granary to hold fourteen
thousand Quarters of Corn, six thousand pounds (all Materials being very dear
in that place) for building of Mills, and some Wheels to draw Wire, and for
other use 500 l. for building of twenty Houses for habitation for persons
employed about the Trade and in the Granaries 2000 l. all which is ten thousand
pounds, which is but one Shilling a piece from each man of the several
Companies, the Number thereof being two hundred thousand persons, as they
themselves say. If these Granaries were fixed, some other Companies may go up
the little River to Whitney and build Granaries there; and some may go up the
Thames as far as Ratcot-bridge, and build Granaries there; and so the good Corn
growing in the heart of England would be applied to London, which will so
convenience the people working in the several Manufactures, that the Trade will
wholly return to the City again; for hands being maintained at work with cheap
Victuals, will make cheap Commodities, and cheap Commodities will enlarge
Trade. I intend to write one Sheet, more particularly setting forth the way of
bringing the Trade to London again, and feeding the Poor with cheap bread and
drink; which you shall have printed on the one side of a Sheet of Royal Paper,
and on the other side a Map of the Rivers which will be serviceable to the
Design, with the places convenient and fit to build Granaries, with the Arms of
the several Companies in the said Map. One of each Map being set in a Frame is
intended to be sent to each Hall in London, there to receive the opinions of
such as the benefit of Granaries is intended for. In the multitude of
Counselors there is safety.

Now I must make a step to Westchester, and endeavor to find out how the River
Dee may be made so Navigable to Bangor-bridge, that thereby it may be made
communicable with the River Severne. In the Month of July 1674. I was prevailed
with by a Person of Honor to survey the River Dee, running by the City of
Chester into the Irish Sea, and finding the River choked with the Sands that a
Vessel of twenty Tuns could not come to that Noble City, and the Ships forced
to lie at Neason, in a very bad Harbor, whereby the Ships receive much damage,
and Trade made so uncertain and chargeable, that the Trade of Chester is much
decayed, and gone to Leverpool; and that old great City in danger of being
ruined, if the River Dee be not made Navigable by Act of Parliament, and Ships
brought to the City. I have formerly drawn a Map of the New River to be made to
bring up the Ships to the City side, which Map was presented to the Duke of
York by the Lord Windsor, and Colonel Warden, and therein the Reasons are
inserted, how it may be done, and the advantage it will be to Trade, and the
City also. The Map is now at Chester in the keeping of the Mayor. His Highness
the Duke of York was pleased to promise the recommending of it to the
Parliament, for the making it Navigable. And if it were made to Chester
Navigable by a new Cut, as is in the Map prescribed, there would be three
thousand Acres of Land gained out of the Sea, and made rich land, besides the
Coals from Aston will be brought to the City of Chester by Water, which now are
brought by land, and all Goods and other things carried and recarried from
England to Ireland, and from Ireland into England, with much less charge than
now it is. And Dee being made Navigable to Bangor-bridge, will be a means to
make the River Severne helpful to convey all Goods to London, by sending it
down the River Severne, and up the River Avon, and so down the Thames to
London; whereby much moneys will be saved, and Trade advanced. The River Dee
must be taken up with a very strong Wear, over against the Water Gate of the
City of Chester, and so the River Dee must be carried in a large Cut or Trench
through the lands below Alderman Wrights House, along the Sands, as far as
Flint Castle, and then dropped by a large Cut, into the Deep Water below the
Brewhouse. There must also be a Cut drawn along the welsh shore, and so from
Aston Pits, and dropped into the Main Trench, thereby the waste water, that comes
from the Hills and Mountains will be voided, and the Coals that are now carried
by Land to Chester will then be carried by water, and at least 1000 l. per Ann.
saved in Carriage; This Trench must be very large, that two Ships may Sail one
by the other, and the Sea Banks must be made very Firm and Strong, not upright,
but very much sloaping. There must also be made five very strong Locks or
Sluices of Stone, which is there very necessary, at the end of the Trench. This
will be done for 15000 l. The River Dee being let down upon a sudden through
the great Trench, will cause the Sands to fly and deepen the Channel, and
thereby make the Harbor safe, and help to open and deepen the Bar. But it must
be done when the Tide is going out, and when the Wind blows hard at East,
with a strong fresh of Water coming off the Mountains. The Map discovering the
whole Design is hereunto Affixed.

map

REader, I beg thy pardon, if I have kept thee long in reading this Discourse;
but I hope thou will not be angry: for when I put Pen to Paper, I intended to
be brief. I know there are many, before they have well weighed the Contents of
this Book, will think that it may much shake their Interests, and so will be
enquiring after the Compiler, and of his Education: And how it is possible that
one man should know all that is in this Book asserted; and will say these are
notions of a hot Brain. I know others, whose Sores are great, and Wounds
dangerous, and desire a cure thereby to live at peace (both in their Estates
and Persons) will be apt to ascribe more to the Compiler than is due. For in
this Age most of the present humors are to detract, and abuse, where Interest
is pinched or laid open to the World; and on the other hand too much to cry up
and extol those that expect benefit and relief. As to both sorts of
Inquisitors, I will save them a labor, and give them a short Account of my
Education and Improvement. I was an Apprentice to a Linen Draper when this
King was born, and continued at the Trade some years: But the Shop being too
narrow and short for my large mind, I took leave of my Master, but said
nothing. Then I lived a Countrey-life for some years, and in the late Wars I
was a Soldier, and sometimes had the Honor and Misfortune to lodge and dislodg
an Army: In the year One thousand Six hundred Fifty two, I entered upon
Iron-works, and pli'd them several years, and in them times I made it my
business to survey the three great Rivers of England, and some small ones; and
made two Navigable, and a third almost completed. I next studied the great
weakness of the Rye-lands, and the Surfeit it was then under by reason of their
long Tillage. I did by Practick and Theorick find out the reason of its
defection, as also of its recovery, and applied the remedy, in putting out Two
Books which were so fitted to the Countrey-mans capacity, that he fell on
Pell-Mell; and I hope, and partly know, that great part of Worcestershire,
Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Staffordshire, have doubled the
value of the Land, by the Husbandry discovered to them: See my Two Books
Printed by Mr. Sawbridg on Ludgate Hill, Entitled, Yarranton's Improvement by
Clover, and there thou may be further satisfied. I also for many years served
the Countries with the Seed, and at last gave them the knowledge of getting it
with ease and small trouble; and what I have been doing since, my Book tells
you at large: And as to any that are my enemies upon the account of this
Subject, or of such as speak, or assert my pains to be to them acceptable, both
parties are to me a-like; I only wish, and pray, that what is here treated
upon, may by the Powers above us, be seriously considered of; and if it be
found it tends to the benefit of this present Age, and for the good of the
Generations to come, then let them pursue the ends to bring it to pass. If any
Gentleman, or other, please to put Pen to Paper, in opposition to what is here
asserted; I shall give him a Civil return, bound up with the Second part: where
these Seven Heads shall be Treated on:

1st, Demonstrate, and make it appear, That England and Ireland are the only
Northern-Kingdoms unimproved.

2dly, Discover, That it is a great and wonderful providence of God, it is so
at this time.

3dly, Show how England may be improved in all its parts to Thirty years
purchase; and how things may be fitted for the doing thereof; as also how
Ireland may be brought to Twenty years purchase, and made as useful to England,
and of as great strength, as Norway is to Denmark.

4thly, Where Manufactures may be fitted, and where settled, and how they must
be ordered for the benefit of the Kingdom, and Trade Universal.

5thly, Show how, and where all manner of Naval-Stores are to be had and
provided at Three fifths they now cost the King, with the way, means, and
manner of accomplishing them.

6thly, How to employ Six thousand young Lawyers, and Three thousand Priests,
for the good of the Public, and mankind, who now have neither practice nor
cure of Souls.

7thly, With Observations of the Balance of Europe, and of the Public Banks
therein, with their Use, Order, Rule, and Riches.

FINIS.


