England's Improvements Justified; and the Author thereof, Captain Y.
vindicated from the scandals in a Paper called a Coffee-House Dialogue. With
some Animadversions upon his Popish Designs therein contained.
MAlice and Envy are the inseparable Companions of a Diabolical Nature; and
that contagion is never more apparent, than by its dreadful symptoms, where it
throws out its sulphurous fiery stink-pots of calumnies and slanders, blasting
the reputations of the best of men, lessening and levelling at the most Heroic
Actions, and endeavoring to make the greatest designs for the weal-publick
frustrate and abortive, Thus malice pregnant with revenge and envy in her
insatiate repining^ again Virture* join their consultations to suggest
falsehoods; steals from Discourses the Antecedent occasion, making in some parts
a divorce between the precedent matter, and coherent Discourse; and like an
ill-seasoned Vessel, Qodcunque infandit acescit, perverts all, even the most
pleasant Liquors to its corrupt nature: Thus has this virulent Dialogist dipped
his Pen in poison; and rather than his repining envy should not be answered in
its importunities, will expose his weakness as well as wickedness to the World,
forgetting what he declares to have read in the Lord Bacons Essays, That
silence in a Fool may pass for wisdom: Vir sapit qui pauca loquitur, few words
become the wise; but I must invert the words for his sake, Vir (...) qui pauca
sapit, the Fool is known by his babbling. Sacred Writ records an Ass to speak
for the preservation of its Master, to his conviction, in his evil undertaking;
but the creature* by creation, superior to that heavy animal, brays out forged,
frivolous defamations, and that so apparently false, that his own Popish Herd,
blushing at his folly, will say, Etiam and Asin^^ noster calcitrat, wondering
that this dull insipid creature durst lift up his foot against a man of so true
worth, industry and ingenuity, as that honest Captain, the glory of whose
public spirit so manifest to the World, so far surmounts all those mists of
envy, that no idle reflections can touch the belief of any man of common sense,
that this worthy Patriot, (so I must justly style him for his great merit in
his public undertakings), can be guilty of any such Solecisms; take the folly
to your self, Sir, and then laugh as simply at your own ginglings, for which
all men else contemns you; and were it not your happiness to be unknown,
there is not a Barrester of the Temple but would kick you, for fathering such a
changling, simple Brat upon so honorable a calling as a Barresters; and
whoever shall lose so much time to read your nonsense, will find you but an Imp
of Rome, a Popish Pettyfogger, a Vermin that spits out only poison to divide
the Protestant interest, thereby to support a languishing Cause, which the high
hand of God has hitherto witnessed against; from whose Almighty Power, none of
your black Dirges, nor all your Idols, Jesuits and Devils to help you, can
deliver you.

But before I come to examine your Paper in its several Paragraphs, I must show
you how unfarely you deal with this honest Gentleman; either you were one of
the Society, or not; if you were, and the matter were true, you are a Traitor,
a Judas, acting against the Laws and Rules of human Society, Odi ^^^morem
compotorem, you are to be detested and abandoned by all civil Company, and if
you were not of the Society, you can know nothing; and your whole Discourse is
a feigned undertaking; and how easy a matter is it for a man to lay
absurdities at any man's door, when the same man, out of a malicious design,
first makes the Question, and also the Answer; has the contrivance of the whole
conference by himself; and yet a person knowing nothing, wholly innocent, must
be exposed; from this Arrow shot in the dark, no man can be safe; and whether
the Captain ought to father so scandalous a Bastard, I leave it to all wise and
just men's censure: This being the true state of the business, the Captain
having never had this conference, he must be cleared from whatsoever is
contained in this forged Dialogue (...) innocence, when he heard of it, only
procured a smile, with this answer, spreta vilescunt, falsehoods must perish,
are soonest destroyed by contempt: ^o that he needs no further vindication; and
his works shall praise him in the Gates, and so fully be-speak his worth, that
every English man is now obliged in his quarrel, and upon that account I take
my self concerned without his knowledge, and must give this public scandal the
lie, as publicly; without which, I could neither satisfy my self, or answer
the duty I owe to the Rules of friendship, nor be just to the honor of the
Captains worth and innocence, being a frequenter of that Society, where I had
the enjoyment of pregnant and ingenious Gentlemen, and no such trumpery could
take place there.

But for your reflections upon Rivers making navigable; who will controvert the
great advantage they are in all places to Trade and Commerce, and a common
good? Is this a crime for a man to demonstrate? saving your ridicule which
belongs to your self, of making the Streets of London navigable, and for
lodging of Ships upon an Hill, what will be your reward to impose
impossibilities? But what the Captain proposed for harboring a considerable
number of Ships in safety, is no Chymera, as your folly remarks; for it has
been demonstrated to many persons of honor, and that with a fair and plausible
reception; and for his Register, which your inventions kick about with so much
slight, I must say, Ars nullum habet inimicum preter ignorantem, you speak evil
of the things you know not, or your ill nature envies, and would blast what you
cannot imitate; but for these things let Englands Improvement speak for it
self, there the profits and advantages of a Register will appear, with the
advancement of Trade, by Lombard-Houses and Common Stores, which are all made
practicable in foreign parts, and now by the hazard of his life in long
travels, the sweat of his brows and vast expense, is brought by him home, and
made public for general good; and is this the reward? But it is no marvel, Quid
cum amaraco sui, what must Swine do with such Pearls? This Dialogue-maker, I
perceive, is for no improvements, he has been trained up for French Government,
to bring Popery into Church, and slavery upon the Nation, and to that purpose
he introduces a forged discourse with the Captain's, to frustrate the happiness
of a free people; methinks I see, poor Scribler! how his Hypocondrias are
distended, and like to burst with envy, when he beheld the grandeur and gravity
of the Lord Mayors installment, the great Character of Englands freedom not to
be paralelled in the Government of any Prince in the World; this adds to the
glory of the Crown, that our King commands the hearts and hands of freeborn
Subjects, flourishing under his gracious protection, with a stable government,
that preserves the honor and majesty of the King, and the happy liberties of
his people. Here I might end, having said enough for the Captains vindication,
if I said no more, but that he is by a forgery imposed upon: But meeting with
some things in his Paper, I cannot but animadvert: first, where he Queries,
What Game have the great ones now to play? He might have answered himself, they
have enough to do. Your Romish Emissaries have cut out work with a witness,
here is Plot upon Plot, and all to murder the King, to subvert Government in
Church and State, and by the mighty Power of God all discovered; and because
the Popish party had received so great a soil, the Protestant party must now be
made Plotters, that under that color you might murder the King, and give the
blow in Masquerade; but no weapon formed against God can prosper: and if his
providence had not embowelled your cursed designs, as you say, the City ere
this might have been on fire at one end, and cutting of Throats all over.

The next Question he begs, is an enforced reflection upon the Clergy of the
Church of England, a fine device to create jealousies amongst Protestants: you
have played that trick too often to have it thrive; we better understand the
common interest, than to divide, divide and impera, we know the danger of a
division; and since the quarrel is plainly betwixt Protestant and Papist, and
that all must endure the fiery trial, they will neither turn, nor burn, but
jointly oppose all your insinuations; I hope Mr. Dangerfields Plot has
convinced the World so, that we shall not hear any more invectives against the
dissenting party, for all are Protestants. The Church of England, as it is the
best of Governments, so I hope it will never want charity for any that agree in
the same fundamentals; the same Gospel is owned by all, and by that rule, all
are to be governed, which says, Let your moderation be seen before all men* the
Lord is at hand: and if any man be otherwise minded, viz. as to Discipline, or
other matters not so essential, God shall reveal it; let there be therefore no
animosities, no differences amongst them, for they are Brethren.

As for what you would suggest, as the saying of the Captains, in the
reflections of the Church of England men, you beg the question, that you may
take the occasion to discover yourself of what foot-mark you are, and that the
mark of the Beast is plainly in your forehead; Ex pede Herculem, I see by this
foot the dimensions of your mind, It is not your kindness or reverence you bear
to the Church of England or honored Clergy, but to sweeten our apprehensions,
and mollify our fears, and to assure us that Popery is not such a bugbear,
but that all the Lands taken away from those Idolatrous, Lascivious Drones,
will keep firm as they are; and reinforceth his argument and persuasions, that
as they were first sold by Act of Parliament, it was again corrobarated in
Queen Mary's Reign; a necessary policy to keep all quiet till they had played
up their Game to a sure point: But the great assurance this Gentleman gives it,
is from infallibility it self, in these words, To which, consent of his
Holiness was given; and this he counts security strong enough: Then, Sir, you
are a simple Papist, and your Pope a Jugler; for the Canons of your Church
denies a power to be in any Pope himself, to divest the Church of any of its
possessions. Where are your wheadles now, Sir? Carry your trifles to your
Children nursed up in an implicit faith, we will trust in God, and use our
lawful endeavors against Popes and Plotters, and enjoy our Lands too, no
thanks to your Pope, whom you style his Holiness, which never any Protestant so
seriously did: A fair evidence of your principles!

The next thing he disputes with himself, and would father it upon the Captain,
is about the Subject of a Pamphlet, called, A Word without Doors: which I have
heard the Captain aver he never saw it, nor I neither; therefore to approve or
disapprove, belongs not to my present occasion; but if any thing be in it,
Contra Bonos mores, or savors of irreligion or disloyalty, I commit him with
this Popish disputant to the Sword of the Magistrate. As for your Sophistries,
and what absurdities are in them, take the shame to your self, for they are all
of your own making. Interest, I perceive, can never Lie; Popery must come in,
if your foul hand or crazy brain can help it. Are not you a brave fellow to
come in Print; that can censure Parliaments, and charge them with injustice and
folly too; you do not like them, we may all see; they are too hearty against
Popery, and too zealous to maintain the Protestant Religion to posterity. Is
this a crime? As for the Bill, that was, is not now in being; for that
Parliament is Dissolved, and another since chosen, and Prorogued for a
considerable time; therefore you dispute, de lana caprina, you set up an Image,
and fall down before it; go on with your Idolatry, we will trust God for
Religion, and next humbly submit all to the wisdom and care of our gracious
King, and his great Council in Parliament.

To how little purpose do you revive the Lord Straffords Case, in which you are
a little too saucy; 'twas done, perenni Parliamento, The supreme Court of the
Nation, and by them he was judged guilty of High Treason, and you must not say
he suffered without Law, though his crimes were not within one, or any of the
Articles of the 25th of Edward the 3d; yet if you consult the same Statute, you
will find the Parliament judge of Treasons not there named; The words of the Act
are these:

And because many other like cases of Treason may happen in time to come, which
a man cannot think nor declare at this present time; it is accorded, that if
any other case, supposed Treason, which is not above specified, does happen
before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without going to judgment of the
Treason, till the Cause be showed and declared before the King and his
Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or other Felony. Sir, the
Articles are yet alive, and the recited clause shows the Parliament not so
mistaken, for they are Judges of what is Treason: I never heard that Act was
repented of by any Parliament, though the same Parliament provided that it
should not be brought into pres^ent; not that they would be understood thereby
to judge themselves as unjust; but in reference to inferior Courts, and how far
that clause reached him, or whether it did not imply that it was in the power
of a Parliament so to adjudg, I submit to better judgments than yours or mine,
for I dare not presume to determine. Qua supra nos nihil ad nos. In your last
Paragraph you would give a fresh assault upon the late Parliament, charging
them with the greatest injustice, and that from the Act Tricessimo Quinto of
the Queen, as if it were denied to the D. liberty of other Subjects, to declare
and make his submission; and implies, that he was never convicted; if all were
well in that case, what mean the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the
Oxen? why were such proposals offered by his Majesty for securing the
Protestant Religion against a Popish successor? and all those great labors in
Parliament, and their Votes, declaring what you would now question? Pray let me
ask you, When was there the least appearance of the D's. inclinations to
declare his submission to the Church of England? If you make not that appear,
What do you argue for? not to satisfy the World that there was or is any such
intention, but to asperse the great Council of the Kingdom? and certainly if
the design had lain there, the concern of succession to Three Kingdoms would
have brought it into Act after so many fair opportunities, and especially when
the Parliament arrived at so high a pitch, caused by the care for the
Protestant Religion, and those dreadful apprehensions of those horrid Plots
discovered against his Majesty's Sacred person. I assure you Sir, if ever such
an offer had appeared; it would have been cherished with the greatest
indulgence; but this is too much to argue upon a non Entity, for that Bill is
gone, and you need not question but when the Parliament meets, and ever take
that debate in hand, the D. will have nothing offered but what is just, with
relation to establishing the Protestant Religion, and the preservation of his
Most Sacred Majesty's person, and the Liberties of all true English men. Now,
Sir, upon examination of your ill-bestowed pains, I think you ought to ask God
forgiveness in the first place, for breaking his commandment, Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy Neighbor; next, to answer to His Majesty for
breach of his Law in Libelling; and upon your Knees to crave pardon of the D.
for your pitiful management of his Cause; and for my part, I shall throw you in
my forgiveness for the trouble you gave me; and as to the Captains concerns, he
is to thank you for the opportunities you have given, to make his deserts more
public, and Englands Improvements more honored.

FINIS

