The Young-mens and the Apprentices Outcry: OR, An Inquisition after the lost
Fundamental Laws and Liberties of ENGLAND.

Directed (August 29. 1649.) in an Epistle to the private Soldiery of the
Army, especially all those that signed the solemn Engagement at
Newmarket-Heath, the fifth of June, 1647. But more especially to the private
soldiers of the Generals Regiment of Horse, that helped to plunder and
destroy the honest and true-hearted Englishmen, traitorously defeated at
Burford the 15. of May, 1649.

By Charles Collins, Anthony Bristlebolt, William Trabret, Stephen Smith,
Edward Waldgrave, Thomas Frisby, Edward Stanley, William White, Nicolas
Blowd, John Floyd, in the name and behalf of themselves, and the Young men and
Apprentices of the City of London.

Who are cordial approvers of the Paper, called, The Agreement of the free
people, dated May 1. 1649. and the defeated Burford-mens late Vindication,
dated the 20. of August, 1649.

LAMENT. 2.11, 12. Mine eyes do fail with tears: my bowels are troubled: my
liver is powered upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people, because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the City.

They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swooned as the
wounded in the streets of the City, when their soul was powered out into their
mothers bosom.


Gentlemen,
WE are all of one Nation, and People, it is the sword only that differs;
but how just a title that is over us, your own private thoughts surely are our
determiners, however your actions import: For, it is not imaginable, (except
amongst Bears, Wolves, and Lions,) that brethren of one cause, one Nation, and
family, can without remorse and secret check of conscience, impose such I^on
yokes of cruelty and oppression upon their fellows, as by the awe and force of
your Sword ram^ant, is imposed upon the people of this Nation: you see it; we
are at best but your hewers of wood, and drawers of water; our very persons,
our lives and properties, are all overawed to the supportation only of the
raging lawless Sword, drench't in the precious blood of the people, the
ancient and famous Magistracy of this Nation, the Petition of Right, the great
Charter of England, above thirty times confirmed in open and free Parliament,
with all other the fundamental laws, safeties, and securities of the people,
which our Ancestors at an extraordinary dear rate (as with abundance of their
blood and treasure) purchased for the inheritance of us, and of the Generations
after us, and for which ^ou pretendedly took up arms against the late King and
his party, are now all subverted, broken down and laid wast, the Military Power
being thrust into the very office and seat of the Civil Authority, The King not
only most illegally put to death, by a strange, monstrous, illegal, ^rbitrary
Court, such as England neverknew; Monarchy extirpated (not rectif^^d) without,
and besides the consent of the people, (though the actors of that bloody Scene
have owned and declared them to be the original of all just humane Authority)
^ut even our Parliaments (the very interest, marrow, and soul of all the
native rights of the people) ^ut down, and the name and power thereof
transmitted to a picked party of your forcible selecting, and such as your
Officers (our Lords, and Riders) have often and frequently styled no better
then a mock-Parliament, a shadow of a Parliament, a seeming-Authority, or the
like pretending the continuance thereof, but till a new and equal
Representative, by (...) mutual Agreement of the free People of England could
be elected, although now for subserviency to their exaltation and Kingship;
they prorogue, and perpetrate the same in the name, and under color thereof,
introducing a Privy Counsel, or as they call it, a Counsel of State, of
superintendency, and suppression to all future successive Parliaments for ever,
erecting a martial Government (by blood and violence impulsed upon us) making
soldiers to be executioners of Orders and Warrants, pretending to the Civil
Authority, and in every particular (notwithstanding, all your famous and
glorious Declarations of Freedom and Liberty) dealing with us, as an absolute;
conquered and inslaved People: The Law being nothing but a mock protection to
our lives, liberties and properties; the Judges set apart, for the excutors of
it, a mere delusion, our Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices of Peace, Constables, etc.
being laid by, or made no better then ciphers, (the choice of them, by will
without right) appropriated to a few factious men, while the right owners (the
people) are robbed of their free and popular elections of them) as not daring to
execute Justice upon the rudest or meanest soldier in England, although the
Law sufficiently warrants them thereunto, but contrariwise, Commoners are
forceably convented and tried before a Council of War, and some sentenced
even unto death, others by a private verbal order made to run the gantlop, and
whipped most barbarously, for refusing to take false and illegal oaths; and the
blood of war (expressly against the Petition of right, and for which amongst
other crimes, the Earl of Strafford lost his head as a Traitor, shed in times
of Peace, as the blood of Mr. Richard Arnell upon the 15. November, 1647. near
Ware, of Mr. Robert Lockier the 27. of April; 1649. (so much bewailed and
lamented at London) of Col. Poyer, of Cornet Thompson, Mr. Perkins, and Mr.
Church, upon the 16. of May 1649 at Burford, contrary to promises, and solemn
engagements at the taking of them, (as their friends lately defeated with them,
in their vindication of the 20. of August, 1649. fully declare, page 6.7.) and
others yet fresh in our memory does witness: parties of horse and foot,
(contrary and in direct defiance, of the due course and process of Law) sent
at unseasonable hours, to hale and pull people out of their beds and houses,
from their wives and children, without so much as ever summoning of them, and
without any crime or accusation shown, or accuser appearing, or the least
pretense or shadow of Law produced, some sent into remote Garrisons, where they
have been most barbarously used, and endeavored to be starved, and to^^ from
Garrison to Garrison, others locked up close prisoners, with sentinels night
and day upon their doors, and all due trials and help at Law, stooped and
denied, and no remedy to be obtained, ye^, free men most barbarously put out of
their legal possessions, by force of arms; without any manner (...) trial at
Law, yea the Law damned, and stoopt up against them, for recovering of their
legal right, and they threatened severely to be punished, if they desist not
their suits at Law; yea, and free-mens estates never pretended to be within the
compass of the Ordinances of sequestrations, seized on to (...) great value
(by some great men's wills, protected by their swords, to do even what they
lift, without control) without any manner of trial or conviction, or any
shadow of legal pretense, or ever so much as laying any pretended crime to the
parties charge; all which are the very (if not higher) crimes, then the Earl
of Strafford principally lost his head for, as a Traitor, as clearly appears by
his Act of Attainder, and by his large printed additionall Impeachment, 1640.
both in English and Irish cases, as clearly appears in the preamble thereof;
and in Article 2.3.4.5.6.7.8. But that which is worst of all, the best and most
faithful maintainers of the English Freedoms, are most maligned, abused, and
vilified, that it is now become a crime of the greatest peril and penalty, to
be faithful to the declared interest of Parliaments, or rights of the people
therein; a thing so dreadfully complained of by the Parliament, in the
beginning of their first Remonstrance of December 1641. New Acts of high
Treason, to that end devised to ensnare and entrap the most conscientious, so
that we cannot talk or discourse of our lost Freedoms, or open our mouths of
our oppressions, but we are in as bad a condition, as our Forefathers were, in
the days of William the Conqueror, (that thought any fact crime enough to
entitle him to their estates,) if not worse by being Treason struck; and
besides all this, multitudes of pick pocket, murdering taxes are heaped, and
continued upon the old, and in default of payment, soldiers are put upon
straining, seizng and plundering of our Masters goods; and houses, for which
violence and villainy, they must be largely paid, or else they will plunder over
again for that; yea and the late large Act about Excize, so transcendent and
insnaring in its penalties, that no man well knows how to behave himself in his
trading, for fear of being undone; yea, so numberless are our most
insufferable cruelties, overspreading and wounding the whole Land and people,
that our borders are even filled with the lamentations, mournings, tears, sighs
and doleful groans, of the oppressed and inslaved ruinated people. Trade
decayed and fled, misery, poverty, calamity, confusion, yea and beggary grown
so sore, and so extreme upon the people, as the like never was in England,
under the most tyrannical of all our Kings, that were before these in present
power, since the days of the Conqueror himself; no captivity, no bondage, no
oppression like unto this, no sorrow or misery like unto ours; (of being
inslaved, undone and destroyed by our large pretended friends, for whose
preservation, we could have even pulled out our very eyes) the people become
desolate and forsaken, wandering, pining, and mourning (like those in Jeremies
Lamentations, unto whose sorrows, they said none was like) after their lost
fundamental Laws, their native, and just freedoms, and rights, and there is
none to comfort, none to pity, none to relieve, none to help or or save. Alas,
alas for pity. For,

Your hearts seem to us as obdurate as the flinty rock, as savage and inhumane,
as if the flesh and blood, the bones and marrow of the people, were become your
meat, as already it is in effect, and instead of encouragement and support to
our true friends, and real relievers, (at least in faithful desire and
endeavor) as shall stand in the gap betwixt our destroyers and us, all ways
and means are used to impoverish, destroy, and suppress them, and in them to
break and vassallage the spirits of all the English, which in all ages have had
the preheminency of other Nations, that there may not be so much of gallantry
or courage left amongst the people, that one amongst them shall dare to assert
or maintain their freedoms; (which Act is not a little aggravated by M. John
Pym, in his remarkable Speech against the Earl of Strafford, as the highest of
Treasons against any Nation or Common wealth,) for if any do but murmr and
complain, on seek for remedy, though by way of Petition or Address to the
House, presently their houses, as with Furies, are beset, with armed mercenary
Janisaries, Guards, and Sentinels, set upon their doors and passages, no
consideration had of the terror or affrightment of our Masters, their wives,
children, or servants; or of reason, or law, and their persons as Traitors
therefore imprisoned, for weeks, and months; yea, and close imprisoned from
the society of all their friends, without ever so much as ever seeing either
informer, accuser, prosecutor, or witness, yea, or ever seeing Indictment,
impeachment, or Charge, yea, or face to face, or in their Mittimus's, or any
other formal or legal way, ever so much as having (...) crime, or pretense of
a crime laid unto their charge, by those very men before whom they (...)
brought, and who by the rules of their mere will commit them therefore,
although the Parliame^^ in several Declarations have declared, That they have
received Petitions for the removal of things established by Law, and we must
say, and all that know what belongs to the course or practice of Parliament
will say, that we ought so to do, and that both our Predecessors, and His
Majesty's Ancestors have constantly done it, there being no other place,
wherein Laws that by experience may be found grievous and burdensome, can be
altered or repealed, and there being no other due and legal way, wherein they
which are agrieved by them, can seek redress, and that it is t^ tumult to
deliver Petitions by popular multitudes, 1 part book of Parliaments
Declarations, page 113. 201. 202. 209. 533. 548. 691. 720.

Yea, and your very selves, and your juggling Officers quarreled with, and took
up arms against the Parliament, your creators and original Lords and Masters,
for prohibiting you to per^ies, and make known your grievances to them, and
sufficiently envy and exclaim against them for so doing, and impeach some of
them as Traitors therefore, as clearly appears in your own book of Declar. p.
10. 11. 17. 23. 33. 35 44. 60. 61. 62. 83. 85. 118.

and yet nothing but the boundless wills and humors of those forementioned
men of blood, ^^rageth and rules over us: and is this all the return and
fruit, that people are to expect at your hands does your solemn engagement at
New Market, and Triplo heath, with your Declaratious, Remonstrances, Vows and
Protestations unto us all, center in this bed-roll of cruelties? we pray you
gi^e us leave to make inquiry amongst you after those things, and give losers
leave to complain. Remember you not with what cheerfullnesse and alacrity our
fellow-Apprentices; the glory and flower of the youth of this Nation, and
multitudes of our selves yet surviving, ran in to your assistance o^^ of a
conscientious intent, to uphold and maintain the fundamental Constitution of
this Common. Wealth? viz. the interest and right of the people in their
Parliaments, it being most rational, and unquestionably just, that the people
should not be bound but by their own consent given to their Deputies in
Parliament, which by the Laws and customs of England, ought [wholly new] to
be annual, to deliver and clear the Land from its heavy pressures and bonds,
not i^gaging in the least, against the person of the King, as King, or with any
thoughts or pretense of destroying, but regulating Kingship, but merely for the
removal of al^ those cruelties and oppressions, he had laid upon the people by
his will, contrary to Law^ this you know to be true, your own papers extant
to the world are our record and witnesses, as might plentifully be recited, but
they are known to all men, that know your affairs, you cannot deny it; but
where is the fulfillment of all your glorious words, registered in your book of
Declarations? in which page 14. you say, you shall through the grace of God,
discharge your duties to the Parliament, etc. and also demonstrate, that the
good and quiet of the Kingdom is much dearer to you, then any particular
concernment of your own: and in page 23. the General to both Houses in his
Letter of the 6. of June 1647: assures the Parliament, it is his study and care
to avoid a new war, and (further thus says) so I find it to be the unanimous
desire, and study of the Army, that a fir^ peace in this Kingdom may be
settled, and the liberties of the people cleared, and secured accordingly, to
the many Declarations by which we were invited, and induced to engage in the
late want, most seriously there promising them, they will not meddle to the
advancement of any particular party, or interest whatsoever.

And in your solemn engagement of the 5. June 1647. page 26. you promise and
engage to God, the Kingdom, and to each other, that you will not disband,
divide, nor suffer your selves to be disbanded, nor divided (either for
Ireland, or any other place else) until we have first such satisfaction [(...)
you say] to the Army, in relation to our grievances, and desires heretofore
presented, and such security, That we of our selves (when disbanded, and in the
condition of private men) or other the freeborn people of England (to whom the
consequence of our case (about petitioning) does equally eatend) shall (...)
remain subject to the like oppression, in ury or abuse, as in the premises has
been attempted and put upon (...) while an Army.

O that there had been an heart in you, to have made this good before your
gross apostasy from all your engagements and promises, that has already
occasioned so much misery, w^rr and block shed. Or, o^ that yet there were
hearts within you vigorously and effectually to go about the accomplishment and
fulfillment thereof (and thereby prev^^t all the miseries, bloodshed and
desolations that for want thereof undoubtedly mu^^ and w^ll ensue) which you
are bound and tied unto both before God and man, as is (in our judgments)
unanswerably proved in the ^^^said treacherously defeated Batford men's
Vindication, p^^. 8. 9 10.

But to return, in your said engagement, in the fore-recited ^6. page, you
positively there dis^^n and disclaim all purposes or designs in our late or
present proceedings, to advance or insist upon a particular interest, to ^e
overthrow of Magistracy, etc. neither ((...) you) would we (^f we ^ight or
could) advance or set up any particular p^^ty or interest in the Kingdom
[though imagined never so much our own] b^^ shall much rather [as far as may be
within our sphere or power] study to promote such ^n establishment of common
equal right and freedom to the whole, as all might equally partake of

And in that most choice and best or Declarations made by the whole Army of
Soldiers, (...) well as Officers June 14. 1^47, tendered to the Parliament,
concerning their just and ^u^^^^entall rights (...) sib^rites o^ themselves and
the Kingdom, Book Decl page 36. 37. you say, That we may no longer be the
dissatisfaction of (...) friends, the subject of our enemies malice [to work
jealousies and misrepresentations upon] and the suspicion [^f not astonishment]
of many in the Kingdom, in ou^l^t or present transactions and conduct of
business; we shall in all faith^^lness^ and cleerness^ profess and declare unto
you, these things which have of late protracted and hindered our disbanding,
the present grievances which possess o^ Army, and are yet unremedied; with our
desires, as to the com^leat settlement of the Liberties and peace of the
Kingdom, which is that blessing of God, then which (of all worldly blessing)
nothing is more dear unto us, or more precious in our thoughts, we having
hitherto thought all ^n r^^^^ enjoyments [whether of life or livelihoo^, or
nearest relations] twice but sufficient to the purchase of so rich a blessing,
that we, and all the freedom people of this Nation may sit down in quiet under
our vines, and under the (...) ad ^mistration of Justice and Righteousness,
and in full possession of those fundamental Rights and Liberties, without
which we can have little ho^es (as to humane consideration) to enjoy either any
comforts of life, or so much as life it self, but at the ^^^sarres of some men,
ruling merely according to will and power:

And in the same Declaration page 38. 39. you t^r^^^r ^ay thus; Nor will it now
(^e(...)) seem strange or unreasonable to rational and hon^st men, who consider
the consequence of our present case, to their own and the Kingdoms [as well as
our] future concernments, in point of right, freedom, peace and safety (if from
a deep sense of the high consequence of our present case, both to our selves
[(...)] and all other people) w^^h^ll, (...) disbanding, proceed in our own and
the Kingdoms behalf, to propound and ^^ad for some provision for our and the
Kingdoms satisfaction and futute security, (...) relation to those things
especially, considering that we were not a mere mercenary (...), hired to serve
any arbitrary power of a State, but called forth and conju^^^ by the several
Declarations of Parliament, to the defense of our own and he ^^^^es just Rights
and Liberties: and so we took up arms in judgment and ^^^tente to those ends,
and have so continued them, and are resolved, according to your first just
desires in your Declarations, and such principles as we have received from your
frequent informations, and our own common s^^s, concerning those ou^
fundamental Rights and Liberties, to assert and vindicate the just power and
rights of this Kingdom in Parliament for those common ends premised against all
arbitrary power, violence and oppression, and (...) all (...) still directing
(...) to the equitable sense of all Laws and Cons^^tu^ions, as ^ispe^ (...)
with the very letter of the sam^, and being supr^me to^^, ^^je^^ the safety and
pr^servation of all (...) concerned: and assuring us that all ^ut^o^^p^^
fundamentally se^^ed in the Office, and but ministerial in the Persons.

A^^ (...) out of the Parliament, ^^declare, your ^^rri^g^ toward them shall
be such, as that he world shall see we (...) nothing of pr^^^te revenge and
(...), but that Justice may have a free course, an^ the Kingdom be ^ased and
f^cured, ^^d ^n^bl^^g such m^n [at least] from place of Ju^i^^^, who desiring
^o advantage and se^ ^p ^^^^^lv^s and their party in a general confusion,
(...) endeavoure^ to p^t the Kingdom into a new flame o^ War, th^n which
nothing is more (...) horrent to us. And in the same Declaration* spending the
42 and 43 pages in most excellent expressions, of the excellency and benefit of
frequent and successive Parliaments [(...) new] and the mischief, bondage and
vassallage of the long continuance of any Parliament, (...) pa. 44. you say,
And thus a firm foundation being laid in the authority and constitution of
Parliaments, for the hopes at least of common and equitable Right and Freedom
to our selves and all the free born people of this Land; we shall for our parts
freely and cheerfully co^^^ our stock or share of interest in this Kingdom into
this common bottom of Parliaments, (...) though it may [for our particulars] go
ill with us in one voyage, yet we shall thus hope (...) right be with us] to
fare better ^n another.

And in the last end of that transcendent Declaration, page 46. you conclude
thus: We have thus freely and clearly declared the depth and bottom of our
heart, and desires in order^ the Rights, Liberties and peace of the Kingdom;
wherein we appeal to all m^n, whether (...) seek any thing of advantage to our
selves, or any particular party whatever, or to the p^^^dice of the wh^le; and
whether the things we wish and seek for, do no^ equally concern (...) conduce
to the good ^^oth (...) common with o^t selves, according to (...) ^^^sires and
intentions ( wherein as we have already found the concurrent sense of (...)
people in diverse Count^ies, by their petitions to the General expressing their
^^resentment of these things and pressing us to stan^ for the in e^est of the
Kingdoms therein; so we shall ^ish^nd expect he unanimous concurrence of all
othe^^ who are equally concerned with us in these things, and wish well to he
^^lick.

And in p. 52. being writing to the Lord Mayor Aldermen, and Commons of the
C^^^^ London in Common Council assembled, it is thus said To con^^^d. We say
f^mou beau^^^ our especial ends are the glory of God, and the good of this
whole Land, so (...) deavou^ shall be to (...) ut^ the ^am^ without (...) the
being (...) well being of Parliamen^^ general; the maintenance whereof we
value above our own lives or (as we (...) formerly said) o^ th^^ Parliament in
pa^^c^^a^, but (...) together ^n order to the g^od and Peace of Nation, and
with a most ^ender regard to your City.

And in. page 57, 58. its* said that, In our last Representation it may appear
whe^^^ desires are, as Members of the Commonwealth in behalf of our selves and
all other the clearing, feeling and securing of the rights, liberties and Peace
of the Kingdom; for justness, reasonableness necessity and common concernment
whereof unto all, we d^^peal to the whole Kingdom, and to the world.

And in page 76 to the Lord Mayor of London, etc. it is said, That it is a
sudden and substantial settlement of the whole we destro in a general, safe,
and well grounded peace, and the establishment of such good Laws, as may duly
and readily render to every man their just rights and liberties; and for the
obtaining of these, not only our intentions had led us in, but we think that
all the blood, treasure and labor spent in this War, was for the accomplishing
those very things, which are of that concernment both to our selves and
posterity, that neither we nor they can live comfortably without them, and
therefore their help is much pressed for to bring things to a happy conc^^^en,
to the satisfaction of all ho^^^ men's expectation, and that in all our
undertakings we shall be ^^und men of truth, fully and singly answering the
things we have held forth to the Kingdom in our several Declarations and
Papers, without by or base respects to any private end or interest whatsoever.

And in page 97. is recorded a notable Proposal to the Parliament from
Red^ing, July 1^. 1647. which does sufficiently condem your late tyrannical
dealing with some of the very parties therein mentioned; The Proposal thus
follows; 'Wee do earnestly desire, That all persons imprisoned in England or
Dominion of Wales, not for Delinquency in relation to the (...) War, but fu^^
pretended misdeameanou^^,) and whose imprisonment is not by the regulated
course of Law, but by Order from either Houses of Parliament, (or of Committees
flowing from them) may be put into a speedy regular and equitable way of
Trial, (or if the ^^^ss^^ o^ ^et^ing the general affairs of the Kingdom (...)
not (...) present ^^tal^) then the^ may have p^^s^^^ (...) (upon reason ^^le
s^^u^i^^e) o^ their appearance at a^e ta^^ day, to answer w^^t shall be charged
against them in a Legal way, and that when they should be tried, if they
appear wrongfully or unduly imprisoned, they may have reparation according to
their sufferings.

In particular we desire this may be done in behalf of L. Colonel John
Lilburn, Master John Musgrave, Master Overton and others (in their condition)
imprisoned in (...) London. Read also more ^ully to this purpose p. 101. 105.
110. 112 118. 128. 132 137. as also the large Remonstrance from Saint Albones
of the 16. of November 1648. page 6. 8 9 12. 14, 15. 22. 23 29. 43. 45. 47. 48.
57. 62. but especially 65. 66. 67. 68. ^9.

But after this large (but yet profitable and necessary) digression, let us
seriously expostulate with you and, ^ut you in mind of your most wicked and
gross apostasy ( such as the world never see nor read of before, from men that
profess God and godliness in a strict manner, and would be reputed the
CHOICEST SAINTS in England) and cry out unto you with astonishment and
admiration; and thus interrogate your very consciences (where God alone ought
to sit King) Do hear you not the blood of our dear fellow Apprentices, and of
the rest of the good People of England spilt for the redemption of this
inthraled Nation (especially since your first contest with the Parliament) cry
aloud in your cars and hearts (where ever you go) for vengeance upon you, the
peoples perfidious abusers, be trayers and destroyers? Oh ^o not you hear them
cry out unto your very conscences; O give our Fathers, our Mothers, our
Brothers, our Sisters, and others of our near and dear relations, the full and
speedy accomplishment of all your forementioned inravishing promises and
engagement, by virtue of the power and efficacy of which you stole away their
heart, and spirits from all t^^^r relations, and ma^^ them with willingness
and cheerfullnesse become sacrifices for your assistance; for that end
principally (if not only) that they that survived might enjoy the full and
ample fruition of all your gloriou ^^^^ses and engagements, for common Freedom,
distributive Justice and righteousness upon the earth; Oh do you not hear
their blood cry unto you? O mock not (nor dally with) God any longer, but
without delay, give our friends and countrymen the promised price of all our
blood, by the full and speedy paying of all your vows, and engagements made
unto God for that end, lest for all your perjury, apostasy, and perfidiousnesse
he create a mighty and ^^resistable spirit of revenge amongst the people, and
knit together (their other wile divided hearts, in one, is one man to rise up
in one day to destroy you, with a more fatal ^eco^^^ destruction then you have
already destroyed others (yea the highest in the Nation) pretendedly for
oppressions, breach of Oaths, Faith and Covenants) yea to sweep you away from
the l^nd of the (...) with an overflowing de^^^e of destruction, as the
^^slived women (...) six or seven hundred years ago, did the Danes in one
night throughout England.

Oh do not your h^^^^s (...) all rel^^? can you consider this your ^or^^^ced
u^^^^a (...) horrible defection and apostasy, and not tremble and be amazed,
and even confounded? is there less remorse of conscience in you then was in
Belshizz^r, who at his s^eing the hand writing upon the wall, ^ha^ged his
countenance, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joynt^ of his (...)
we^e loose^, and his knee^ smote one against another, (though otherwise in as
gre^ J^lity and ^^^sperity as any of yourselves or Officers) or have you l^sse
apprehension of the Majesty of (...) then was in ^he heathen Roman Governor
Felix, who when he heard Paul reason or Pr^^^ of righteousness, temperance and
Judgment to come trembled and feared, and durst not proceed in fury against
him, although much thereunto provoked by his adversaries, Act. 24. S^^^ all
sense and compunction of conscience is not totally departed from you; hear us
therefore i^ the earning bowels of love and kindness we entreat and beseech you
with patience and do (...) abuse us for complaining and crying out, for the
knife has been very long at the very throats of our Liverties and Freedoms,
and our burdens are too great and to many for us, we are not able to bear them
and contain our selves, our oppressions are (...) ready to m^ke us despair, (
or forthwith to fly to the prime Laws of nature, viz. the (...) ^iolent remedy
at hand, light it where it will, or upon whom it will) they are become as
devouring fit in our bones, ready to burn us up, rendering us desperate and
careless of our lives, prising tho^^ that are already dead, above those that
are yet living, who are ri^ of that pain and torment, (...) we do and must
endure, by sensibly seeing an^ behold^ng not only the d^ing, but the daily
bu^i^^ our native Liberties and Freedoms, that we care not what becomes of u^^,
se^ing that we are (...) into that original state or chaos of confusion;
wherein lust is become a law, envy and mali^^^ become laws, and the strongest
sword rules and governes all by will and pleasure; all our ^rcien^ b^^^ries and
landmarks, are pulled up by the roots, and all the ^yes and bonds of humane
society in (...) English horizon totally destroyed and ex^erpa^ed A^^s for pity.

We had rather die then live th^s life of languishing death, in which our
Masters poff^^^ nothing (to buy themselves or us bread to keep us alive) that
they can call their own; therefore its no boot for us to serve out our times,
and continue at our drudging and ^oyling trades, while these oppressions,
cruelties and inhumanities are upon us, and the rest of the people; ^p^sing
thereby the Nation not only to ^omestick broils, wars and blood-sh^ds (wherein
we ^^^sure our bodies must be the prin^^p^^l burs) but to foreign Invasions by
France, Spain, Denmark, Sweathland, etc. as was well observed by our endeared
and faithful friends of the (...) mentioned late treachero^sly defeated party
^t Burford in their Book of the 2^ of Aug^^^ 1649. Entitled the Levellers
v^ndicated, or the Case of their 12 Troops truly stated, page 11.^^. which we
cannot but seriously recommend (with them) to your serious perusal and
judgment and desire to know of you (but especially the p^^vate Soldiery of
the Generals Regiment of horse, (...) we understand had a hand in seasing upon
and plundering our true friends at Burford) whether you (...) own the
abominable and palpable treacherous dealings of your General and Lieutenant
G^^rall Cromwell and their perfidious Officers with them or no? (that so we may
not cond^^^ the innocent with the guilty, and may know our friends from our
so^^) as also to tell us, whether (...) do approve of the total defection of
your Army under which it now l^eth, from their Faith (...) solemn engagement
made at Newmarket-heath, June the 5. 1647. not one of those righteous (...) in
behalf of the Parliament and people, on which your vow was made, being yet
fulfilled or (...) but on the contrary (as we have before rehea^sed) (...)
whole flood-gate of ^y^a^nies are let in upon us, and even over whelme us; and
whether you just^ly all those act^^^s done in (...) ^t the A^my upon your
account, and un^er pretext of that Engagement since the Engagement it self was
broken, and your Counc^l^ of Agitators dissolved? And whether you will hold up
your Swords to maintain the total abolition of the peoples choicest interest
of freedo^, (...) frequent and successive Parliaments, by an Agreement of the
People, or obstruct the annual succession? Whether you do allow of the late
shedding of the blood of war in time of pe^ce, to the subve^sion of all our
Laws and Liberties? And whether you do councen^nce the ^^^^pation of the
fundamental Freedoms of this Common-wea^^^? as their revocation or ^ullity of
the Great Charter of England, The Petition of Right^ etc And whether you do
assent to the erection of Arb^^rary prerogative Courts that have or shall
over-ru^e, or make void, our ancient (...) of trials in criminal Cases, by a
Ju^y of 12 men of the nei^^ bour hood? and whether you (...) assist or joy ne
in the forcible obt^usion of this Martial and Tyrannical Rule over us? Also
whether you will fight against and destroy those of our friends that shall
endeavor the composure ^f our differences, to gether with the pro^^ement of
our Freedoms and settlement of our pe^ce (^our plenty and prosperity)
accordingly as it was offered by the 4 Gentlemen prisoners in the Towe^ of
London upon the first of May 1649 (as a peace offering to this Nation) by the
Agreement of the People?

Lastly; We earnestly besee^h you to acquaint us, whether from your hands (to
your power) we may expect any help or assistance in this our miserable
distressed condition, to the remorall of those ^^ron bands and ^o^ks of
oppression, that have thus enforced us to complain, and address our selves
thus to your serious consideration.

For we cannon choose but acquaint you, that we are seriously resolved, through
the strength and assistance of God, (with all the interest we have in the
world) to adhere to the righteous things contained in our treacherously
defeated friends forementioned late vindication; very much approving of that
unparaleld expedient (of an agreement of the free people,) they propose in the
latter end thereof, for the firm fetling of the peace, Liberties and Freedoms
of this distracted nation, which has so much justice, righteousness and
safety in it, that we hope it will in a very short time level all self
interests before it and make it clearly appear to him that claims the greatest
persmall share in the government of this Nation, that there i^no way to obtain
the ^^e^^ve of the understanding English people (without which he will never
obtain his desired Crown) but by a cheerful, hearty and real promotion of
such principles therein ^^^ained as do sufficiently tie h^s hands from cutting
the peoples throats, at his will and pleasure, the endeavoring of which,
exposed his father to that fa^all end that be^ell him; which may be a
seasonable caveat to all Princes etc. to take heed of tha^ d^s^crate rock, viz.
the attempting to govern the people by will, and not by Law; by force, and not
by love; the only and alone durable and perma^^^^ ^ie or bond amongst the sons
of men; We say that expedient of an Agreement of the free people appears to us
to have so much equity righteousness and common safety in it, that we are
resolved to bury all by past DISTASTS at the greatest of Englishmen that shall
heart^ly and cordially, sign and put forth their power and interest, to
promote the establishment of the principalls therein contained; and in the
ADHERING TO AND STANDING BY, all such as shall be ^n any danger for walking in
such paths, we shall through the strength of the Lord God Omnipo^ent (to the
uttermost of our power and abilities) resolvedly hazard our lives and all that
is dear to us.

For the effectual promotion of which said Agreement we are necessiously
compeld, to resolve in close upon to join our selves, or our Commissione^s
(chosen for that end) in Counsel with our foresaid Burford friends, or their
Commissioners, and to resolve to run all hazards, to methodize all our honest
fellow Prentises, in all the Wards of London, and the out-P^rishes, to choose
our their Agents to join with us or ours: to write Exhortative Epistles, to all
the honest hearted freemen of England, in all the particular Countries thereof,
to erect several Councels amongst themselves, out of which we shall desire
(and exhort them) to choose Ag^^^ or Commissioners (empowered and entrusted by
them) speedily to meet us and the Ag^^^^ of all ours (and the Agreement of the
People) adherents at London, resolvedly to consider of a speedy and effectual
method, and way how to promote the Election of a new and e^^all Representative
or Parliament, by the Agreement of the f^ee People, seeing those men that now
(...) at Westminster, and pretendedly style themselves the Parliament of
England, and who are (as they say (although most falsely) in the Declaration for
a Free State, dated March 17. 1648 p. ^^. entrusted, aund authorizedly the
consent of all the People of England whose Representative^ (...) make it their
chiefest and principallest work, continually to part and share amongst
themselves, all the great, rich, and profitablest places of the Nation, as also
the Nations public treasure (...) Lands, and will not ease our intolerable
oppressions, no nor so much as of late receive our Po^^lar Petitions having
upon Thursday last, August 23. 1649. rejected that most excellent of Petitions
re^dy at their door to be presented to them by diverse honest men (our true
hea^^^ neighbors of Surrey) the true Copy of which for the worth of it
although it be at large ^^ready printed in Friday Occurences and the Tuesday
Moderate,) we desire here to in^^^.

To the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament The humble Petition of the oppressed of the County of Surrey, which
have cast in their Mite into the Treasury of this Commonwealth.
SHOWS,
THat as the Oppressions of this Nation in time foregoing this Parliament were
so numero^^ a^^ burdensome, as will never be forgotten; so were the hopes of
our deliverance by this Parliament exceeding great, and full of confidence,
which as they were strengthened by many Acts of yours i^ (...) beginning,
especially toward conscientious people, without respect unto their judgments
or opini^^, (...) did the gratitude of the wel-minded people, exceed all
presidents or example sparing neither estate, (...) liberty, or life, to make
good the authority of this honorable house, as the foundation and root of all
(...) Freedom, although we many times observed (to our grief) some proceedings
holding resemble ce^^^ with our former bondage: yet did we impute the same to
the troublesomness of the times of Wa^ ^^^ntly and silently passing them over,
as undoubtedly hoping a perfect remedy, so soon as the Wan^^^^ ended: But
perceiving our expectations in some particulars frustrated: and considering
some (...) dealings with some of our friends, etc. the consideration of which
lies so heavy on our spi^^^ that for prevention thereof, we conceive our selves
bound in conscience and du^y to God, to set bef^^^ you once more, the general
grievances of the Commonwealth, and the earnest desires of the ing^^^^^ ^s and
well-minded people.

First, That the Petition of the Eleventh of September last, and the Agreement
of (...) People may be reassumed, and the particulars thereof speedily
established. Secondly, we most earnestly beg, with many other of your faithful
friends in all the Counties England that that most irksome and intolerable
oppression of Tithes, which is retained in (...) formed Church, nevertheless
more firmly established then ever by your Ordinance for^^^^ damages, made in
the Parliaments corruption, and yet no Act against it, which causes our (...)
to be discouraged, and brought into much fear and doubt of the removal of
these and other b^^^^^ by this Representative: Wherefore we cannot pass it by,
but again entreat, that the Ordin^^^^ for Tithes may be speedly revoked, and
that a more equal way of maintenance be provided (...) public Ministry.
Thirdly, That all proceedings in law may be in English, that a short time may
be inserted for the try all of all causes, and that by Twelve men of the
N^^gh^^rbood, and that none may be debarred of Freedom to plead his own or his
N^^ghbors Cause, [as by Law any man may and ought to do, as clearly appears by
the Statute of 28 E^ 1 chapter 11.] before any court of Justice, ^^bough no Lawyer.
And that no member of your House be suffered to plead as a Lawyer, whilst a
^^^ber thereof. Fou^^^, That some course may be taken for the future, to par^h^
Army; not la^ing such intolerable Brown and ^axes on the people which we are
not al^e to h^at, And so we shall for ever hand by you, ^^ill Representative
f^^ the (...) o^^hu N^^^on, is formery. Destring that we may obtain speedily a
ne^ and equal Represen a^^ve.
We say, considering what is before prem^^ed, we are necessitated and compeld
to do the ut^ost we can for our own preservations; and for the preservation
of the Land of our Nativity; and never (by popular petitions) address our
selves to the men sitting at Westminster any ^o^e, o^ to take an^ notice of
them, then is of so many sy^ant and Vsur^^er^, and for time to come to hinder
(as much and as far as our poor despised int^rest will extend to) all others
whatsoever save subs^^^bing or presenting any more popular petitions to them:
And only now as our last P^pe^-r^fuge, mightily cry out to each other, of our
intolerable oppressions in Letters and R^monstrances, ^^^^ned in the behalf,
and by the appointment of all the rest by some of the stoutest and stiff^st
amongst us that we hope will never apostatize, but be able through the strength
of God, to lay down their very lives for the maintaining of that which they set
their han^s to.

You our fellow-Countrymen (the private Soldiers of the Army) alone, being the
isntrumental authors of your own slave^y and ours; therefore as there is any
bowels of men in you, ^y love to your Native Country, Kindred, friends or
relations, any spa^k^ of conscience in you, any hopes of glory of immortality
in you, or any pity, mercy, or compassion, to an Inslived, undone, pe^shing,
dying people, O help, help! save and redeem us from to tall vassalage and
sl^very, and be no more like brute beasts, to fight against us or our friend,
your loving and dear brethren after the flesh: to your o^n vassalag^ a^ well a^
ours.

And as an assured pledge of your future cordialnesse to us (and the true and
real liberties of the Land of your Nativitie) we beseech and beg of you, ( but
e^pe^ially those amongst you that subscribed the solemn ^ngagement at New
ma^ket heath the fifth of June 16^^) speedily to choose out from amongst your
selves, two of the ablest and co^stantest faithful men amongst you in each
Tro^p and Comp^ny, now at last, ( ^y corresponding ^a^h with o^rer, and with
your honest f^iends in the Nation) to consider of some effectual course (bey
and all pret^nces and cheat) to accomplish the ^eal end of all your eng^gements
and fightings, viz. the settling of the Liberties and Freedoms of the people,
which can never permanently he done, but upon the sure foundation of a POPULAR
AGREEMENT: who (viz. the people) in Justice, gratitude, and common equity,
cannot choose but voluntarily and largely make bett^r provision for your future
subsistence ( by the payment of your ARREARS) then ever your Officer, or this
pretended Parliament intends, or you can rationally expect from them; witness,
their cutting off three parts of your Arreares in four for E^ec-quarter and
then necessitating abundance of your Fellow Soldiers (now cashiered, etc.) to
s^ll their Debenters at two shillings six pence, three shillings and at most
four shillings per^l. by means of which you that keep your Debenters being
necessitated to vie with the greatest hidder, in the purchase of the late Kings
^ands, they are able to give above 30 years purch^s^, for that you cannot give^
yea^s purchase (...); and if you will not give with the most you must have no
l^nd, so that the m^st of your Debenters are likely to prove was^^ pa^ers, and
those that purchase will have but a slippery security of their possessions, by
^eason of general dis^ontents amongst all sons of people, and particularly by
so extraordinarily disengaging and cheating so many Sould^^rs as they have done
of their just expected recompense of reward.

And also, as a further demonstration of the cordialnesse of your hearts to us,
OUR B^FORD FRIEN^S, and ^our own and our Liberties; we desire you to take some
speedy (...) for the faithful restoring to the right Owners, all such Horses,
Money, Clothes, etc. as yo^^ any of you, plundered or stole from our true
friends, ( chea^^d and defeated) at Burfords publish some kind of
Demonstration of your or any of your remorse of Cons^^^ for your being
isntrumental in destroying of them there, that stood for your good, ^reed^^
and ARREARS, as much, (and as well) as their own, especially considering they
have their fore^aid Vindication made it evident and apparent (and we understand
they are (...) face to face to prove) That ^oth ^o (...) Gene^all, and
^ieu^^nant Gen^rall Cromwell broke their (...) faith with them, and
treachero^sly surprised them; and so dealt worse and more vild^^^ them, then
ever they did with the worst of Cavaliers, with whom in that kind they ne^^^
broke faith with, in their lives; but more especially we desire the last
fore-metioned thing your hands; because upon that Traiterous and wicked defeat
of those our (...) Frien^s, (and wilfu^^y murdering of three of them) that
really stood for the Nations interest, (...) berries, and Freedoms your
General and Cromwell, with the rest of their faction ma^^ most transcendent
Feast, t^ insu^t over the Liberties and freedoms of the servants of the most
h^gh (...) as though by that most vile act, they had subdued and buried all the
Liberties of the No^^^ in eternal oblivion, and FOILED the Lord of life and
glory himself, from dis^i^^ng any more Sy^^^ of Courage and Resolution into any
to stand for them; and in that wicked^st of Feasts, not only (...) great
measure imitated ^elshazzar, Dan. 5. That ^^ade a great Fea^ to a thousand of
his Lords, (...) fe^^hed out the v^ss^^^, that by the spoi^e of the people of
God, his father Nebuchadnezzar had got (...) the Temple of the Lord, and drank
wine in them, and praised the gods of ^old and of silver, of brass, of (...)
of wood, and of stone, but also imitated the greatest of the enemies of Christ,
who at the s^y^^ of the two witnesses, Rev. 11. rej^^ced over them and made
me^^y and sent gifis one to another ((...) Gold and Silver plate, etc. was most
largely done to your General Fairfax and Lieutenant (...) Cromwell) the reason
of which is there ^endred, which is, because the two Prophers (of Tr^^^ and
Justice) tormented them that dwelt on the r^^th; but with comfort and joy we
cannot bu^ (...) serve the next words to them, which is, That within a little
season after, the Spirit of life from (...) en^red into them, (as we hope and
dow^t not, but it will abundantly now do upon the true ^^^ders for justice and
righteousness amongst men) and they stood upon their feet, and great fe^^ upon
them that saw them, and great Earth qu^kes followed, in the nick of which is
proclamation (...) that the Kingdoms of this world are became the Kingdom^ of
our lord and of his Christ; and he s^all (...) for ever and ever; unto which we
heartily say, Amen, Amen. So with our hearty (...) true love remembered to you
all, expecting your, or some or your speedy answer, we co^^ you to God, and rest

London this 29. August, 1649. Your faithful, though abused Countrymen. Signed
in the behalf of our selves and the unanim^^^^ sent of the Agents of the
Youngmen and Appre^^^ of the City of London, that love and approve of Agreement
of the People, dated May 1. 1649. the Vindication of the sat defeated men at
Bu^^ entitled, The Leveller vindicated. Charles Collins William Trabret Ed.
Waldegrove Ed. Stanley Nicholas Blowd Anthony Bristlebolt Steven Smith Thomas
Frisby. William White John Floyd.


FIN^^

