The Blemish of Government, the Shame of Religion, the Disgrace of Mankind; or,
a Charge drawn up against Drunkards, and presented to his Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR, in the name of all the Sober Party in the three Nations. Humbly
craving, that they may be kept alone by themselves from infecting others;
compelled to work and earn what they consume: And that none may be suffered to
sell Drink, who shall either Swear, or be Drunk themselves, or suffer Others
within their Walls.
By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex.
1. BRANCH of the Charge.
THat as the Basilisk is chief of Serpents: so of sinners the Drunkard is
chief. That Drunkenness is of sins the Queen: as the Gout is of diseases: even
the root of all evil, the rot of all good. A sin which turns a man wholly into
sin. That all sins, all beast-like, all serpentine qualities meet in a
Drunkard, as rivers in the sea: and that it were far better be a Toad, or a
Serpent, than a Drunkard. That the Drunkard is like Ahab, who sold himself to
work wickedness. That he wholly dedicates, resigns, surrenders, and gives
himself up to serve sin and Satan. That his only imploiment is to drink, drab,
quarrel, swear, curse, scoff, slander and seduce: as if to sin were his trade,
and he could do nothing else; like the Devil, who was a sinner from the
beginning, a sinner to the end. That these sons of Belial, are all for the
belly: for to drink God out of their hearts, health out of their bodies, wit
out of their heads, strength out of their joints, all the money out of their
purses, all the drink out of the Brewers barrels, wife and children out of
doors, the house out at windows, the Land out of quiet, plenty out of the
Nation, is all their business. In which their swinish swilling, they resemble
so many frogs in a puddle, or water-snakes in a pond: for their whole exercise,
yea, Religion, is to drink; they even drown themselves on the dry land. That
they drink more spirits in one night, then their flesh and brains be worth.
That more is thrown out of one swines nose, and mouth, and guts, than would
maintain five sufficient families.

2. Br. That it is not to be imagined, what all the Drunkards in one Shire, or
County do devour, and worse than throw away in one year: when it has been
known (if we may give credit to Authors, and the Oaths of others) that two and
thirty in one cluster have made themselves drunk; that six and thirty have
drank themselves dead in the place, with carowsing of healths; that at one
Supper, one and forty have killed themselves, with striving for the conquest:
that two have drank each of them a peck at a draught: that four men have drank
four gallons of wine at a sitting: that one man has drank two gallons of wine;
and two more, three gallons of wine a piece at a time: that one Drunkard in a
few hours, drank four gallons of wine: that four ancient men drank as many cups
of wine at one sitting, as they had lived years, which was in all, three
hundred cups of wine amongst four men: and lastly, that three women came into a
Tavern in Fleetstreet (when I was a boy, take it upon Claptons Oath and credit,
who drew the Wine) and drank forty nine quarts of Sack; two of them sixteen a
piece, and the third to get the victory, seventeen quarts of Sack. Which being
so, what may the many millions of these ding-thrifty dearth-makers consume in a
year in all the three Nations?

Nor need it seem incredible, that common drunkards should drink thus: for they
can disgorge themselves at pleasure, by only putting their finger to their
throat. And they will vomit, as if they were so many live Whales spuing up the
Ocean; which done, they can drink afresh.

Or if not so, yet custom has made it pass through them, as through a tunnel, or
strainer; whereby it comes out again as sheer wine as it went in, as has been
observed.

Nor has the richest Sherry or old Canary any more operation with them, then a
cup of six has with me. And no marvel for if physic be taken too often, it will
not work like physic: but nature entertains it as a friend, not as a
Physician: yea poison by a familiar use becomes natural food. As Aristotle (in
an example of a Maid, who used to pick spiders off the walls and eat them) makes
plain.

3. Br. That as Drunkards have lost the prerogative of their creation, and are
changed (with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 16.) from men into beasts, so they turn
the sanctuary of life into the shambles of death: yea thousands (when they have
made up the measure of their wickedness) are taken away in God's just wrath in
their drink; (as it were with the weapon in their bellies) it faring with them
as it did with that Pope, whom the Devil is said to have slain in the very
instant of his Adultery, and carry him quick to hell; being suddenly struck
with death, as if the execution were no less intended to the soul, than to the
body.

That by the Law of God in both Testaments; He that will not labor, should not
eat, Genesis 3. 19. Prove. 20. 4. 2 These. 3. 10. because he robs the Commonwealth
of that which is altogether as profitable as land, or treasure. But Drunkards
are not only lazy get-nothings, but they are also riotous spend-als; and yet
these drunken drones, these gut-mongers, these Quagmirists, like vagrants and
vermin, do nothing all their life-long that may tend to any good, as is
storied of Margites, and yet devour more of the fat of the Land, than would
plentifully maintain those millions of poor in the Nation, that are ready to
famish. A thing not fit to be suffered in any Christian Commonwealth, yea far
fitter they were stoned to death, as by the Law of God they ought, Deuteronomy. 21.
20, 21. since this might bring them to repentance; whereas now they spend their
days in mirth: and suddenly they go down into hell, Job 21. 13. Drunkards
being those swine, whom the legion carries headlong into the Sea, or pit of
perdition.

4. Br. That every hour seems a day, and every day a month to a drunkard, that
is not spent in a Tap-house; yea, they seem to have nailed their ears to the
door of some Tavern or Tap-house, and to have agreed with Satan, Master, it is
good being here! That where ever the Drunkards house is, his dwelling is at the
Alehouse, except all his money be spent, and then if his wife will fetch him
home with a lanth^rn, and his men with a barrow, he comes with as (...) sense
as (...) Image had.

That the pot is no sooner from their lips, but they are melancholy, and their
hearts as heavy, as if a millstone lay upon it. Or rather they are vexed like
Saul with an evil spirit, which nothing will drive away but drink and Tobacco.
They so wound their consciences with all kind of prodigious wickedness, and so
exceedingly provoke God, that they are rackt in conscience, and tortured with
the very flashes of hellfire. That they drink to the end only, that they may
forget God, his threats and judgments; that they may drown conscience, and put
of all thoughts of death, and hell; and to hearten and harden themselves
against all the messages of God, and threats of the Law: which is no other in
mitigating the pangs of conscience, than as a saddle of gold to a galled horse,
or a draught of poison to quench a man's thirst. That if they might have their
wills, none should refuse to be drunk unpunished, or be drunk unrewarded at the
common charge. As how will they boast what they drank, and how many they
conquered at such a meeting, making it their only glory? That the utmost of a
Drunkards honesty is good-fellowship; that temperance and sobriety with them,
is nothing but humor and singularity; and that they drink not for strength or
need, but for lust and pride; to show how full of Satan they are, and how near
to swine.

That though these swinish swill-bouls make their gullet their god, and
sacrifice more to their god-belly, than those Babylonians did to their god
Bell, Bell and Drag. ver. 3. yet they will say, yea swear, that they drink not
for love of drink, though they love it above health, wealth, credit, child,
wife, life, heaven, salvation, all. They no more care for wine, than Esau did
for his pottage for which he sold his birthright, Isa. 56 12.

5. Br. That Drunkards are the Devils captives, at his command, and ready to do
his will; and that he rules over, and works in them his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
Ephesians. 2. 2. that he enters into them, and puts it into their hearts, what he
will have them to do, Joh. 13. 2. Act. 5. 3. 1 Chro. 21. 1. opens their mouths,
speaks in, and by them, Genesis 3. 1, to 6. stretches out their hands, and they
act as he will have them, Act. 12. 1, 2. Rev. 2. 10. he being their father,
Genesis 3. 15. Joh. 8. 44. their king, Joh. 12. 31. and 14. 30. and their god, 2
Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. And which is worst of all, that Drunkenness not only duls
and dams up the head and spirits with mud, but it beastiates the heart, and
(being worse than the sting of an Asp) poisoneth the very soul and reason of a
man, whereby the faculties and organs of repentance and resolution are so
corrupted and captivated, that it makes men utterly incapable of returning,
unless God should work a greater miracle upon them, then was the creating of
the whole world. Whence Austin compares it to the very pit of hell, out of
which (when a man is once fallen into) there is no hope of redemption.

That Drunkenness is like some desp^rate plague, which knows no cure. As what
says Basil, Shall we speak to Drunkards? we had as good speak to
liveless-stones, or sensless-plants, or witless beasts, as to them; for they no
more believe the threats of Gods Word, than if some Impostor had spoken them.
They will fear nothing, till they be in hellfire; resembling the Sodomites,
who would take no warning, though they were all struck blind; but persisted in
their course, until they felt fire and brimstone about their ears, Genesis 19. 11.

That there is no washing these Blackmoors white, no charming of these deaf
Adders; blind men never blush; fools are never troubled in conscience; neither
are beasts ever ashamed of their deeds.

That a man shall never hear of an habituated, infatuated, incorrigible,
cauterized Drunkard, that is reclaimed with age.

6. Br. That as at first, and before custom in sin has hardened these
Drunkards, they suffer themselves to be transformed from men into swine; as
Elpenor was transformed by Circes into a hog; so by degrees they are of swine
transformed again into Devils, as Cadmus and his wife were into serpents, as
palpably appears by their tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition.

That these Agents for the Devil, Drunkards, practice nothing but the Art of
debauching men; that to turn others into beasts, they will make themselves
devils, wherein they have a notable dexterity, as it is admirable how they will
wind men in, and draw men on, by drinking first a health to such a man, then to
such a woman my mistress, then to every ones mistress; then to some Lord or
Lady; their Master, their Magistrate, their Captain, Commaader, etc. and never
cease, until their brains, their wits, their tongues, their eyes, their feet,
their senses, and all their members sail them: that they will drink until they
vomit up their shame again, like a filthy dog, or lie wallowing in their
beastliness, like a brutish swine. That they think nothing too much either to
do or spend, that they may make a sober man a drunkard, or to drink another
drunkard under the table; which is to brag how far they are become the Devils
children: that in case they can make a sober and religious man exceed his
bounds, they will sing and rejoice, as in the division of a spoil; and boast
that they have drenched sobriety* and blinded the light; and ever after be a
snuffing of this taper, Psalm. 13. 4. But what a barbarous, graceless, and
unchristian-like practice is this, to make it their glory, pastime, and
delight, to see God dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his Name blasphemed, his
creatures abused, themselves and their friends souls damned. Doubtless such men
have climbed the highest step of the ladder of wickedness; as thinking their
own sins will not press them deep enough into hell, except they load themselves
with other men's; which is Devil-like indeed! whose aim it has ever been,
seeing he must of necessity be wretched, not to be wretched alone.

That as they make these healths serve as a pulley, or shoing-horn to draw men
on to drink more, then else they would or should do: so a health being once
begun, they will be sure that every one present shall pledge the same, in the
same manner and measure, be they thirsty or not thirsty, willing, or not
willing, able, or unable: be it against their stomachs, healths, natures,
judgments, hearts and consciences, which do utterly abhor, and secretly
condemn* the same. That in case a man will not for company grievously sin
against God, wrong his own body, destroy his soul, and wilfully leap into hell
fire with them; they will hate him worse than the hangman; and will sooner
adventure their blood in the field, upon refusing, or crossing their healths,
than in the cause and quarrel of their Country.

7. Br. How they are so pernicious, that to damn their own souls, is the least
part of their mischief; and that they draw vengeance upon thousands, by
seducing s^^e, and giving ill example to others. That one Drunkard makes a
multitude; being like the bramble, Judge. 9. 15. which first set it self on
fire, and then fired all the Wood. Or like a malicious man sick of the plague,
that runs into the throng to disperse his infection; whose mischief out-weighs
all penalty. And this shows, that they not only partake of the Devils nature,
but that they are very devils in the likeness of men: and that the very
wickedness of one that fears God, is far better than the good entreaty of a
Drunkard.

That with sweet words they will tole men on to destruction, as we tole beasts
with fodder to the slaughterhouse; And that to take away all suspicion, they
will so mollify the stiffness of a man's prejudice, so temper and fit him to
their own mould; that once to suspect them, requires the spirit of discerning.
And that withal, they so confirm the profes^ion of their love with oaths,
protestations and promises, that you would think, Jonathans love to David
nothing to it. That these pernicious seducers, devils in the shape of men, have
learned to handle a man so sweetly, that one would think it a pleasure to be
seduced.

But little do they think, how they advance their own damnations, when the
blood of so many souls, as they have drawn away, will be required at their
hands! For know this thou tempter, that thou do not more increase other men's
wickedness on earth, (whether by persuasion, or provocation, or example) than
their wickedness shall increase thy damnation in hell, Luke 16. 27, 28. Non
fratres dilexit, sed seipsum respexit. And this let me say to the horror of
their consciences, that make merchandise of souls; that it is a question when
such an one comes to hell, whether Judas himself would change torments with him.

8. Br. That the Drunkard is so pleasing a murderer, that he tickles a man to
death, and makes him (like Solomon's fool) die laughing. Whence it is, that many
who hate their other enemies (yea, and their friends too) embrace this enemy,
because he kisseth when he betrayeth. And indeed what fence? for a pistol
charged with the bullet of friendship. Hence it is also, that thousands have
confessed at the Gallows, I had never come to this, but for such, and such a
Drunkard. For commonly the Drunkards progress is, from luxury to beggary, from
beggary to thievery, from the Tavern to Tyborne, from the Alehouse to the
Gallows. Briefly, That these Bauds and Panders of vice breathe nothing but
infection, and study nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. That
the Drunkard is like Julian, who never did a man a good turn, but it was to
damn his soul. That his proffers are like the Fowlers shrape, when he casts
meat to birds, which is not out of pity to relieve, but out of treachery to
ensnare them. Or like traps we set for vermin, seeming charitable, when they
intend to kill, Jer. 5. 26. And thou may answer these cursed tempters, who
delight in the murder of souls, as the woman of Endor did Saul, 1 Samuel 28.
Wherefore seekst thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to die, verse. 9.

That he is another Absalom, who made a feast for Amnon, whom he meant to kill.
And there is no subtilty like that which deceives a man, and has thanks for
the labor. For as our Savior says, Blessed is the man that is not offended
at their scoffs, Mat. 11. 6. So blessed is the man that is not taken with their
wiles. For herein alone consists the difference, He whom the Lord loves, shall
be delivered from their meretricious allurements, Eccl. 7. 26. And he whom the
Lord abhors, shall fall into their snares, Pro. 22. 14.

9. Br. That Taverns and Tap-houses are the drinking schools, where they learn
this their skill, and are trained up in this trade of tempting. For Satan does
not work them to this height of impiety all at once, but by degrees: When
custom of sin has deaded all remorse for sin; as it is admirable how the soul
that takes delight in leudness, is gained upon by custom. They grow up in sin,
as worldlings grow in wealth and honor, They wax worse and worse, says the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 13. they go first over-shoo's, then over-boots, then
over-shoulders; and at length over-head and ears in sin, as some do in debt.
Now these Tap-houses are their meeting-places; where they hear the devils
lectures read; the shops and markets, where Satan drives his trade; the
schools, where they take their degrees; these are the Guild-hals where all
sorts of sinners gather together, as the humors do into the stomach before an
ague-fit, and where is projected all the wickedness that breaks forth in the
Nation, as our reverend Judges do find in their several Circuits.

That these Taverns and Alehouses (or rather hell-houses) are the fountains
and well-heads from whence spring all our miseries and mischiefs: these are the
nurseries of all riot, excess and idleness, making our Land another Sodom, and
furnishing yearly our Jails and Gallowses. Here they sit all day in troops,
doing that in earnest, which we have seen boys do in sport; stand on their
heads, and shake their heels against heaven; where, even to hear how the Name
of the Lord Jesus is pierced, and Gods Name blasphemed, would make a dumb man
speak, a dead man almost to quake.

10. Br. That it were endless to repeat their vain-babling, scurrilous jesting,
wicked talking, impious swearing and cursing: that when the drink has once bit
them, and set their tongues at liberty, their hearts come up as easily as some
of their drink; yea, their limitless tongues do then clatter like so many
windows loose in the wind, and you may as soon persuade a stone to speak, as
them to be silent; it faring with their clappers, as with a sick man's pulse,
which always beats, but ever out of order. That one Drunkard has tongue
enough for twenty men; for let but three of them be in a room, they will make a
noise, as if all the thirty bells in Antwerp steeple were rung at once: or do
but pass by the door, you would think your self in the Land of Parrats. That it
is the property of a Druukard to disgorge his bosom with his stomach, to empty
his mind with his maw: His tongue resembles Bacchus his Liber pater, and goes
like the sail of a Windmill: For as a great gale of wind whirleth the sayls
about, so abundance of drink whirleth his tongue about, and keeps it in
continual motion. Now he rayls, now he scoffs, now he lies, now he slanders,
now he seduces, talks baudy, swears, bans, foams, and cannot be quiet, till his
tongue be wormed. So that from the beginning to the end, he belcheth forth
nothing, but what is as far from truth, piety, reason, modesty* as that the
Moon came down from Heaven to visit Mahomet: As oh! the beastliness which burns
in their unchaste and impure minds, that smokes out at their polluted mouths! A
man would think, that even the Devil himself should blush, to hear his child so
talk. How does his mouth run over with falsehoods against both Magistrates,
Ministers and Christians: what speaks he less than whoredoms, adulteries,
incests at every word? yea, hear two or three of them talk, you would change
the Lycaonians language, and say, Devils are come up in the likeness of men.

11* Br. That at these places men learn to contemn Authority, as boys grown
tall and stubborn, contemn the rod: Here it is that they utter swelling and
proud words against such as are in Dignity, as St Peter and St Jude have it.
They set their mouths against heaven, and their tongues walk through the earth,
Psalm. 73. 9. So that many a good Minister and Christian may say with holy
David, I became a song of the Drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. And in case any of them
have wit, here they will show it in scoffing at Religion, and flouting at
holiness. From whence it is, that we have so many Atheists, and so few
Christians amongst us (notwithstanding our so much means of grace) and that the
Magistracy and Ministry are so woefully contemned by all sorts of people.

That these tippling Tap-houses are the common Quagmires of all filthiness,
where too many drawing their Patrimonies through their throats, exhaust and
lavish out their substance, and lay plots and devices how to get more. For
hence they fall either to open courses of violence, or secret mischief, till at
last the Jail prepares them for the Gibbet; for lightly they sing through a red
Lattise, before they cry through a Grate.

12. Br. I speak not of all, I know the calling to be good, and that there are
good of that calling, (and these will thank me, because what I have said, makes
for their honor and profit too) but sure I am, too many of these
drinking-houses are the very dens and shops, yea the thrones of Satan, very
sinks of sin, which like so many common-shores, refuse not to welcome and
encourage any, in the most loathsome pollutions they are able to invent, and put
in practice. As did you but hear, and see, and smell, and know what is done in
these Taverns and Alehouses, you would wonder that the earth could bear the
houses, or the Sun endure to look upon them. That lest they should not in all
this do homage enough to Satan, they not seldom drink their healths upon their
knees, as the Heathen Witches and Sorcerers (of whom these have learned it)
used to do, when they offered drink offerings to Beelzebub the prince of
Devils, and other their Devil-gods.

That these godless Ale-drapers, and other sellers of drink, in entertaining
into their houses, and complying with those traiters against God, and in
suffering so much impiety to rest within their walls, do make themselves guilty
of all, by suffering the same; and that a fearful curse hangs over their
heads, so long as they remain such* For if one sin of theft, or perjury is
enough* to rot the rafters, to grind the stones, to level the walls and roof of
any house with the ground; as it is Zec. 5. 4. What are the oaths, the lies,
the thefts, the whoredoms, the murders, the damnable drunkenness, the
numberless, and nameless abominations that are committed there. For these
Ale-house-keepers are accessory to the Drunkards sin, and have a fearful
account to give for their tollerating such, since they might, and ought to
redress it: so that their gain is most unjust, and all they have is by the the
sins of the people; as Diogenes said of the strumpet Phryne.

13. Br. That of all seducing Drunkards, these Drink-sellers are the chief;
their whole life being naught else but a vicissitude of devouring and venting,
and their whole study, how to tole in customers, and then egg them on to drink;
for as if drinking and tempting were their trade: they are always guzling
within doors, or else tempting at the door, where they spend their vacant
hours, watching for a companion, as a spider would watch for a poor fly; or as
the whorish woman in the Proverbs laid wait for the young novice, until with
her great craft, and flattering lips, she had caused him to yield, Prove. 7. 6,
to 24. Though when he sees a Drunkard, if he but hold up his finger, the other
follows him into his Borough, just like a fool to the stocks, and as an Ox to
the slaughterhouse, having no power to withstand the temptation. So in he
goes, and there continues as one bewitched, or conjured with a spell; out of
which he returns not, until he has emptied his purse of money, and his head
of reason: while in the mean time his poor wife, children and servants want
bread.

That did Sellers of drink aim at the glory of God, and good of others, as they
ought, 1 Cor. 10. 31. there would not be an hundredth part of the drunkards,
beggars, brawls, and famished-families there are: whereas now thousands do in
sheer drink, spend all the clothes on their beds and backs. As be they poor
laboring men, that must dearly earn it before they have it, these Alehouse
keepers, these vice-breeders, these soul-murtherers will make them drink away
as much in a day, as they can get in a week; spend twelve pence, sooner than
earn twopence, as St Ambrose observes.

That thousands of these Labouring-men may be found in the very Suburbs of this
City, that drink the very blood of their wives and children, who are near
famished, to satisfy the Drunkards throat, or gut, wherein they are worse than
Infidels, or Cannibals, 1 Timothy 5. 8. who again are justly met withal: For as
if God would pay them in their own coin, how often shall you see vermin
sucking the Drunkards blood, as fast as he the others.

14. Br. That these Drunkards and Ale-drapers are always laying their heads
together, plotting and consulting how to charm and tame their poor wives (for
the Drunkard and his wife agree like the harp and the harrow) which if maids
did but hear, they would rather make choice of an Ape-carrier, or a
Jakes-farmers servant, than of one who will be drawn to the Alehouse. For let
them take this for a Rule, He that is a tame devil abroad, will be a roaring
devil at home; and he that has begun to be a Drunkard, will ever be a
Drunkard. True, they will promise a maid fair, and bind themselves by an
hundred oaths and protestations; and she (when love has blinded and besotted
her) will believe them; yea, promise her self the victory, not doubting but she
shall reclaim him from his evil company; but not one of a thousand, scarce one
of ten thousand that ever finds it so, but the contrary. For let Drunkards
promise, yea and purpose what they will; Experience shows, that they mend as
sour Ale does in Summer; or as a dead hedge, which the longer it stands is the
rottener. And how should it be other, when they cannot go the length of a
street, but they must pass by, perhaps an hundred Alehouses, where they shall
be called in. And all the while they are in the drinking-school, they are bound
by their law of good fellowship to be pouring in at their mouths, or whiffing
out at their noses: one serving as a shoing-horn to the other; which makes them
like ratsban'd Rats, drink and vent, vent and drink, Sellengers round, and the
same again. Oh that a maids fore-wit were but so good as her after-wit! then
the Drunkard should never have wife more to make a slave of, nor wives such
cause to curse Alehouse keepers, as now they have. And indeed, if I may speak
my thoughts, or what reason propounds to me, Drunkards are such children and
fools (to what Governors of families ought to be) that a rod is fitter for
them than a wife. But of this by the way only, that maids may not so miserably
cast away themselves; for they had better be buried alive, than so married, as
most poor men's wives can inform them.

15. Br. That to speak to these Demetriuses, that get their wealth by drinking;
yea, by helping to consume their drink, and that live only by sin, and the sins
of the people, were to speed as Paul did at Ephesus, after some one of them had
told the rest of their occupation. Yea to expect amendment from such, in a
manner were to expect amendment from a Witch, who has already given her soul
to the devil. That to what has been spoken of Drunkards and Drink-sellers in
the particular cases of drinking and tempting, might be added seventy times
seven more of the like abominations. For the Drunkard is like some putrid
grave, the deeper you dig, the fuller you shall find him both of stench and
horror: Or like Hercules's monster, wherein were fresh heads still arising one
after the cutting off of another. But there needs no more than this taste, to
make any wise man (or any that love their own souls) to detest and beware these
Bawds and pandors of vice, that breathe nothing but infection, and study
nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. These Brokers of villainy,
whose very acquaintance is destruction: As how can they be other than
dangerously infectious, and desperately wicked, whose very mercies are cruelty?

16. Br. That I have unmasked their faces, is to infatuate their purpose: that
I have inveighed and declaimed against Drunkenness, is to keep men sober; For
vices true picture, makes us vice detest.

O that I had Dehortation answerable to my detestation of it! Only here is a
discovery how Drunkards tempt; if you will see directions how to avoid their
temptations, read my Sovereign Antidote against the contagion of evil company*
Only take notice for the present, that the best way to avoid evil, is to shun
the occasions: Do not only shun Drunkenness, but the means to come to it: and
to avoid hurt, keep thy self out of shot; come not in drunken company, nor to
drinking places: As for their love and friendship, consider but whose Facters
they are, and thou will surely hate them. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

POSTSCRIPT.
COnsidering the premises, if there were any love of God, any hatred of sin,
any zeal, any courage, any conscience of an Oath in most of our Justices of the
Peace, they would rather put down and purge out of their Parishes and
Liberties, this viperous brood of vice-breeders, and soul-murtherers (I mean
Alehouse keepers) then increase them as they do, when any common Drunkard,
Cheat, or Witch may procure a License to sell drink, if they will but bribe
some one of their Clerks. But if it be left to them (if his Highness himself do
not by some other way redress it, as blessed be God he has already begun the
work in some Counties) look never to see it mended, until Christ comes in the
clouds.

Only it is much to be feared, that as we turn the sanctuary of life into the
shambles of death: so God may send a famine after such a satiety, and
pestilence after famine. Or rather that our Land, which has been so long sick
of this disease, and so often surfeited of this sin, should spue us all out,
who are the Inhabitants.

Or in case God be pleased to dispense with the Nation, the wickedness that is
done by these Drunkards and Drink-sellers, shall be reckoned, unto those that
are the permitters, for their own. For Governors make themselves guilty of
those sins they may redress, and will not. But I know to whom I speak, and my
hopes are depending.

In the mean time, it is sad to consider, how many Drunkards will hear this
Charge, for one that will apply it to himself. For confident I am, that fifteen
of twenty, all this City over, are Drunkards, yea, seducing Drunkards, in the
dialect of Scripture, and by the Law of God, which extends even to the heart
and affections, Mat. 5. 21, 22, 28. Perhaps by the Laws of the Land, a man is
not taken for drunk, except his eyes stare, his tongue stutter, and his legs
stagger; but by Gods Law, he is one that goes often to the drink, or that
tarrieth long at it, Prove. 23. 30, 31. He that will be drawn to the Tavern or
Alehouse by every idle soliciter, and there be detained to drink, when he has
neither need of it, or mind to it; to the spending of his money, wasting of his
precious time, neglect of his calling, abusing of the creatures (which
thousands want) discredit of the Gespel, the stumbling of weak ones, the
encouraging of indifferent ones, the hardening of his associates, and all the
truths enemies that know or hear of it. Briefly, he that drinks more for lust,
or pride, or covetousness, or fear, or good fellowship, or to drive away time,
or to still conscience, than for thirst, is a Drunkard in Solomon's esteem,
Prove. 23. 30, 31. Perhaps thou do not think so; but can you produce that holy
man of God, that will not deem him a drunkard, who can neither buy, nor sell,
nor meet any friend, or customer, but he must go to the Tavern, or Alehouse,
perhaps six times in a day; and who constantly clubs it, first for his mornings
draught, secondly at Exchange-time, thirdly at night, when shops are shut in;
as is the common, but base custom of most Tradesmen; yea, and the Devil so
blinds them, that they will plead a necessity of it; and that it is for their
profit?

Nor can it be denied, but in cases of this nature, things are rather measured
by the intention and affection of the doer, than of the issue, and event. And
why should not a man be deemed a Drunkard for his immoderate and inordinate
affection to drink, or drunken company? as well as another, an Adulterer, for
the like affecton to his neighbors wife, Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 28. Yet these men
are in their own, and other men's esteem, not only good and civil men, but good
Christians forsooth. Certainly, the more light we have, the more blind men are,
or else this could not be; For I would gladly ask such, Are you Christians? In
what part of the Word find you a warrant for it? Where find you, that this
custom was ever used by any one of the Saints in former ages? Well may you
(with Agrippa) be almost Christians, but sure enough, you are not with St Paul,
altogether such: and then what will become of you? For almost a son is a
bastard, almost sweet is unsavory, almost hot is lukewarm; and those that are
lukewarm will God spue out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 15, 16.

A Christian almost, is like a woman that dies in travel, almost she brought
forth a son; but that almost killed the mother, and the son too If thou
believ'st almost, thou shall be saved almost; as we say of a Thief that has a
pardon brought him whiles he is upon the gallows, he was almost saved, but he
was hanged, and his pardon did him no good. To be almost a Christian, is to be
like the foolish Virgins, that had Lamps, but without oil in them; for which
they were shut out of heaven, though they came to the very door, Mat. 25. 10,
11, 12. Can the door which is but almost shut, keep out the Thief? Can the ship
that is but almost tite, keep out the water? The soldier that does but almost
fight is a coward? And therefore if thou love thy self, look to it, and that
in time, lest hereafter you most dolefully rue it: For know this, that you
shall once give an account for every idle penny and hour you spend, and for
every cup of drink you shall spoil, or waste; and for every one that is
encouraged to do the like by your example. For which see Mat. 12. 36. Luke 16.
2. Romans 14. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 5. Rev. 20. 13. and 22. 12.

That (by the blessing of God) our children, and childrens children may loath
drunkenness, and love sobriety; let this be fixed to some place convenient in
every house, for all to read. The Persians, Parthians, Spartans, and
Lacedaemonians did the like, and found it exceeding efficacious: And Anacharsis
holds it the most effectual means to that end.

Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMIE.

FINIS.
Offer of Help to Drowning-Men.
Imprimatur

THO* GATAKER.

SEeing, and foreseeing the sad effects of men's crying down Books, Learning,
the Ministry, Sanctification, etc. if this their deep and devilish design do
meet with no stop: and seeing we should specially prepare for defense, where
Satan specially prepares for offense. Considering also the numberless number of
those that by professing themselves Protestants, discredit the Protestant
Religion: Who because they have been Christened, as Simon Magus was, received
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, like Judas; and for company go to Church
also as Dogs do, are called Christians, as we call the Heathen Images gods:
yea, and (being blinded by the Prince of darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 4.) think to be
saved by Christ, though they take up Arms against him: and are no more like
Christians, than Michols Image of Goats hair was like David: Who make the world
only their god, and pleasure or profit alone their Religion: Who are so
graceless, that God is not in all their thoughts; except to blaspheme him, and
to spend his days in the Devils service: Who being Christians in name, will
scoff at a Christian indeed: Who honor the dead Saints in a cold profession,
while they worry the living Saints in a cruel persecution: Who so hate
Holiness, that they will hate a man for it; and say of good living, (as Festus
of great learning) It makes a man mad: whose hearts will rise at the sight of a
good man, as some stomachs will rise at the sight of sweet meats: Whose
Religion is to oppose the power of Religion; and whose knowledge of the Truth,
to know how to argue against the Truth: Who justify the wicked, and condemn
the just: who call Zeal, madness; and Religion, foolishness: Who love their
sins so much above their souls, that they will not only mock their Admonisher,
scoff at the means to be saved, and make themselves merry with their own
damnations; but even hate one to the death, for showing them the way to eternal
life: who will condemn all for Roundheads, that have more Religion than an
Heathen, or knowledge of heavenly things, than a child in the womb has of the
things of this life; or conscience than an Atheist, or care of his soul, than a
Beast, and are mockers of all that march not under the pay of the devil: Who
with Adam, will become Satan's bondslaves for an Apple; and like Esau, sell
their birthright of Grace here, and their Blessing of Glory hereafter for a
mess of Pottage: Who prefer the pleasing of their palates before the saving of
their souls: who have not only cast off Religion, that should make them good
men; but reason also, that should make them men: Who waste virtues faster than
riches, and riches faster than any virtues can get them: Who do nothing else
but sin, and make others sin too: who spend their time and patrimonies in Riot;
and upon Dice, Drabs, Drunkenness; who place all their felicity in a Tavern or
Brothel-house, where Harlots and Sycophants rifle their Estates, and then send
them to rob: Who will borrow of every one, but never intend to satisfy any
one: Who glory in their shame, and are ashamed of that which should and would
be their glory: Who desire not the reputation of honesty, but of good
fellowship: Who in stead of quenching their thirst, drown their senses; and had
rather leave their wits, than the wine behind them: Who place their Paradise in
their throats, Heaven in their guts: and make their belly their god: who pour
their Patrimonies down their throats, and throw the house so long out at
windows, that at length their house throws them out of doors: Who think every
one exorbitant that walks not after their Rule: Who will traduce all whom they
cannot seduce; even condemning with their tongues, what they commend in their
consciences: Who, as they have no reason, so they will hear none: Who are not
more blind to their own faults, than quick-sighted in other men's: Who being
displeased with others, will fly in their Makers face, and tear their Saviors
Name in pieces with oaths and execrations, as being worse than any mad dog that
flies in his Masters face that keeps him: Who swear and curse even out of
custom, as Currs bark; yea, they have so sworn away all grace, that they count
it a grace to swear; and being reproved for swearing, they will swear that they
swore not.

Or perhaps they are covetous Cormorants, greedy Gripers, miserly Muck-worms;
all whose reaches are at riches: Who make gold their god, and commodity the
stern of their consciences: Who hold every thing lawful, if it be gainful:
Who prefer a little base pelf before God, and their own salvations; and who
being fatted with Gods blessings, do spurn at his precepts: Who like men
sleeping in a Boat, are carried down the stream of this World, until they
arrive at their Gravesend [Death] without once waking to bethink themselves
whether they are a going [to Heaven or Hell.]

Or Ignorant and Formal Hypocrites: who do as they see others do, without
either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason: Who do what is morally good,
more for fear of the Law, then for love of the Gospel: Who fear the Magistrate
more, than they fear God or the Devil; regard more the blasts of men's breath,
than the fire of Gods wrath; will tremble more at the thought of a Bailiff, or
a Prison, than of Satan, or Hell, and everlasting perdition: Who will say, they
love God and Christ, yet hate all that any way resemble him; are flint unto
God, wax to Satan; have their ears always open to the Tempter, shut to their
Maker and Redeemer; will choose rather to disobey God, than displease great
Ones; fear more the Worlds scorns, than His anger; and rather than abridge
themselves of their pleasure, will incur the displeasure of God: Who will do
what God forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what He threatens: Who will do
the Devils works only, and yet look for Christ's wages; expect that Heaven will
meet them at their last hour, when all their life long they have galloped in
the beaten Road toward Hell: Who expect to have Christ their Redeemer and
Advocate; when their consciences tell them, that they seldom remember him, but
to blaspheme him; and more often name him in their Oaths and Curses, than in
their Prayers: Who will persecute Honest and Orthodox Christians; and say, they
mean base and dissembling Hypocrites: Who think they do God service in killing
his servants, Joh. 16. 2. Who will boast of a strong faith, and yet fall short
of the Devils in believing, Jam. 2. 19. Who turn the grace of God into
wantonness; as if a condemned person should head his Drum of Rebellion with his
Pardon; resolving to be evil, because God is good: Who will not believe what is
written, till they feel what is written; and whom nothing will confute, but
fire and brimstone: Who think their villainy is unseen, because it is
unpunished; and therefore live like beasts, because they think they shall die
like beasts.

Considering the swarms, Legions, Millions of these, I say, and many the like,
which I cannot stand to repeat. As also in reference to Lev. 19. 17. Isa. 58.
1. And out of compassion to their precious souls; there are above twenty
several Books purposely composed, wherein are proper remedies (of the same
alloy) for each soul seduced or afflicted; to be had without any expense: which
Books (like glasses) will show them (from Gods Word) the very faces of their
hearts: And (like Peter to Cornelius, Act. 11.) tell them words whereby (with
blessing from above) both they, and their Associates (by their means) may be
saved, ver. 14.

And that they might the better recompense the Readers pains; whether he
propound to himself pleasure or profit: they are (as many Reverend Divines
deem) a brief Collection of the most winning and convincing Arguments out of
the choicest Authors; very pithily, orderly, and elegantly conveyed, and
embellished with much both variety of graceful and delightful illustration.
Yea, if such as they concern, shall be pleased to make use of them; they may
(with Gods blessing) not only have their vices lessened, their knowledge
increased, and their minds cheered and comforted: but probably they shall find
in them the flower, cream, or quintessence, of what would otherwise cost them
twenty years reading to extract.

It remains only, that the Patients, for whom this Physic is proper, be
prevailed withal to take it. For although here is all necessary provision
made, and the guests lovingly invited, yet (of themselves) they will refuse to
come, as in that Parable of the Lords Supper, Luke 14. 16. to 25. Because, as
good meats are unwelcome to sick persons; so is good counsel to obstinate
sinners. Here is light, but they love darkness rather than light; lest their
deeds which are evil, should be reproved. Only they that do well, and love
truth, will come to the light, that their deeds may be made manifest, Joh 3.
19, 20, 21. Also many young novices in sin, will entertain them, as Lot did
those Angels, that came to fetch him out of Sodom, Genesis 19. And probably some
Parents and Masters will desire them, to prevent the spreading of these
Gangrenes in their children and servants. But as for the parties principally
concerned and invited, and that stand in the greatest need, and are most to be
pitied; they will even storm at this very offer of help, and hiss like
serpents, because it troubles their nests. Being like him, Luke 8. 27, 28. who
having bin possessed with devils a long time, was at length very loath to part
with his Guests.

Indeed, if some, whose hearts God has already changed, would put them into
their hands, and use their best Art to make them relished: (For like Babes,
meat must not only be given them, but prepared too, and put into their mouths,)
some return of good might happily come thereof. As weak means shall serve the
turn, where God intends success. Even a word seasonably spoken (God blessing
it) like a Rudder, sometimes steers a man quite into another Course. Antiochus
by hearing from a poor man, all the faults which he and his Favorites had
committed, carried himself most virtuously ever after* Antoninus amended his
future life and manners, by only hearing what the people spoke of him. The very
crowing of a Cock occasioned Peter's repentance. Augustine, that famous Doctor,
was converted, by only reading that Text, Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly, as
in the daytime, etc. Learned Junius, with reading the first Chapter of St
John's Gospel, was won to the Faith of Christ. And Melancthon much after the
same manner. I have read of two famous Strumpets,, that were suddenly converted
by this only Argument, That God sees all things, even in the dark; when the
doors are shut, and the curtains drawn. And Mountaign tells of a libidinous
Gentleman, that sporting with a Courtizan in a house of sin, happened to ask
her name, which she said was Mary; whereat he was so stricken with reverence
and remorse; that he instantly both cast off the Harlot, and amended his whole
future life. Bilney's Confe^sion converted Latimer: yea, Adrianus was not only
converted, but became a Martyr too, by only hearing a Martyr at the Stake
allege that Text, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Yea, it
was an observation of Mr John Lindsay, that the very smoke of Mr Hamilton
converted as many as it blew upon. Yea, even those Jews that crucified the Son
of God, were converted by hearing those few words of Peter, Act. 2. And it
pleased God, when, my self, was in as hopeless a condition, as any of those
Sensualists before mentioned; (I mean, as much fore-stalled with prejudice
against Religion, and the Religious) that a poor man's persuading me to leave
reading of Poetry, and fall upon the Bible, was a means of changing my heart,
before I had read out Genesis, being but twenty years of age: whom ^ more bless
God for, than for my Parents from whom I received life. And this (because I
know no better way to express my thankfulness to him, who has freed me from
frying in Hel-flames for ever and ever, than by endeavoring to win others from
Satan's standard to Christ's) makes me do the like to others. For I seldom hear
any one swear, or scoff, or see any drunk, or the like, but I present them with
one of these forementioned Messages, from that God, whom they so daringly and
audaciously provoke. Nor do I always miss the mark at which I aim. And I tell
it you, because many discreet ones are apt to wonder, that I so make my ^f a
scorn and gazing stock to fools: Though I shall never think it a shame to me,
which was the only glory of him, that was a man after Gods own heart, as you
^ay very often hear him profess, as in Psalm. 50. 15. and 71. 17, 18, 19, 24.
and 51. 14. ^119. 171. and 22. 22. and 35. 18. and many the like; See Luke 8.
38, 39.

I also mention it, that I may (if possible in this covetous, cold and dull
Age) ^ovoke others to do the same; or at least something for the saving of these
poor, ^^norant, and impotent wretches; that are neither able nor willing to
help them^^lves, Though as one would think (for I speak to enlightened souls)
they should ^ot need spurring, nor prompting to this Duty: For what heart would
it not ^ake to bleed, that has any Christian blood in his veins, to see what
multitudes ^ere are that go blindfold to destruction; and no man offer to stop
or check ^^em before they arrive there, from whence there is no Redemption.
Mat. 7. ^3, 14. 1 John 5. 19. Rev. 20. 8. and 13. 16. Isa. 10. 22. Romans 9. 27.
2 Timothy 2. 26. 2 Cor. (...) 4. Ephesians. 2. 1, to 4, Phil. 3. 18. Joh 8. 44. and 14.
30.

^ Yea, how should it not make all, that are themselves got out of Satan's
clutches, ^^ot, study, and contrive all they can; to draw others of their
brethren after them.

We read that Andrew was no sooner converted, and become Christ's Disciple, ^ut
instantly he drew others after him to the same Faith, Joh. 1. 41. and the like
of Philip, ver. 45. and of the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 28, to 41. And of
Peter, Luke ^2. 32. Act. 2. 41. and Chap 3. and 4. 4. and so of all the
Apostles. Yea, Moses so thrist^d after the salvation of Israel, that rather
than he would be saved without them, he desired the Lord to blot him out of the
book of life, Exo. 32. 32. And Paul (...) this purpose says, I could wish my
self to he separated from Christ, for my brethren, ^^at are my kinsmen
according to the flesh: meaning the Jews, Romans 9. 3. And indeed ^ll heavenly
hearts are charitable. Neither are we of the Communion of Saints, if ^e desire
not the blessedness of others: it being an inseparable adjunct, or rela^^ve to
grace; for none but a Cain will say, Am I my brothers keeper? Yea, where the
^eart is thankful, and inflamed with the love of God, and our neighbor, this
will be ^^e principal aim: As by my sins, and bad example, I have drawn others
from God, (...) now I will, all I can, draw others with my self to God. Saul
converted, will build (...), as fast as ever he plucked down, and preach as
zealously as ever he persecuted. And ^e are no whit thankful for our own
salvation, if we do not look with charity and ^^ty upon the gross mis-opinions
and misprisions of our Brethren. And what though ^e cannot do what we would?
yet we must labor to do what we can, to win o^^ers; not to merit by it, but to
express our thanks. Besides, it were very disho^orable to Christ not to do so.
Did you ever know that wicked men, thievs, drun^ards, adulterers, persecutors,
false prophets, or the like, would be damned alone? no ^^ey mis-leade all they
can, as desiring to have companions. Yea, the Pharisees ^ould take great pains,
compass sea and land, to make others twofold more the chil^ren of hell then
themselves, as our Savior expressly says, Mat. 23. 15. which ^ay cast a blush
upon our cheeks, who are nothing so industrious to win souls (...) God. And
what a shame is it, that our God should not have as faithful ^^rvants, as he
has unfaithful enemies? That wicked men should be at more ^^st and pains to
please an ill master, than we can afford to please so good a ^od, so gracious,
and so loving a Father? Shall they labor so hard, for that which will but
inhance their damnation? And shall we think any pains too much for that, which
will add to the weight of our eternal glory and salvation.

And what though their case be not only desperate, but almost hopeless? (as i^
reason, that sin is past cure, which strives against the cure: nor would these
drowning men refuse help, were they not wilful murderers of their own souls)
yet ther^ is a mercy due even to them: And it is our duty to use the means;
leaving the i^sue to him, who is able to quicken the dead, and to make even of
stones children to Abraham; Witness Manasses in the Old Testament, and Paul in
the New* Yea, I suppose, that this their sad condition, calls for our more* than
ordinary compassion Since they have precious souls, that must everlastingly
live, in bliss, or woe. An^ hence it is, that the Angels are said to rejoice
more at the conversion of such a sinne^ then for the building up of ninety and
nine, that are already converted, Luke 15. 7. because he to whom God has given
a new heart, and spiritual life, will be sure (...) seek out for, and use the
means of growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lo^^ and Savior Jesus
Christ. Whereas the former are not only dead in sin; but so b^ried in the grave
of long custom, that they cannot stir the least joint; no, not (...) much as
feel their deadness, nor desire life; but resist all means tending thereunt^
Insomuch, that the conversion of such an one is, held by Divines a greater
worl^ or Miracle, than the creating of the whole World: For in every New
creature are (...) number of Miracles; A blind man is restored to sight: A deaf
man to hearing, A m^^ possessed with many Devils, dispossessed; Yea, A dead man
raised from the dead; an^ in every one a stone turned into flesh: in all which
God meets with nothing (...) opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

Wherefore you, that (by calling to mind your own former blindness, and
bondage) are able to know how it fares with them; and accordingly to pity the^^
you that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward their precious
soul^^ use your utmost endeavor to reduce them; earnestly admonish them; draw
them^^ hear some Boanerges, that preaches with power and authority, and not as
the Scribe^ Persuade them also to read Books that are convincing, etc. So shall
you dischar^^ your Duty to God, show your love to them, your thankfulness to
your Redeemer; an^ not a little pleasure your selves. For if you do gain them,
you shall shine as the sta^^ in Heaven, for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. Or in
case you cannot reclaim them, (...) he who requires it at your hands, Will
return the same into your own bosoms, I^^ 49. 4, 5. Prove. 11. 18. and 25. 22.

But I were as good knock at a deaf man's door, as press or persuade the most to
the duty, though thus necessary: for those two Idols, Discretion and cursed
Covetousn^^ bear a greater sway with the common Professors of this age, than
either their Ma^^ or Redeemer: Though confident I am, others will do more than
I^say, Philem. 21^

Melancthon having found the Word, most easily to prevail with him, doubt^^ not
but his Preaching should do wonders upon others: but having tried, he fou^^ and
confessed, That old Adam, was too strong for young Melancthon.

Many Lepers were in Israel, in the time of Elizeus the Prophet, but none of
the was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian, Luke 4. 22. to 29. Many are called,
but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 14. FINIS.
Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by Henry Crips in Popes-head-alley, and
Ja^^ Crump, in Little-Bartholmews Well-yard, who will also show the other
Books, and tell the place where any one may borrow them gratis, 1658.


