A DISCOURSE UPON IMPROVING THE REVENUE OF THE STATE OF ATHENS.

Written Originally in Greek by Xenophon.

And made English from the Original, with some Historical Notes: By W. M. Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1697.

TO THE AUTHOR OF THE ESSAY UPON Ways and Means.
SIR,
AT length the WAR, which has been carried on for so many Years, with such
Expense of Blood, and Treasure to the Nation, is at an End; and we have the
fairest prospect imaginable of a lasting PEACE, and a happy Settlement under
the Government of a Prince, who after He has employed His Arms abroad with so
much Success for the Defense of our Liberties; will, we hope, turn all His
Councils to the finishing so Glorious a Design, and be as Renowned to future
Ages, for the Peaceful Arts of Government, as for His Military Virtues: As His
Courage has made us Safe, so His Wisdom, undoubtedly, will make us Rich and
Happy, by the improvement of our Navigation, and the increase of our Trade: For
it is to Trade we owe the Rise and Progress of the English Greatness, that has
enabled us to support so tedious a War against the most formidable Power which
has been known in Europe for these many Ages, and that alone can enable us to
discharge the vast Debts we have contracted by the WAR. Trade being of such
mighty Consequence to the Interest of the Nation, will, we hope, meet with due
Encouragement and Protection from our Laws, and will be settled under the
ablest Management, and the wisest Regulation. These Branches of our Commerce
which have been impaired or lost by the Piratick WAR, and the fatal
Interruption of our Navigation, may be retrieved by the PEACE, and other
Trades, and particularly that with France, which the Negligence, or the
mistaken Counsels of the last Reigns had fetled upon a Foot so distructive to
our Interest, may be established to our Advantage in a new Treaty of Commerce.
The great Trade to the East Indies with some few Regulations, might be
established upon a Bottom more consistent with the Manufactures of England; but
in all Appearance, this is not to be compassed, unless some public spirited
Man with a Masterly Genious be placed at the Head of out Affairs in India; and
though we who are his Friends, are loath to loose him, 'twere to be wished, for
the Good of the Kingdom, that the Gentleman whom common Fame, and the Voice of
the World, have pointed out as the ablest Man for such a Station, would employ
his excellent Judgment and Talents that way, in the Execution of so useful a
Design.

The general Interest of a Nation, ought to be the Care of particular Men, the
main bent of their Studies, and the chief Pursuit of their Inquiries: Every Man
ought to set his helping Hand to such a a Work: And your own generous Labors
upon this Subject, have set an excellent Pattern to the rest of the World. To
this End I present you with a Translation of this Discourse of Xenophon upon
the Subject of Revenue and Trade, and I fancy it will be no unwelcome
Entertainment to you, to find your own admirable Observations upon these
Matters; confirmed by the Authority of one of the greatest Men that ever
Antiquity produced, and the only ancient Author upon this Subject, which is now
extant. You will admire the Force and Solidity of his Observations, the
Exactness of his Calculations, the justness, and freedom of his Thoughts, not
confined to the narrow Notions of Parties and Factions, and the vigor of his
Judgment and Eloquence at so great an Age. The general Rules for the Increase
of Riches and Trade, are either directly advanced, or may be very naturally
deduced from this Discourse. That admirable Maxim That the true Wealth and
Greatness of a Nation, consists in Numbers of People, well employed, is every
where inculcated throughout the whole Course of the Treatise. And I believe
Xenophon was the first Author that ever argued by Political Arithmetic, or the
Art of Reasoning upon things by Figures, which has been improved by some able
Heads of our own Nation, and carried to the highest Perfection by your own
successful Inquiries.

As for what relates to my Translation, I have rather chosen to render the
Sense and Meaning of the Author, than his Words, or his Manner: The Purity,
Politeness, and the unaffected Simplicity of his Style, are Graces not to be
copied by the Barrenness and Barbarity of our Modern Languages.

I hope the Translation is faithful, and exact; if there are any Mistakes, I
desire the candid Reader to forgive them: I have added some Historical Notes at
the End, to explain some Difficulties relating to the Law and Customs of the
Grecian People. I am,

SIR, Your very Affectionate Friend, W. M.

A DISCOURSE UPON Improving the Revenue OF THE STATE OF ATHENS.
I Always held it for a certain Maxim, that Governments resembled their
Governors, and that the Prosperity, or Declension, the Vigor or Decay of all
States, was derived from the Virtues and Vices, the Abilities or Weakness of
their Rulers: But since it is generally alleged in vindication of the Athenian
Ministry, that they understand the common Principles of Justice as well as the
rest of Mankind, but that they are compelled by the (1.) Necessities of the
common People to oppress their (2.) Confederate Cities with unreasonable
Tributes, and Taxes: I have attempted to examine whither this Apology is well
grounded, and whither they are not capable by the Native Riches, and Revenue of
the State of Athens, to maintain the whole Body of our People, which is the
justest, and mos honorable Provision can be thought of: For I imagine if such
a Design could be compassed, that the Wants of the People would be more
effectually relieved, and the Jealousies, and Suspicions of our Neighbors
would be quieted.

Upon a general view of the whole Matter, it appeared to me that the Athenian
Territory is capable of affording a mighty Income, and Revenue, the truth of
which Assertion may be easily evinced by a brief Survey of the State, and
Nature of the Country.

The Fruits of the Earth, and Native Products of our Soil, are a Proof of the
temperature of our Climate, and the mildness of our Seasons; for we have Plants
which bear in great abundance in our Country, which will never grow in others;
and our Sea, as well as Land, abounds in all Things necessary for Life, or
Luxury: Add to this, that all the Blessings which the Gods have made peculiar
to the different Season of the Year, begin earlier, and end later with us, than
in any Part of the World.

Besides the vast plenty we enjoy of perishable Goods, our Soil affords us some
staple and permanent Commodities, such as our noble Quarries of Marble, out of
which are drawn the best Materials for the Building, and Ornament of Temples,
and for the Altars and Statues of the Gods, and which both the Greeks, and
barbarous Nations set a high Value upon.

And where the Soil is too barren to receive the common Improvements of
Husbandry, it contains hidden Treasures, which will feed a much greater Number
of Mouths, than any arable Lands can do: For the Divine Bounty has bestowed
upon us inexhaustible Mines of Silver, an Advantage which we enjoy above all
our Neighboring Cities by Sea, and Land, who never yet could discover one Vein
of Silver Oar in all their Dominions.

We have Reason likewise to believe that Athens is seated in the Center of
Greece, and the habitable World; for all Nations are incommoded with more
intense Degrees of Heat or Cold in proportion to their He means North or South.
distance from us; and that we lie in the Heart of Greece is evident, for all
Travelers, that pass by Sea or Land, from one Extremity of Greece to the
other, must take Athens in their Way.

And though Attica is no Island, yet we have the same Benefit of Trading with all
Winds, for we are bounded on two Sides by the Sea, and being joined to the
Continent we have the Convenience of driving on an Inland Traffic.

Other Cities lie exposed to the Fury of barbarous Nations, but we are so far
from having so ill a Neighborhood, that the States that border immediately
upon us, lie at a remote distance from them.

To all those Advantages which conspire to the Felicity, and greatness, of our
State, and which (...) owe to the happy Situation, and the native Wealth of our
Country, a mighty Improvement might be made by the Institution of public Laws,
in favor of Strangers that establish themselves among us; for besides the
general Benefits derived to all Cities from Numbers of People, our Strangers
would be so far from living on the Public, and receiving Pensions from the
State as our own Citizens do, that they would maintain themselves, and be the
Foundation of the Noblest Branch of our Revenue by the Payment of the (3.)
Aliens Duties.

An effectual Inducement to the Settlement of Foreigners among us might be
established, by taking off all those public Marks of Dishonor from them which
are of no Service, nor Advantage to the State, and by excusing them from
serving among our heavy armed Troops; for an Exemption from the Dangers of War,
and from the necessity of being absent from their Families, and (4.) Trades,
would be a very powerful Encouragement.

It Is likewise the Interest of the Commonwealth, rather to fight our Battles
with our own Troops, than to keep up in our Armies, a mixture of Lydians,
Phrygians and Syrians, and all kinds of barbarous Nations, out of whom the
greatest Number of our Aliens are composed.

Besides the Advantage of avoiding the Confusion such a Mixture of Troops
produces, 'twould be more for our Reputation Abroad, to trust the Fortune of
our State to the Courage, and Valor of our own Citizens, than in the Hands of
Foreigners,

Besides all other proper encouragement to Strangers, the Privilege of being
(5.) enrolled among our Horse, would more warmly unite the in our Interests,
and prove a solid Foundation of Strength, and greatness of the State.

'Twould be likewise a strong Inducement to greater Numbers of considerable
Strangers to plant among us, if we gave the (6.) wast Ground within our Walls
to be built on by such of them as deserved, and desired it of the Public.

The Institution of a new (7.) Magistracy, like the (8.) public Guardians of
our Orphans, for the protection, and Security of Strangers, with Rewards of
Honors, and Dignities to those, who by their Care, and Industry, procured the
most numerous Settlements of Foreigners among us, would gain the Affections of
our Aliens, and would have a very happy Effect, in drawing a vast concourse of
Exiles, (...) Men whose Cities have been destroyed.
Exiles, and Strangers to live under the Protection of our Government, and
augment our public Renenue.

That of all Cities, Athens lies the fairest for inviting an extended Commerce,
is evident from the convenience of our Stations, and Harbors, where Ships can
ride secure in all Weather. And whereas in other trading Cities, Merchants are
forced to barter one Commodity For another, in regard their Coin is not current
abroad, we abound not only in Manufactures, and Products of our own Growth,
sufficient to answer the Demands of all Foreign Traders, but in case they
refused to export our Goods, in return for their own, they may trade with us to
Advantage, by receiving Silver in exchange for them, (9.) which transported to
any other Market, would pass for more than they took it for at Athens.

'Twould be a great Encouragement to Commerce, if Prizes, and Rewards were
allotted to such (10.) Judges of the Courts-Merchant, as made the quickest, and
justest Determination of all Causes relating to Trader, that the Merchant might
not loose the Benefit of his Market by an attendance upon the Courts of Justice.

'Twould be likewise for the Honor and Advantage of the Public, to give the
first Rank (11.) and Precedence in all public Places to Foreign Seamen, and
Merchants, and to invite to the public Feasts of the City, such of them as by
their Ships, or Commodities do service to the State; for this Distinction of
Honor as well as the Consideration of their own Profit, would invite them to
make quick Returns from their Voyages to so friendly a Government.

And it is manifest beyond all Contradiction, that our Trade and Commerce would
be extended, our Exportations, and Importations increased, and the standing
Income, and Revenue of the State improved, in proportion to the Number of
Foreign Seamen, and Merchants of all kinds that establish themselves among us.

To the Improvement of these Articles of our Revenue, nothing more is required
than a generous Lenity, and Indulgence in our public Laws, and an universal
Encouragement, and Protection to Strangers. But the Improvements that may be
added by other Methods to advance our standing Income, will of Necessity
require a Settlement of some Public (12.) Fond.

And I have good Grounds to believe that the People will make large
Contributions in favor of such a public Undertaking, when I consider what
Sums they advanced when we sent Succors to the Arcadians under the Command of
Lysistratus, and likewise of (13.) Hegesilans.

How often we have set out Squadrons of Galleys by extraordinary Subsidies,
without any certain Prospect of Advantage to the State, but this we were all
sure of, that no particular Contributer would ever be repaid the whole, or any
part of his Money.

But in the present Case no Man can possess a more Honorable, or Advantageous
Revenue, than what he will receive in Recompense for his Contribution to this
public Fond: For a Contributer of Ten Minae, will receive a (14.) Triobolon a
Day from the State, which in a Year's time, amounts to near 20 per Cent. which
is a running Income as high as the Produce of (15.) Nautick Interest: And a
Contributer of five Minae, will at the Year's End receive more than a (16.)
third Part of the Capital Sum he advanced: As for the Body of the People, if
they pay in one Mina a Piece, they will in a Years time very near (17.) double
their Principal Money, and be paid in the City, without any hazard, or
Contingency, upon the Security of the public, Faith, which is the most
certain, and most lasting Profit.

I am of Opinion likewise, that private Strangers, and (18.) foreign Cities,
Kings, and Governors, if they had the Honor of being registered to Posterity
in our public Monuments, and Records, as Benefactors to the State, would
mutually vie in emulation who should contribute most largely to the carrying on
so generous a Design.

The necessary Fonds being advanced, 'twould be for the Honor and Interest of
the State, to build a greater Number of public Inns, and Houses of
Entertainment in our Ports, for the use of Seamen, in the trading Parts of the
City for Merchants, and in general for the Reception of all Strangers
whatsoever.

And if we build Shops, Warehouses, and Exchanges for common Retailers, the
Rents of the Houses would be a great Addition to our public Revenues, and the
magnificence of the Buildings would be an Ornament to the City.

As the Public builds Galleys for War, so it might likewise be for the
Advantage of the State to make a new Experiment, and build Merchant-Ships for
Trade, which might be farmed out, like the other Branches of our Revenue, upon
good Security; for if this Design was found practicable, it would prove a
considerable Article in the Increase of our public Income.

Our Silver Mines alone, if rightly managed, besides all the other Branches of
our Revenue, would be an inestimable Treasure to the Public. But for the
Benefit of those who are unskilled in Inquiries of this Nature, I design to
premise some general Considerations upon the true State, and Value of our
Silver-Mines, that the Public, upon a right Information, may proceed to the
taking such Measures, and Councils, as may improve them to the best Advantage.

No one ever pretended from Tradition, or the earliest Accounts of Time, to
determine when these Mines first began to be wrought, which is a Proof of their
Antiquity, and yet as ancient as they are, the Heaps of Rubbish which have been
dug out of them, and lie above Ground, bear no Proportion with the vast
Quantities which still remain below, nor does there appear any sensible Decay,
or Diminution in our Mines, but as we dig on, we still discover fresh Veins of
Silver-Oar in all Parts, and when we had most Laborers at work in the Mines,
we found that we had still Business for more Hands than were employed.

Nor do I find that the Adventurers in the Mines retrench the Number of their
Workmen, but purchase as many new Slaves as they can get; for their Gains are
greater, or less, in Proportion to the Number of Hands they employ. And this is
the only Profession I know of where the Undertakers are never envied be their
Stock or Profits never so extraordinary, because their Gains never interfere
with those of their Fellow Traders.

Every Husbandman knows how many Yoke of Oxen and Servants are necessary to
cultivate his Farm, and if he imploys more than he has occasion for, reckons
himself so much a Looser; but no Dealer in the Silver Mines ever thought he had
Hands enough to set to work.

For there is, the Difference between this* and all other Professions, that
whereas in other Callings, for Instance, Braziers and Black-Smiths, when their
Trades are over-stock'd, are undone, because the Price of their Commodities is
lowered of course, by the multitude of Sellers; and likewise a good Year of
Corn, and a plentiful Vintage, for the same Reason does hurt to the Farmers,
and forces them to quit their Employments, and set up public Houses, or turn
Merchants and Bankers.

But here the Case is quite otherwise, for the more Oar is found, and the more
Silver is wrought, and made, the more Adventurers come in, and the more Hands
are employed in our Mines.

A Master of a Family indeed when he is well provided with Furniture, and
Houshold-Goods, buys no more, but no Man was ever so overstock'd with Silver,
as not to desire a further Increase: if there are any who have more than their
Occasions require, they hoard up the rest with as much Pleasure as if they
actually made use of it.

And when a Nation is in a flourishing Condition, no One is at a loss how to
employ his Money: The Men lay it out in fine Armor, in Horses, and in
magnificent Houses and Buildings; Women lay it but in great Equipage, costly
Habits, and rich Clothes.

And in Accidents of War when our Lands lie fallow, and uncultivated, or in a
public Dearth, and Scarcity, what Reserve have we left so apply to but Silver,
to purchase Necessaries for our Subsistence, or hire Auxiliaries for our
Defense?

If it is objected that Gold is as useful as Silver, I will not dispute it, but
this I am sure of, that plenty of Gold always lowered its Value, and advanced
the Price of Silver.

I have insisted the longer upon these general Reflections to encourage
Adventurers of all kinds, to employ as many Hands as possible in so
advantageous a Trade, from these plain Considerations, that the Mines can never
be (19.) exhausted, nor can Silver ever lose its Value.

That the Public has known this long before, is evident from our Laws, which
allow Foreigners to work our Mines upon the (20.) same Terms and Conditions our
own Citizens enjoy.

But to draw this Discourse more immediately to the Subject of my present
Consideration, which is the Maintenance of our Citizens, I will begin to
propose those Ways, and Means, by which the Silver-Mines may be improved to the
highest Benefit, and Advantage to the Public. Nor do I set up for the Vanity
of being admired for an Author of new Discoveries: For that Part of my
following Discourse which relates to the Examples of the present Age, lies
obvious to all the World; as for what is past it is Matter of Fact, and every
Man might inform himself that would be at the Pains of inquiring.

It Is very strange, that after so many Precedents of private Citizens of
Athens, who have made their Fortunes by the Mines, the Public should never
think of following their Examples: For we who have made Inquiry into this
Matter have heard, that Nicias, the Son of Niceratus, had a thousand Slaves
employed in the Mines, whom he let out to Sosias the Thracian, upon Condition
to receive an Obolus a Day, clear of all Charges, for every Head, and that the
same Complement of Workmen should be always kept on Foot.

In like manner Hipponicus has 600 Slaves let out at the same Rate, which
yielded him a Revenue of a Mina a Day, and Philemonides 300, which brought him
half a Mina a Day, and many others made the same Advantage, in proportion to
the Number of Slaves they possessed, But what need we to appeal Precedents of
an elder Date, when at this Day we have so many Instances of the same Nature
before our Eyes?

In the Proposals which I offer, there is only One thing new, namely, That as
private Men have a constant Revenue coming in from the Slaves whom they let out
to work in the Mines, so the Public in imitation of their Example, should
purchase as many Slaves to be employed in the same manner, as will treble the
Number of their own Citizens.

Let any reasonable Man take this whole Proposal to pieces, and examine every
distinct Head apart, and then judge whether the Design is feasible or not. It Is
plain the State can bear the Charge of the Price of the Slaves better than
private Men. And nothing can be easier than for the Senate to make Proclamation
for all that have Slaves to sell, to bring them in, and then buy them up for
the public Use.

And when they are bought, what should hinder any one from hiring them of the
State upon the same Terms they hire them from private Men? For we see that our
Revenues are farmed by particular Men, and the repair, and the building of our
public Structures and Temples (21.) are let out to private Undertakers.

And that the Public may be no loser by the Desertion of Slaves, or other
Accidents, the Adventurens in the Mines like the Farmers of our Revenue should
be obliged to give good Security to save the State harmless: Though at the same
time the Commonwealth may be much more easily cheated by the Farmers of their
Revenue, than by the Hirers of their Slaves.

For how is it possible to discover the Frauds that are committed in the
Management of the Public Money* there being no visible Distinction between
public and private Money* the same Materials, and Stamp being common to both.
But when our Slaves are burnt with the public Mark of the State, with severe
Penalties to be inflicted upon all that buy, or sell them; what Danger is there
of their being stole? Thus much of my Proposal as relates to the buying and
preserving our Slaves, appears practicable beyond all Contradiction.

If any one questions whether after we have purchased a great Number of
Workmen, there will be Adventurers enough to hire them of the Public, let him
consider, that the Undertakers who have a good Stock of Slaves will hire more
of the State; for the Mines are so great, that they will require a vast Number
of Hands to work them; and many of the Workmen that are grown old, and
unserviceable, and many others, Athenians, and Strangers whose Bodies are not
vigorous enough for Labor, yet would be willing to get their Living by easier
Callings, would turn Adventurers in the Mines, and hire our Slaves; so that
there is little danger of wanting Employment for our Workmen.

Twelve hundred Slaves, when bought, will probably in five or six Year's time,
produce a Revenue sufficient to purchase as many more as will make the Number
6000. This Number at the rate of ah Obolus a Day a Head, clear of all Charges,
will afford a Yearly Revenue of (22) sixty Talents.

And if but twenty of these Talents are laid out in the Purchase of more
Slaves, the City may employ the overplus as they think convenient; and when the
Number of Slaves is increased to 10000. it will produce a standing Revenue to
the Public, of a hundred Talents a Year.

To demonstrate that the Mines would take up a greater Proportion of Slaves to
work 'em, I appeal to the Authority of all these living Witnesses who remember,
what Numbers of Workmen were employed in them before the taking of (23) Decelea
by the Lacedaemonians. And our Silver Mines that have been wrought for so many
Ages, with such Numbers of Hands, and continue still so far from being drein'd,
or exhausted, that we can discover no visible difference in their present State
from the Accounts our Ancestors have delivered down to us, are undeniable
proofs of my Assertion.

And their present Condition is a good Argument that there never can be more
Hands at work in the Mines than there is Employment for: For we dig on still
without finding any Bottom or End of our Mines, or decay of the Silver-Oar.

And at this Day we may open new Mines as well as in former Ages, and no one
can determine whether the new Mines may not prove more Rich than the old Ones.

If any one demands why our Miners are not so forward in pursuit of new
Discoveries, as formerly, I answer, it is not long since that the Mines have
begun to be wrought afresh, and the present Adventurers are not rich enough to
run the Risque of such an Undertaking.

For if they discover a rich Mine their Fortunes are made, but if they fail,
they lose all the Charges they have been at; and this Consideration chiefly has
discouraged the Adventurers from trying so dangerous an Experiment.

But in Order to remedy this Difficulty, I have some (24) Proposals to offer to
the Public. There are Ten Tribes at Athens, and to each of these I would have
the Government assign an equal Proportion of their public Slaves, to be
employed in search of new Mines, and the gains to be equally divided in common
among all the Sharers in the Ten Tribes: For if the Mines were once settled
upon this Establishment, and the whole Undertaking carried on by a National
Stock, the Adventurers would run little Hazard; and if but one of the Ten
Tribes succeeded in the Attempt, the whole Community would be Gainers; and if
two, threes four or half the Tribes had the same good Fortune, the Profits
would be proportionably greater; for it is a wild Supposition, and against the
Experience of all Ages, to imagine that not One in Ten should succeed in such an
Undertaking.

Companies of private Adventures may carry on the same Trade in a Joint Stock,
nor is there any danger that they and the National Company will interfere one
with another, but as Confederates are strengthened by their mutual Assistance
to each other, so the more Adventurers of all kinds are employed in the Mines,
so much larger will the Gains, and Advantages be to all.

Thus have I briefly proposed some Considerations to the Public, for
establishing the Management of the National Revenue upon such an Institution as
shall make effectual Provision for the whole Body of our People.

Nor let any Man be discouraged from the Considerations of the vast Expense,
which will be necessary for the perfecting so great a Work: For there is no
Necessity that either the whole Design must be finished at once, or the Public
will receive no Advantage from it; Quite contrary, every Step we advance in our
Way, the State will gain Ground; and by the gradual Progress we make in our
public Buildings in the rigging out our Trading-Vessels, or in the Purchase of
our Slaves, the Commonwealth will be an immediate Gainer.

And it is certainly more for the Advantage of the Public to parcel out the
Design, and finish it by degrees: For when many Houses are building at once,
they cost more, and are worse built: In like manner, if we purchase our
Complement of Slaves all at once, we must pay more for them, and buy worse into
the Bargain.

But if we proceed gradually according to to our Abilities, we shall still have
the same Advantage of continuing any right Methods we pitched upon in the
Beginning, and shall be at liberty to correct the Oversights, and Mistakes we
made at our first setting out. And if we perfect some Parts of our Undertaking,
and delay the Execution of the rest, the Revenue arising from part of our
Design, which is finished, will be sufficient to answer the whole Expense of
the Remainder. But if we resolve to execute the whole Project at once, the
whole Charge of the Enterprise must be raised at once likewise.

And then the great Difficulty which will be objected to this whole Scheme is,
that in case the Public purchase so great a Number of Slaves, the Mines may
happen to be overstock'd; but there can be no Grounds for such an Apprehension,
if we take care every Year to employ no more than there is actually Occasion
for.

Thus I think the easiest Methods of finishing this Design are the best, and
most effectual. It may be objected that the immense Charges of this War have
exhausted our Treasure in such a manner, that 'twill be impossible for the
Public to raise any new Subsidies, much less to advance the Necessary Fonds
for such an Undertaking. But this Difficulty may be easily removed, for let the
State employ no more Money in the Administration of the Government the next
Year after we have a Peace, than the annual Income of the Public produced
during the War, and whatever additional Improvements of our Revenue are made by
the Peace, from the Encouragement of Strangers, and Merchants, from the
Increase of our Exportations, and Importations, occasioned by the resort of
more People, and from a greater Vent of Commodities in our Ports and Markets,
let all that be appropriated to this particular Service, in order to advance
the National Revenue.

If any One imagins that a War will ruin our Works, let him but consider that
the Execution of this Design, will enable us to meet a Foreign Invasion, with
so many Advantages on our side, that a War in such a Juncture will be less
formidable to us, than to our Enemies themselves.

For what Advantage can better enable us to carry on a vigorous and successful
War, than Numbers of Men? and by such an Addition to the Stock of our People,
as might be made by due care and encouragement; what Levies might be raised,
what mighty Fleets and Armies set out to disappoint all the Designs of our
Enemies?

And I have Reason to believe that it is possible to work our Mines in the
conjuncture of a foreign War, for they are covered on the South Sea, by a
strong Citadel in Anaphlystus, and on the North-Sea, by another in Thoricus and
these two Fortresses lie at a distance of but 60 Furlongs from one another.

And if a third Fort was built upon the top of a high Mountain, in the middle
of the two former, the three Works would meet together, and our Silver Mines
would be enclosed in a Circle, and guarded on all sides, and the Workmen at the
first Notice of an Invasion might retire to a Place of Security.

But if we are invaded with more Numerous Armies, our Enemies may make
themselves Masters of our Corn, Wine, and Cattle that lie without the Works;
but if they possess themselves of our Silver Mines, what can they find to carry
off more than a heap of Stones and Rubbish.

But how is it possible for our Enemies to make an Inroad upon our Mines? For
the City Megara, which lies nearest, is above 500 Furlongs from them; and
Thebes, which is nearer than any but Megara, is more than 600 Furlongs distant
from them.

If they advance to our Mines in a small Body from this side, they must leave
Athens behind them, and run the hazard of being cut off by our Horse, and
flying Parties; for it is a wild Notion to imagine that they will invade us with
their whole Force, and unguard their own Country, and leave it exposed to our
Inroads; for in such a Case, Athens would be nearer to their Cities than their
own Army.

But suppose they marched up to our Mines with a Numerous Army, how could they
Subsist for want of Provisions? If they forrag'd in small Parties, they would
be in danger of having their Conveys intercepted; if they forrag'd with their
whole Armies, they must act upon the defensive, and we should be the Aggressors.

The Revenue arising from our Slaves would not only make a considerable Article
in the Charge of maintaining our Citizens, but by the vast Concourse of People
from all Parts, the Customs of the Fairs, and Markets at the Mines, and the
Rent of our Public Buildings, and Melting-houses, and many other Heads would
produce a mighty Income to the State.

The State upon such an Establishment would be peopled with a prodigious Number
of Inhabitants, and the value of Lands at the Mines would be as high as those
that lie near Athens.

A pursuit of such Measures and Councils would not only in rich the City, but
introduce a habit of Obedience in the People; reform their Discipline, and
revive the Courage of the Nation.

For if upon this Improvement of our Revenue, a larger Allowance was
established for the maintenance of our Youth, they would be trained up to the
Art of War in our (25.) Public Academies with more exactness, and perform
their Military Exercises with a more regular Discipline, than the Racers in the
(26) Torch-Course are taught to observe. And our Troops in Garrison, and the
standing Guards of our Coasts, would do their Duty in their several Posts with
more cheerfulness, if any effectual Provision was settled for their subsistence.

If it be made appear that the Revenue of Athens can never be improved, or
advanced to the full height without a Peace, it may deserve the public
Inquiry, whether the Establishment of a (27) Council of Peace would not be for
the Benefit and Advantage of the State.

For the Institution of such a Magistracy, would invite more numerous
Settlements of Foreigners to make Athens the Place of their Abode.

For it is an absurd Supposition to imagine, that Peace will weaken our
Strength, and ruin our Authority, and Reputation abroad; for of all
Governments, those are happiest who have continued longest without War, and of
all Commonwealths, Athens lies fairest for flourishing, and increasing by the
Arts of Peace.

For Athens in time of Peace, is the great Theater to which all Mankind have
Occasion to resort: To begin with Merchants and Commanders of Ships, Where can
the Traders in Wine, Oil, Corn, or Cattle have a quicker Vent, or a better
Market for their Commodities than at Athens? Where can Mony'd Men make a better
Improvement of their Wealth; and, where is there greater Encouragement for
those who live by Arts of Invention and Ingenuity?

Where is there better Employment for Artificers, and Mechanic Trades? where
can the Sophists, Philosophers, Poets, and the Lovers of the Liberal Arts,
resort to a more renowned School of Learning, and Humanity? where is there a
nobler Scene to gratify the Curiosity of all Strangers that are delighted with
Divine Rights, and Institutions, and the celebrations of Religious Games, and
Festivals? And where can Merchants of all kinds whatsoever, find a better
Market to make quick Returns of their Money, than Athens.

If my Opposers acknowledge all this to be true, but still imagine that we can
never recover the Dominion of Greece but by a War, I desire them to look back
to the Persian Invasion, and examine, whether it was by Force of Arms, or our
good Offices to the Greeks, that we were placed at the Head of the (28.) Naval
Confederacy, and the Common Treasury of Greece.

And when by a Tyrannical Exercise of our Power we lost our Jurisdiction, by an
Alteration of our Measures, and a milder Administration, (29.) we were restored
to our ancient Authority by the joint Consent of all the Islands.

Did not the Thebans in Acknowledgement of our generous Assistance to their
State, place us at the Head of the Common (30.) Alliance? and our Rivals, the
Lacedaemonians, for the same Consideration, quitted their old Pretensions, and
suffered us to give Laws to the (31.) last Treaty, and dispose of the Supreme
Command of Greece at our own Discretion.

And at this Juncture in the general Confusion of Greece, we have the most
favorable Opportunity of recovering our ancient Dominion without Difficulty,
Hazard, or Expense, that ever any Nation had: For if we set up to be the Common
Mediators of Greece, and interposed our Authority to unite all the divided
Interests abroad, and reconcile all the Factions at home; and if by solemn
Embassies to all the Neighboring States, we declared for the Liberty of (32.)
Delphi, all Greece would support us at the Head of so Glorious a Cause, and
unite in a general Confederacy against the common Enemies (33.) who endeavored
to make themselves Masters of Delphi, when the Phocians were reduced to
Extremitry.

And if we afterward warmly interested our selves to establish a general Peace
by Sea, and Land; all Greece, next to the Security of their own Governments,
would desire the Preservation of Athens.

If any Man can have so wild a Notion, as to imagine, that War will contribute
more to the Increase of the Riches of the State than Peace, I know no better
way to decide the Controversy, than by appealing to the Experience of former
Ages, and producing Precedents to the contrary out of our own Story.

For upon inquiry he may find that the vast Treasure we had amassed in Peace,
was all consumed in our former Wars; and to quote Instances of a fresher Date,
in the present War all the Branches of our Income have been deficient, and what
Money came in upon the Public Fonds, has been all applied to the pressing
Occasions of the State; but since the Seas have been open, and our Trade free,
every Article of our Income is advanced, and the Government is at liberty to
employ it as they think convenient.

Not that I would advise the Commonwealth to sit down tamely by their Injuries
in case of a Foreign Invasion; but this I am sure of, that we should be better
enabled to revenge the Affront, if we are not the Aggressors, for our Enemies
will never be able to form a Confederacy to support them in an unjust War.

Upon the whole Matter, if nothing in this Proposal appears impossible, or
difficult, and if a pursuit of these Councils, and Resolutions, will gain the
Affections of Greece, and establish our Security at Home, and increase our
Reputation abroad: if the common People will abound in all things necessary for
Life, and the Rich be eased of their Taxes to the Wars: If in this Universal
Plenty our Temples will be rebuilt, and our Religious Festivals, and
Solemnities celebrated with more Magnificence: If our Walls, Docks, and
Arsenals will be repaired, and our Priests, Senate, Magistrates, and Cavalry,
restored to their ancient Rights and Privileges, is it not fit that all Engines
should be set at work to promote so glorious an Undertaking, that in our Days
we may see our Country established upon a solid Foundation of Security and
Happiness?

And if the Public, upon due consideration, thinks fit to execute these Orders
and Institutions, I would advise them to send Ambassadors to Delphi, and Dodona
to consult the Gods, whether such a Reformation of our Government would not
turn to the Advantage of the present Age, and the Benefit of all Posterity.

And if these Resolutions are ratified by the Divine Approbation, to consult
the Oracle once more, to the protection of what Gods we should recommend the
Success of this Enterprise, and then to propitiate those Gods we are directed
to apply to, in order to engage their Assisstance. And after this solemn
Invocation to enter boldly upon the Execution of this Design: For it is but
reason that all Undertakings should be attended with more favorable Success,
that are begun, and carried on, under the immediate Care and Protection of the
Divine Providence.

The End.
NOTES UPON THE TRANSLATION.
A Table of the Attick Coins reduced to the Value of English Money.
THE Obolus was equal to 1 d. 1 q. The Triobolus was three Oboli, and made 3 d.
3 d. The Dram was six Oboli, and made 7 d. 2 q. The Mina was an hundred
Drams, and made 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. The common Attick Talent consisted of sixty
Minae, which amounts in our Money to 187 l. 10 s.
These are the common Attick Coins, which are most frequently mentioned by
their Writers, and which I have reduced to our English Money, to make way for
the easier understanding of this Discourse.

Note (1.)

(...). The State of Athens was at a great Charge in maintaining the Common
People. They were allowed three Oboli a Man for every Cause they judged; and
this Pension was called the (...). Lucian. in bis accusato. And some days many
Thousands received this Pension.

The (...) was an Allowance of two Oboli a-piece, to pay for the Sight of
public Shows. Liba. in argu. Olyn. primae.

The (...) was an Obolus a-piece, paid them every time they assembled. Juli.
Poll. l. 6. c. 9. And this Pension was afterward increased to three Oboli.
Besides, all maimed and disabl'd Citizens had a Pension of two Oboli a day.
Harpocra. in verbo (...).

Note (2.)

Xenophon says only (...), but the Word (...) is plainly understood, as appears
from the Sequel of this Discourse, and Xenophon's Treatise of the Government of
Athens. This Tax upon the Confederates was at first but 400 Talents, but it was
afterward advanced to 1300. Plutar. in Vita Aristidis. This Tribute was so
burdensome, that it provoked the Confederates to frequent Revolts.

Note (3.)

(...), Aliens Duties. This was an annual Tribute paid by the Aliens, of twelve
Drams for every Man, and six for every Woman. Harpocra. in verbo (...). The
number of the Aliens amounted generally to 10000. Originally at Athens there
was no distinction between Strangers and Natives, for all Foreigners were
naturalized promiscuously. Thucyd. l. 1. c. 2. Thus all the Plataeans were
naturalized at once. Thucyd. l. 3. c. 55. And this Custom was the Foundation of
their future Greatness. But as the City grew more populous, they grew more
sparing of this Favor. Scholi. Thucyd. l. 1. c. 2. and this Privilege was
given to such only as had deserved it by some extraordinary Service to the
State. Demost. Oration contra Neaeram.

Note (4.)

Trades. (...) not (...). The Basil Edition reads it right; for most part of
the Mechanic and Handicraft Trades were carried on by the Aliens at Athens.
Xenoph. de polit. Athen.

Note (5.)

(...). Xenophon explains this Passage in his Hipparchicus, where he advivises
the State to inroll Aliens among their Horse. Besides the Dignity of the
Horse-Service, there was a considerable Pay in Peace and War allowed them.
Ulpianus in Timocrateam. Xenoph. in Hippar.

Note (6.)

Waste Ground. Vide Thucyd. l. 2. c. 17.

Note (7.)

(...). Every Alien by the Laws of Athens, was obliged to choose a private
Patron among the Citizens. Harpocration in verbo (...), but here Xenophon
proposes public Patrons for the whole Body of the Aliens.

Note (8.)

(...). Vide Demosthen. contra Macartatum.

Note (9.)

(...). The meaning of Xenophon is that the Athenian Money was more valuable
abroad than the Coin of any other Nation, because it was finer, and
consequently was worth more than its own weight of any other Silver that had
more Alloy in it. For it is impossible that an Ounce of Athenian Silver should
be worth more in Specie than an Ounce of other Silver of the same fineness.
Sensus moresque repugnant, atque ipsa utilitas.

Note (10.)

(...). This Court of Judicature was probably the same with the (...),
mentioned by Suidas and Hesychius, in verbo (...).

Note (11.)

(...). This was a right of Precedence in the Theaters, Senate, Assemblies of
the People, and in all public places whatsoever. Schol. Aristoph. in Equ. This
Custom was practiced by the Spartans, who gave this Privilege to the Deceleans.
Herodotus lib. 9. c. 72.

Note (12.)

(...), a Fond, Harpoc. Hesychius, in verbo (...).

Note (13.)

Hegesilaus commanded the Athenian Troops sent to the Assistance of the
Mantinaeans at the Battle of Mantinaea; which is a Proof that this Discourse
was writ after that Battle. Diog. Laer. in Xenoph. Diodorus Siculus by Mistake
calls him Hegelochus.

Note (14.)

(...). Salmasius de modo usurarum thinks that this was the (...) which the
People received for judging Causes. But Xenophon's Computation plainly confutes
this Opinion: He says that a Contributer of 10 Minae, or 1000 Drams, at the
rate of a Triobolus or half a Dram a Day, will in a Years time receive
almost the fifth part of the principal Money he advanced. Which is very true,
for reckoning (as Xenophon always does in this Discourse) 360 Days to the Year,
the Payment of a Triobolus a Day will amount to 180 Drachmae, which is near the
fifth part of 1000 Drachmae. But the payment of the (...) could never amount to
this Sum, because the Holydays, by the Confession of Salmasius, took up two
Months in the Year, and on these Days the People never heard Causes, so that 30
Drams must be deducted from 180, which reduces the Sum to 150, which is
little more than the seventh part of 1000. So that Salmasius is mistaken, or
Xenophon was a very loose Calculator. The true meaning of the Passage I take to
be this: Xenophon in the following part of this Discourse, in order to make
Provision for the Citizens, makes a Proposal to the State, to buy as many
Slaves as would treble the Number of their own Citizens, which Slaves were to
be let out at the rate of an Obolus a Day to the Adventurers in the Mines,
which brought in a Revenue of three Oboli a Day to every Citizen, because the
Slaves were thrice as many as the Citizens among whom this Revenue was to be
divided. And this I take to be the Triobulus mentioned by Xenophon, which every
Citizen was to receive in recompense for his Contribution.

Note (15.)

Nautick-Interest was the highest Interest, and is here opposed to
Land-Interest, which was considerably less. For in the former the Creditor run
a greater Hazard; for if the Merchant who borrowed the Money, and employed it
in Trade, lost his Ship, the Creditor lost his Money, and had no right to
demand it of the Merchant; a Trade somewhat like our Bottumry. This Interest
generally amounted to 20 per Cent. or the fifth part of the Principal per
annum. It Is true, it often varied, and was higher or lower according to the
Plenty and Scarcity of Money, or the Danger and Distance of the Voyage. But the
general Medium may be safely established at 20 per Cent. There are several
Contracts of Money lent upon Nautick-Interest, extant in the Orations of
Demosth. contra Lacrit. pro Phormi. contra Pant. contra Phormi.

Note (16.)

(...). More than a third part of the principal Money: For a Triobolus a Day in
a Year makes 180 Drachmae, which is above the third part of five Minae or 500
Drachmae. The (...) was the highest Nautick-Interest, and came to above 33 per
Cent. There is an Instance which comes very near this Computation, in the
Oration of Demosthenes contra Phormi.

Note (17.)

Almost double their Principal. For 180 Drachmae is almost double one Mina, or
100 Drachmae.

Note (18.)

Foreign Cities, etc. Foreign States often contributed to the Public Buildings
of the Greeks. The Rhodians when their Colossus was overturned by an
Earthquake, received Contributions from all the neighboring States in order to
restore it, Polybius, lib. 5. And there are many Inscriptions of such public
Benefactors extant in Gruterus, and elsewhere.

Note (19.)

That the Mines can never be exhausted. It Is plain from Pausanias that these
Mines were not worked in his Time. Paus. Attic. But this does not destroy the
Assertion of Xenophon, for the plundering the Temple of Delphi brought out two
Millions of our Money, which lay dead before; and the Conquest of Persia by the
Macedonians brought such a vast quantity of Silver into Greece, and
consequently made Labor so dear, that the Silver found in the Mines would in
all probability scarce countervail the expenses of the working them. Or it
might proceed from the Subjection of Athens to a Foreign Power, or from other
Accidents, and not from any decay of the Mines.

Note (20.)

(...). Upon the same Terms, etc. The State was the Proprietor of the
Silver-Mines, and Strangers or Athenians that worked in them, were obliged to
pay the same Tribute of the 24th Part of the Silver found, to the Public.
Suidas in (...).

Note (21.)

The repair of our Temple, etc. (...). 'Twas the Custom of the Greeks to let
out the building and repair of their Temples to private Undertakers. Athenaeus
l. 6. Herod. l. 5. c. 62. where he makes use of the same Word, (...); That is,
They hired the building of the Temple upon such Terms. And the Latins used the
Word conducunt in the same Sense. Conducunt foricas, i. e. Repurgandas.
Juvenal. Sat. 3.

Note (22.)

Revenue of 60 Talents. This Computation proves that Xenophon reckoned but 360
Days to the Year: For 6000 Oboli, multiplied by 360, make 2160'000 Oboli; which
Sum. divided by 600 (for 600 Oboli make a Mina) makes 3'600 Minae, which
divided by 60 (for 60 Minae make a Talent) reduces the whole Sum to 60 Talents.
And the following Computation of 100 Talents a Year, produced by 10000 Oboli a
Day, answers exactly to the former.

Note (23.)

The taking of Decelea, etc. Decelea was taken and fortified by the
Lacedaemonians in the 19th Year of the Peloponnesian War, and lying in the
Heart of Attica, it gave opportunity to 20000 Athenian Slaves to desert to the
Enemy. Thucyd. l. 7. c. 27.

Note (24.)

Xenophon in his former Proposal would have 10000 Slaves let out at a certain
Rate to the Adventurers in the Mines, but in this second, Proposal he advises
the State it self to adventure in search of Discoveries of new Mines, which
Work was to be carried on by another set of Slaves, and not by the former 10000.

Note (25.)

There were at Athens, and in other Parts of Greece, Military Academies or
Gymnasia, where the young Men exercised. Theophrastus de Blanditia Aristoph.
and Schol. in Equil. Xenoph. in 1, 2, 3, and 6th lib. de rebus Graec.

Note (26.)

(...). Torch-course. There was a Festival at Athens, on which a certain Number
of Men ran with lighted Torches in their Hands. Paus. Attic. To this Ceremony
Lucretius makes that fine Allusion in his 2d. Book,

Et quasi Cursores vitai lampada tradunt.

Note (27.)

(...). Council of Peace. This new Magistracy which Xenophon proposes to be
instituted for the Preservation of the Public Peace, was to be, in all
probability, like the (...) or Faeciales of the Romans, who were instituted by
Numa for the same considerations. Dion. Haicarn. lib. 2.

Note (28.)

(...). After the Persian invasion, the Athenians had the command of the
Confederate Fleet, and were made Treasurers of the Money contributed by the
Greeks to the carrying on the War against Persia. Thucydides, lib. 1.

Note (29.)

The Athenians recovered the Command of the Greek Islands, (which they lost in
the Peloponnesian War,) in the 4th Year of the 100th Olymp Diod. Sicul. lib. 15.

Note (30.)

This Alliance between the Thebans and Athenians, was made in the second Year
of the 96th Olympiad. Diod. Siculus. lib. 14. Xenophon lib. 3. de rebus Graec.

Note (31.)

This League between the Spartans and Athenians, was made in the 4th Year of
the 102d Olympiad, not long after the Battle of Leuctra. Diod. Sic. 1. 15.
Xenop. 1. 7. de rebus Graec.

Note (32.)

For the Liberty of Delphi. The Greeks made it a part of their Religion, to
preserve the Liberty of Delphi. Thus the Lacedaemonians entered into a War to
restore the Oracle to the Delphians. Thucyd. lib. 1. c. 112. And the first
Article of their Leagues, often began with a mutual Engagement on both Parts,
to protect the Liberty of Delphi. Thucyd. l. 4. c. 118. l. 5. c. 18. Besides
their Religion, they had Reasons of State for this proceeding: For if Delphi
were subject to a foreign Power, the Priestess might be forced to utter
whatever Oracles the Conqueror pleased to impose: Nor could the Resolutions and
Sentences of the Amphictyons, who often sat at Delphi, be free and unbiased
as long as Delphi was under a Foreign Dominion.

Note (33.)

If we knew who these Enemies were that designed to seize upon Delphi, it would
be no difficult Matter to determine exactly the Time when this Discourse was
written. Jason, the Tyrant of Thessaly, had formed a Design upon Delphi, but
his Death prevented the execution of it. Diod. Sic. Xenop. Hist. Graec. Aelian.
Frag. But this Passage cannot be understood to mean this attempt, for Jason was
assassinated in the third Year of the 102 Olymp. Some Years before the Battle
of Mantinaea, and this Discourse, as I have proved in a former Note, was
written after that Battle. I think that this Passage (taking the Word (...) in
a neutral Sense as I have rendered it, and for which there are a thousand
Authorities) ought to be understood of a Design the Thebans had formed upon
Delphi. The Story in short is this: The Thebans being engaged in a War with the
Phocians, upon some Dispute about a Frontier, formed a Design upon the Temple
of Delphi. Demost. de Falsa Legatione, Ulpianus. And the Phocians at the same
time being condemned by the Amphictlyons to pay a great Fine for plowing up
some Consecrated Land, the Greeks prepared to execute the Sentence by force of
Arms. The Phocians being unable to resist such an approaching Storm, were
reduced to great Extremities, and compelled for their own Preservation, to
seize upon the Treasures of Delphi: This gave beginning to the Holy War, and
all Greece engaged in the Quarrel. The Athenians assisted the Phocians, but
Xenophon advises them to break off that Alliance, and declare for the Liberty
of Delphi, and under that Plausible Pretense, to unite all Greece, against the
Thebans who were equally Criminal with the Phocians, (as Demosthenes observes)
for having formed the first Design upon the Temple. This Counsel he recommends
to the Athenians as the best Method to recover the Dominion of Greece. I know
it will be objected that Laertius places the Death of Xenophon in the first
Year of the 105th Olympiad, and the Phocian War breaking out some Years after,
it will be impossible to explain this Passage in my Sense. To this I answer,
that this Account of Laertius is certainly false: For Xenophon, in his Greek
History, mentions the Death of Alexander the Tyrant of Pherae, which happened,
as Diodorus observes, in the 4th Year of the 105th Olymp. so that Xenophon must
be a Prophet, or be alive at that time, three Years after his supposed Death.
Xenophon likewise in the conclusion of his Greek History affirms, that after
the Battle of Mantinaea, Greece was in a greater Disorder and Confusion than
ever. But we read of no considerable Commotion in Greece till the breaking out
of the Holy War, in the 1st Year of the 106th Olymp. which engaged all Greece
in an intestine Division.

To confirm this Account of Laertius, it may be urged, that Xenophon living 90
Years, according to Lucian in Macrob. and being present at the Battle of
Delium, which was sought in the first Year of the 89th Olympiad, about 67 Years
before the Holy War, it is highly improbable that he was living at the time of
the Holy War. It Is true, Laerrius says that Socrates saved Xenophon's Life at
that Battle: But Athenaeus l. 5. says that Socrates was not at the Battle; and
it is probable that the other part of the Story of Xenophon's being there, may
be equally sabulous, especially if what Athenaeus (according to Casaubon's
Correction) says be true, that Xenophon was but a Boy at the Banquet of
Callias, which was three Years afterward. Besides he is called a Young Man in
his Expedition into Asia; but at this rate he must have been 50 Years old at
that time, an Age at which a Man cannot properly be called young.

But granting that he was present at the Battle of Delium, if we allow him to
be 18 Years old, the Age, if I mistake not, that the Athenians usually made
their first Campaign, he would be but 81 Years old on the first Year of the
105th Olympiad, and consequently might write of the Holy War, which broke out
four Years afterward. Nor does Lucian precisely limit his Age to 90 Years
only, but says he lived, above 90 Years.

Xenophon in this Discourse says, that the Athenians had been engaged in a War
by Sea and Land; that the War by Sea was at an end, but the War by Land still
continued. This exactly agrees with the Bellum Sociale, or the War of the
Athenians against their revolted Islands, which was carried on by Sea, and
begun in the third Year of the 105th Olympiad, and ended in the second Year of
the 106th Olympiad, two Years after the breaking out of the Holy War, which the
Athenians were then engaged in.

By this Account Xenophon writ this Discourse about the third Year of the 106th
Olympiad, a Year after the Conclusion of the Peace with the Islands.

If the Account of Xenophon's Death in Laertius be true, I cannot believe this
Work to be genuine; for I believe it almost impossible to explain this Passage
in any other sense. But the Authority of all the Writers who ascribe this
Discourse to Xenophon, and the Conformity of the Style with the rest of his
Works, and that Character of Piety which runs through the whole Piece, which is
so peculiar to the Works of Xenophon, and that particular Maxim at the
Conclusion of this Treatise, of undertaking every thing under the Favor and
Protection of the Gods, which he inculcates in all his Works, and particularly
at the end of his (...), are undeniable Proofs that this Discourse is Genuine.

The End of the Notes.
BOOKS sold by James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French Armies 56 years.
Translated by Charles Cotton Esquire; Fol.

Sir William Temple's Memoirs. 8vo.

Scarron's Novels, 8vo.

Processus Integri in morbis fere omnibus curandisa Do. Th. Sydenham
Conscripti, 12 s.

Dr. Sydenham's Practice of Physic, faithfully translated into English, with
large Annotations, Animadversions, and Practical Observations on the same. By
W. Salmon, M. D. 12 s.

Wingate's Arithmetic, 8vo. 9th Edition.

Scrivener's Directions to a holy Life 8vo.

A learned Treatise of the Situation of the Terrestrial Paradise. Written by
Monsieur Huet, done into English.

Quadriennium Jacobi, or the History of the Reign of King James II. from his
coming to the Crown, to his desertion: The second Edition.

A new Method of curing all sorts of Fevers, without taking any thing by the
Mouth; being a new Prescription for giving the Bark in Clysters, whereby all
the Inconveniences of administering it in any other form are avoided, and a more
speedy and certain Cure is obtained. By A Helvet, M. D. 12 s. 2d Edit.

The Governor of Cyprus, 12s. a Novel.

The wanton Friar, 12 s. a Novel.

Cornel. Nepos in usum Delph. 8vo.

Syllabus musculorum Humani Corporis: In sex praelectionibus ut hodie in
Theatro Anatomico Chirurgorum Londinensium distinctus.

The Artificial Clock-maker; a Treatise of Watch and Clock-Work, wherein the
Art of calculating Numbers for most sorts of Movements, is explained to the
Capacity of the Unlearned; also the History of Clock-Work both Ancient and
Modern, with other useful matters never before published, 8vo. By J. D. A. M.

The History of the Inquisition of Goa, done into English by the ingenious Mr.
Wharton, 4to.

Russel's Treatise of Physic, 8vo. Bp. Taylor's Life of Christ, fol. Elis de
Articulis, 12mo. Mori Ethica, 12mo.
Poetry and Plays.
Ben. Johnson's Works, fol. Sir Robert Howard's Plays. The E. of Orrerey's
Plays, fol. Dryden's Juvenal, 8vo. Milton's Paradise lost and regained, fol. --
Poetical Works with Notes. Prince Arthur. And King Arthur. Ovid's Epistles by
several Hands, 8vo. Dryden's Miscellany Poems. Mr. Shadwell's Plays, bound or
single. Mr. Otway's Plays, bound or single. Mr. Lee's Tragedies, bound or
single.
And all other Modern Plays.


