THE Hearts-Index. OR Self-Knowledg: Together with I. The wonderful Change that
the Word and Spirit, do work upon the Heart, when a Sinner is converted. II.
The excellency of Grace above Nature. III. The Safety and Calm of such as have
sued out their pardon in Christ.


By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in Essex.

Imprimatur

Ex Aed. Sab. Aug. 8, 1663. Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Patr.
Gilb. Epist. Land. a Sac. Domest.



Section I.

PRobable it is, that that medicine which has cured one desperate Patient, if
it be communicated, may work the same effect upon others; the concealment
whereof, would argue in a Physician, either too much lucre, or too little love.
However, the conscience of good intentions in themselves (let their success be
what it will) is both a discharge and comfort to a free and willing mind.

A fine wit, and a Christian will, is like the little Be, that will not off
the meanest flower, until she has made somewhat of it: whereas an unsanctified
heart, will ( spider-like) suck poison from the choicest of flowers.

Every line of God's word shall add finew to the virtuous mind; and withal
heal that vice, which would be springing in it. But with the carnally minded,
it is far otherwise. The same report, wherewith the spirit of Rahab melts,
hardens the King of Jericho, Josh. 2. Sergius Paulus was converted, Elimas
obdurated, at the same Sermon, Acts 13. that one hard saying of our Savior,
John 6. like a file sharpened eleven of his Apostles; while it so blunted the
rest of his Disciples, that many of them murmured, and from that time went
back, and walked no more with him, verse 66, etc. Whence observe, that as all
bodies, are not equally apt to be wrought upon, by the same medicine; so are
not all souls by the same means of Grace. One remains obstinate and refractory,
whiles others are pliable.

Sin and Satan, have no Servants but the simple. As for instance: A wise man
hearing in what a dangerous condition he is in, by reason of original and
actual sins, and how God is so incensed with wrath and indignation against him,
that he means utterly to destroy him, if he go on in his impenitency; foreseeth
the evil of Hell, and preventeth it, by departing from his evil ways: but
fools go on and are careless, Prove. 22.3. and 14.16. Stark fools indeed: For if
their eyes were opened, to see in what a condition, they are content at present
to continue in; they should need no entreaty, to turn their course another way.
Luther says, that if a man could perfectly see his own evils, and the misery
that attends them, the fight thereof would be a perfect Hell unto him: and this
indeed might prove to be his way to Heaven; For then, and not till then, a man
sees what need he has of a Savior; and then he begins tightly to prize the
joys of Heaven, when he sees he has escaped the Flames of Hell, which those
fools before spoken of, never mean to do, because they think themselves wise,
good, happy, and what not? The case of all men by Nature. And until that vail
or curtain which is drawn over their hearts, be removed, and taken away by
unseigned repentance, and turning to the Lord, they remain stark blind to all
saving truths, as the Apostle plainly sets down, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
See Rev. 3.17. 1 Timothy 6.4. And the truth is, were it not for pride and
Ignorance (springing hence) every man would make it his main business, to work
out his salvation with fear and trembling. But to proceed, for this is but an
excursion, let in, by way of a parenthesis, and in zeal for their good; that
desire not their own. The Ninivites by harkening to Jonah, and those murderers
of the Lord of Life, by listening to Peter, were converted and saved, Jonah 3.4,
5. Acts 2.37. Wax (we know) yields sooner to the seal, than steel to the
stamp.

Sect. 2. Of Hearers, there are usually four sorts, as our Savior shows, in
the Parable of the seed, Mat. 13.3, to 24. As first, An honest and good heart,
will not return from hearing the Word unbettered: yea, he will so note what is
spoken to his own sin, that it shall increase his knowledge, and lessen his
vices. As who (by looking in a glass) shall spy spots in his face, and will not
forthwith wipe them out? A wise man will not have one sin twice repeated unto
him; Yea, he more rejoices, in being overcome with a wise and gracious advice,
then he would have rejoiced in a revengeful victory. Of which we have a rare
example, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. A true argument of an ingenuous nature. Whereas
those that will not hearken to, nor obey the voice of Christ, but rage and
storm; are more stubborn than the wind and sea, Luke 8.24, 25. enough to make
them blush blood, when told of it. But

Secondly, Another sort of Hearers, are like Tully's strange soil; much rain
leaves them still as dry as dust. Or the Wolf in the Emblem, which though it
sucked the Goat, kept notwithstanding his Woolfish nature still. And indeed,
until the spirit of God meekens the soul, say what you will, it minds nothing,
or nothing to purpose. Whatever an impenitent sinner hears, it presently passes
away, like the sound of a Bell that is rung. Let testimonies and examples never
so much concern them, it makes an impression but skin, or ear deep: For as in
an hourglass or conduit, that which in one hour runs in the same in another
hour runs out again. Who may be resembled to the Smiths Iron, put it into
the fire it is much softened, but put it into the water it is harder than before.

Thirdly, Another sort will very orderly hear the Word, and delight in it,
until it comes home to their consciences, touches their Copy hold (as John
served Herod) but then they will turn their backs upon it, as the Jews served
our Savior, John 6.66. the Athenians, Paul, Acts 17.16, to 34. and Ahab,
Micaiah, 1 Kings 228. Now these that will not hear an untoothsome truth, but
turn their backs upon and fly from instruction. Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. not only
declare themselves to be guilty persons (for he confesses the fact, who to
judgment turns his back: And it is only the weak sighted, that cannot abide
the light) but it proves them to be out of all hope to become better. For that
sin is past cure, which turns from, and refuses the cure, Deuteronomy. 17.12. Prove
29.1. 1 Samuel 2.25. 2 Chronicles. 25.16. turn to the places. And take this for a
Rule, if ever you see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a wilful
murderer.

Sect. 3. Fourthly and lastly, (for I pass by those blocks; that can hear the
Word powerfully delivered for twenty or thirty years together, and mind no more
the spirituality of the matter, than the seats they fit on, or the stones they
tread on.) There are a generation of hearers, who being told the naked truth,
plainly reproved for their sins, shown the judgments of God, and the due of
what they deserve, and are like to undergo, if they go on, to the end they may
repent and believe, that so they may be saved, will ( Ahab like) carp, and
fret, and chafe, and fume, and swell; and spurn, against the very Word of God,
and be ready to burst again for being so sharp and searching; and thereupon
persecute the Messenger, as Herodias did John, and the Pharisees, Christ. They
love application as dearly, as a Dog does a cudgel. So that like Adders, they
are not only deaf to the Charmer, but like Slow-worms, they hiss, and then turn
their tails to sting him.

Gods holy precepts and prohibitions harden them; as the Sun hardens clay, and
water hot iron. Or else they inrage them, as a furious mastiff Dog, is the
madder for his chain. But when it comes to this, that men spurn at the means,
and are hardened with the word, as steel is hardened with strokes; or as Bulls
grow mad with baiting: the best way is to leave them to their Judge, who has
messengers of wrath, for them that despise the messengers of his love, Psalm.
81.11, 12. See Luke 10.10, 11. Prove. 29 and 1.24, 25, 26, to 33. 2 Chronicles. 25.16
20. 1 Samuel 2.25. And in reason, herbs that are worse for watering, trees that
are less fruitful for digging, dunging, pruning, are to be rooted out, or hewed
down And to admonish them is to no more purpose, than if one should speak to
lifeless stones, or senseless plants, or witless beasts: for they will never
fear any thing, till they be in Hellfire. Wherefore God leaves them to be
confuted with fire and brimstone, since nothing else will do it.

Sect. 4. Thus you see what a wonderful difference there is in Hearers! Only
herein they agree, all men (good and bad) love the light as it shines; but the
most of men hate it, as it discovers and directs. But the difference is so
great, that it is admirable to think, how some men would not be prevailed
withal, though an Angel should be sent unto them from the dead. And yet with
what small means some others have been converted, as were Justin the
Philosopher, Ciprian the Nicromancer, Saint Austin, Fulgentius, Francisco
Junius, Malancton, Adrianus, Latimer, and many others.

One treating upon the Prodigal son, and the Thief upon the Cross, mentions two
famous strumpets, that were suddenly converted by this only argument, that God
sees all things, even in the dark, when the doors are shut, and the Curtains
drawn; and Mountaigne tells of a Gallant, that (sporting with a Curtezan in a
house of sin) happened to ask her name, which she said was Mary; whereat he was
so stricken with reverence and remorse, that he instantly both cast off the
Harlot, and amended his whole future life. And indeed no means can be too weak
where God intends success: yea, a thought only has sometimes served the turn.
Nor needs there any more to a clarified understanding, than the bare thought of
Gods Omnipresence, Omnisciency, or Omnipotency; as being present every where,
knowing every thought and intent of the heart, and being almighty to punish or
reward evil and good

Sect. 5 And so much of the kinds of hearers Only a Question or Scruple may
hereupon arise. The Minister or Author out of compassion to their precious
souls, would show them from Gods Word, the very faces of their hearts, and like
Peter to Cornelius, Acts 11. tell them that, whereby (with blessing from above)
they might be saved, verse. 14. the which some do kindly entertain, as Lot did
those Angels that came to fetch him out of Sodom, Genesis 19. Others as churlishly
reject, and as villainously entreat and handle them, as the Ammonites did
David's messengers, 2 Samuel 10.4. Wherein (may some say) lies the difference?

Answ. I could give you sundry Reasons of it, I Will only name a few, being
enjoined to contract all my matter into two sheets.

First, Will makes the difference, and who makes the difference of wills, but
he that made them? He that creates the new heart, leaves a stone in one bosom,
puts flesh into another; and yet if God denies his grace, it is only when he
sees it contemned: As God oftentimes is so provoked, by their obstinate
hardness and impenitency, that he gives them over to Satan, and up to the
hardness of their own hearts, to be led by their lusts, and to walk in their
own counsels; as it is, Psalm. 81.12. Romans 1.24, 26. So that not God, but our
selves, are the authors of sin, and of our own damnation, as it is, Hos. 13.9.
Of which, more in its due place.

Secondly, The holy Word of God, which is Spirit and Life, is so quick,
powerful and operative, that it will have its effect: where it does not
quicken, it kills. None ever heard it, but they were either better or worse by
it. It is a holy fire; those whom it does not purify and cleanse, by melting
into repentance, it does consume and destroy by burning, into the ashes of
profaneness here, of confusion hereafter. It is the power of God unto
salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. And a sweet savor of life
unto life, to them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2.16. But it becomes the savor of
death unto death, unto such as wrest and pervert the same to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. And no marvel, for the same cause may have diverse and
contrary effects, in respect of sundry objects, as might be exemplified in the
Sun, the wind, the same breath out of one mouth, the earth; the stomach, the
rain, etc. as might be largely shown. In one garden, grows an hundred kinds of
herbs of several operations and qualities; some nutritive, others infective;
yet they all draw their juice from one and the same Earth. Every Member
receives nourishment from the stomach; yea, the same meat in the stomach? but
that which the Liver receives becomes blood, that which the Gaul receives
becomes cholar, that which the Lungs receive becomes fleam, and that which
passes into the paps becomes milk: So all receive the same good Word of God,
but every one does not make the same use of it. For as one has his faith
strengthened by it, his patience increased, his judgment rectified, his will
reformed, his life and practice amended, his love and zeal inflamed: so fares
it with wicked men, in respect of the contrary vices, etc. Again, the Word of
God, is like a fructifying dew or rain, which falls not upon any ground in
vain. If these Celestial showers, fall into the Garden of a good heart, they
raise up herbs and flowers; if in a field, corn or grass; whereas if they fall
on clay, they make but dirt; yea, the more rain, the more dirt: If upon
kennells, or dunghils, a stink. Or if they produce any fruit, it is Weeds
instead of herbs; or perhaps briars and thorns, to scratch and wound the
Husbandman that dresses it. Thus I might go on, and show you how the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, is recieved by one to salvation, by another to his greater
damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. The cloudy pillar, which gave light, and was a defense
to Israel, became darkness and offense to the Egyptians, Exodus 14 20. And the
like of Manna, Exodus 16 20. The Ark the Red Sea, and sundry the like which I
might weary you with. Yea, Christ himself, who is a Rock to save all that
believe in him, shivers his enemies in pieces, Mat. 21.44. And immortality, the
greatest blessedness of the Saints, is the greatest misery to the damned. No
wonder then, if these Spiders, those Bees; the wicked and the godly, suck, the
one honey, the other poison from the self fame flower of holy Writ.

Sect. 6 Thirdly, Another reason why they so swell against their reprehender,
is their guiltiness. And it is a sure sign the horse is gauled, that stirs too
much when he is touched. In the Law of jealousies, if the suspected wife were
guilty, that drank of the bitter waters of trial, she would presently swell: if
otherwise, she was well enough, Numb. 5.27. Nor did you ever hear of any that
were offended with wholesome truth for being untoothsom, that disliked the
Minister for being too sharp and searching, but evil minds. But as good meats
are unwelcome to sick persons: so is good counsel to obstinate and resolved
sinners. Unfound flesh loves to be stroaked, the least roughness puts it into a
rage. Bad wares would have dark shops, Thieves will put out all the lights,
that in the dark they may more securely rifle the house, John 3.19.20, 21. So
the conscience that is guilty of flagitious crimes, could wish the Heavens
blind.

Fourthly, No wicked man can endure to hear the downright truth: For then they
must also hear the sentence of their own condemnation. What the Minister
delivers is the very Word by which they are judged and condemned, therefore
they loath as much to hear it, as the Prisoner at the Bar does abhor to hear
his sentence from the just judge. And indeed, if many (as we well know by
experience) love not to hear the worst of their temporal causes and cases, nor
yet of their bodily distempers, with which their lives or estates be
endangered; how much more will wicked men decline from seeing their heinous
abominations, and themselves guilty of Hell and eternal damnation? though
thereof, there be an absolute necessity, if ever they be saved.

Sect. 7. And so much of the Reasons. From all which we may learn not to impute
the cause of wicked men's raging, to any miscarriage in the messenger: for he
may vindicate himself as Paul did, 1 Cor. 7.10. I have not spoken, but the
Lord. And therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Acts 9.4. that he persecuted
him: So they which reject any truth delivered out of the word, do resist God
himself, and not his messenger. And this for certain were Christ himself their
Minister, they would much more oppose and persecute him, as the Priests and
Pharisees did, when they heard him.

Yea, consider it rightly, and you will grant, that there cannot be a greater
honor done to a poor minister, than this. For, what says one of the Fathers?
It may well be doubted that ministers open not the Word aright, when wicked men
kick not against it. Yea, says Luther, To preach the Gospel as we ought, is to
stir up all the furies of Hell against us. And what says our Savior himself
to his Apostles, in their pupil-age? The World cannot hate you, but me it
hates; because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil, John 7.7.
And so touching Paul, who had never become their enemy, but for telling them
the truth, and dealing so plainly, and so roundly with them. Nor can there be
such an argument, that a Minister studies more to profit, than to please men
with his wholesome counsel; as when he will not let them sleep and snort in
their sins, but cry aloud against their abominations.

Secondly, We may learn from the premises, that if any receive the Word with
readiness, and become new creatures by hearing the same: not to attribute, or
ascribe the praise thereof to the parties converted, or to the means or to the
instrument; but to God, who is the Author, and gives the blessing. For Paul may
plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God only that gives the increase. It is
God alone that gives words unto the wise, and virtue unto their words, 1 Cor.
3.5, 6, 7. And he will give success to whom, when, and as he pleases. Even
twelve mean Fishermen, when he pleases, shall without force, or weapon,
armor, bands of men, or stroke stricken, subdue the whole world to their King!
Hillary found not seventeen believers, and left not so many unbelievers in the
whole City.

Indeed in these days, Ministers may tear their throats, spend their lungs,
and force their sides, in suing to' a deaf world, and say, when they have done
all they can, Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? Yea, how many painful Peter's have complained to fish all night, and
catch nothing? Many professors, and few converts, has been the lot of the
Gospel in these last times, and since our means has exceeded. Gods house (as
the streets of Jericho) may be thronged, and yet but one Zacheus gained to the
faith. And why so? but for this cause; if some few like the Be, do gather from
the Word, whatsoever adds to their knowledge and virtue: the greatest number,
use the same as some do artificial teeth, more for show, than service; more for
ability of discourse than activity of practice; to talk of it, than to walk by
it. Whence it is, that God utters his saving truths, as it were in Parables; so
hiding them from the wise and prudent (namely the proud, that are wise in their
own Eyes) and reveals them to babes and sucklings, (that is, the humble and
lowly) as Austin speaks.

Sect. 8. Which being so, let not him that has five Talents, despise him that
has but two: Even those great lights of Heaven, the Sun and Moon, take not
away the necessity of lamp light. To the making of the Tabernacle, fine linen,
and Goats hair, had their use; as well as gold, silver, and precious stones.
And the same God that gave proportion to the Cedar, gave also being to the
Mushroom.

Nor is the strength or weakness of means, either spur or bridle to the
determinate choises of God; who not seldom does greatest acts, by weakest
agents. He chose David's sling, rather than Saul's sword, to conquer Goliath Frogs
Grasshoppers, and Lice, rather than Bears and Lions, to fight against Pharaoh.
Yea, he that with Rams horns overthrew the Walls of Jericho, has sometimes
chosen vile and weak means, to serve himself by, in great matters. Peter has a
Cock to tell him of his cowardice. And Balaam an Ass, to reprove his avarice.
Yea, that God, who will bless where he pleases; now and then gives the greater
success to the weaker means. The men of Nineveh repented at the preaching of
Jonas: yet not the Jews, at the preaching of Christ, who was greater then
Jonas. The Apostles did greater signs in Christ's Name, than Christ himself,
Joh. 14.12. It was a greater miracle, that the shadow of St. Peter ( as he
walked in the street) should heal many sick persons, Acts 5.15, 16. than that
the hem of Christ's vesture should heal one single woman of her bloody Issue,
Mat. 9.21, 22. Who then can cavil, or indeed wonder, at the ensuing story the
which I am now to relate?

Yea, who that has either heart or brain, shall well consider this preceding
matter, and the difference of Hearers, and not be forced to acknowledge that
which follows, to be the case of every one that shall hear it, be they what
they will? I mean before their hearts are renewed with the power of Gods word,
which is the strong arm of the Lord, and the mighty power of God to salvation.
Romans 1.16. And the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. And like as a fire, or an
hammer that breaks even the Rock in pieces, Jer 23.29, 30. And that
irresistible Cannon-shot, that is mighty to beat down all the strong holds of
sin and Satan, 2 Cor. 10.4. Quick and powerful, and sharper than any two edged
sword, and pierces even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow; and to the discerning of the very, thoughts, and most
secret intents of the heart, Heb. 4 12.

Sect. 9. And look to it, for if thou do not see and acknowledge the very
secrets of thy heart to be clearly laid open to thy conscience, in the one or
other, first or last of these ensuing Characters: I dare peremptorily conclude,
That Satan the God of this world, has blinded thy mind, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine unto thee,
2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 These. 2.9.10, 11. 1 Timothy 4.2.

But this is the misery! and a just plague upon our so much ignorance,
formality, and profaneness, under our so much means of Grace: there be very few
men, that make not the whole Bible, and all the Sermons they hear: yea the
checks of their own Consciences, and the motions of Gods spirit utterly
ineffectual; for want of wit and grace, to apply the same to themselves, as
they can unto others; being better able to discern others meats, than their own
beams.

If you question what Satan can do in this case? Look upon what he has done to
others, as wise, and as good, as the best of us. I Will give you instances, both
of the godly and wicked, and likewise Testimonies: I pray mind them seriously,
and turn to the places, for they are exceeding considerable. In the first place
take notice, how he blinded and deluded Ahabs four hundred Prophets, 1 Kings
22.22. And Judas, John 13.2. And all Magistrates, when they persecute the
people of God, Rev. 2.10. And indeed all men in their natural estate; whereof
not a few, think they do God good service, in persecuting and killing the
Prophets; as our Savior expressly tells us, John 16 2. But see other particular
instances, as that of Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.3. Then for the godly, how he
has blinded and beguiled them, as our first Parents, Adam and Eve; Eve by
himself, and Adam by making her his instrument; and that in the state of
innocence, when they had wit at will, Genesis 3. And holy David, a man after Gods
own heart, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Then Peter, who so dearly loved Christ, Mat. 16.22,
23.

And having this done, argue thus with thy self; If Satan so blinded and
besotted these; if he made such use of all these, whereof some were the best
and wisest of Gods children and servants, who hate the very appearance of evil,
1 These. 5 22. Jude 23. Ephesians. 5.27. 2 Pet 3.14. James 1.27. Have the eye of
faith, and the spirits direction, and know the mind of Christ above others, 1
Cor. 2.12, to 17. John 10.14. How much more can he work the same upon his own
children and servants? that delight only in wickedness, and are ignorant of
Satan's wiles, as not having the least knowledge or ability to discern spiritual
things, 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 4 4.

But if you still question the truth of this, turn to Joh. 14.30. and 12.31.
Genesis 3.15. John. 8.44. 2 Timothy 2.20. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. which are such clear
testimonies, that none (who shut not their eyes against the light) can gainsay,
Mat. 13.15.

Which being so, in reading this ensuing Dialogue or Index of the heart, Make
the application to your selves and not to others; as David did Nathans parable,
2 Samuel 12.1, to 8. And Ahab the Prophets, 1 Kings 20.39, to 43. which yet
concerned no less then their own lives And so much the rather, for that in all
probability, what this will not effect touching your amendment no ordinary
means are like to do. As what can be further expected? No glass can more
lively represent your faces, than this Book does your hearts, if you be yet in
your natural condition, unregenerate. Neither can you look that Christ Jesus
himself should call to you severally by name, as he did to Saul; for now we
have the Gospel written at large: Visions and Miracles cease. Or put case
Christ himself should do so, I question whether you would be any more warned,
or reclaimed by it, than Hazael was, when the Prophet told him, what abominable
wickedness he should shortly commit, 2 Kings 8.12, 13, etc. Yea, Abraham tells
Dives the contrary, Luke 13 31. And so I come to the Conference it self.

Sect. 10. A loose Libertine meeting with his friend that had lately been a
formal Christian, he greets him as follows:

Sir! Me thinks I have observed in you a strange alteration, since our last
meeting at Middleborough: not only in your behavior, company, and converse?
but even in your countenance: What is the matter if I may be so bold?

Convert. Truly Sir, you are not at all mistaken, nor am I unwilling to
acquaint you with the cause, if you can afford to hear it.

Soon after my return into England, I was carried by a friend to hear a Sermon,
where the Minister so represented the very thoughts, secrets, and deceitfulness
of my heart unto my conscience, that I could not but say of him, as the Woman
of Samaria once spoke of our Savior; He has told me all things that ever I
did. Which made me conclude with that unbeliever, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. That God
was in him of a truth: nor could he ever have so done, if he were not of God,
as the Young man in the Gospel reasoned with the Pharisees, touching Jesus,
when he had opened his eyes that had been blind from his birth, John 9.32, 33.
Whereupon I could have no peace nor rest, until I had further communed with him
about my estate; for I found my self in a lost condition touching Eternity: It
faring with me, as it did with those Jews, Acts 2. when Peter by his searching
Sermon had convinced them, that Christ, whom they had by wicked hands crucified
and slain, was the only Son of God, and Lord of glory, verse 36, 37. And
having had the happiness to enjoy the benefit of his sage advice, as I stood in
need thereof, ( God having given him the tongue of the learned to administer a
word in season to them that are weary, Isa. 50.4.) I bless God his word and
spirit has wrought in me such a change and strange alteration, that it has
opened mine eyes that were blind before, inclined my will to obedience, which
before was rebellious, softened my heart, sanctified, and quite changed my
affections: so that I now love that good which before I hated, and hate that
evil which before I loved; and am delighted with those holy exercises, which
heretofore did most displease me; and am displeased with those vain pleasures
and filthy sins which in times past did most delight me. Which is such a mercy,
that no tongue is able to express! for till that hour, I went on in the broad
way, and worlds road to destruction, without any mistrust, whereas now God has
been pleased to take me into his kingdom of grace here, and will never leave
me, until he has brought me to his kingdom of glory hereafter.

Loose Libertine. What you speak makes me wonder: for I ever held you the
compleatest man of my acquaintance; just in all your dealings, temperate and
civil in your deportment; yea, I have never seen you exceed in the least, nor
heard you swear an oath, except faith and truth, and that very rarely. Besides
you have been a good Protestant, and gone to Church all your days.

Convert. What you speak, none that know me can contradict; nor could they ever
accuse me of any scandalous crime, or unjust act. Yea, I had the same thoughts
of my self; and should any one have told me formerly, that I was such a great
sinner, such a devil incarnate as I was! I should have replied as Hazael did to
the Prophet (telling him of the abominable wickedness he would ere long commit)
What am I a dog, etc. 2 Kings 8.12, 13. And no wonder, for as every man in his
natural condition is stark blind to spiritual objects, 1 Cor. 2.14. so the
heart of man is deceitful above all things: even so deceitful, that none but
God alone can know it, as the Prophet shows, Jer. 17.10. But because this is a
truth that transcends your belief, and because it may be of singular use to you
also, to know the same: I will give you a short character of my former
condition; the which done, I doubt not but you will assent unto what I have
hitherto said, or shall further relate.

Sect. 11. First, Touching my knowledge, (I mean saving knowledge, without which
the soul cannot be good, as wise Solomon witnesses, Prove. 19.2.) it was such,
though I thought my self wiser than to make scruple of, or perplex my self
about matters of Religion, as do the religious: even as the King of Tyrus
thought himself wiser than Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.3. that spiritual things were
mostly represented to my understanding false, and clean contrary to what they
are indeed. Like corporal things in a looking glass, wherein those that are on
the right hand seem to be on the left, and those that are on the left hand seem
to be on the right. As it fared with St. Paul; while he was in his natural
condition, Acts 26.9. which made me think and call evil, good; and good, evil;
bitter, sweet; and sweet, bitter; to justify the wicked, and condemn the just,
as the Prophet complains, Isa. 5.20, 23.

As for instance, I most sottishly thought, that I both loved and served God as
I ought; yea, I should have taken it in foul scorn, if any one had questioned
the same; when indeed I was a traitor to God, and took up arms against all that
did worship him in spirit and in truth. I was so far from loving and serving
him, that I hated those that did it; and that for their so doing. I could also
hear him blasphemed, reproached, and dishonored, without being once stirred or
moved at it. I loved him dearly, but I could never afford to speak a word for
him: And likewise his Children entirely; but instead of justifying them, or
speaking in their defense when I heard them scoft, scorned and abused by wicked
and ungodly men; all my delight was to jear at, slight and slander them
wherever I came. I more feared the Magistrate, than I feared God, and more
regarded the blasts of men's breath, then the fire, of Gods wrath. I chose
rather to disobey God, than to displease great ones; and feared more the worlds
scorns, than his anger.

And the like of Christ that died for me; a strong argument that I loved
Christ, when I hated all that resembled him in holiness. Yea, I so hated
holiness, that I most bitterly hated men for being holy: insomuch that my blood
would rise at the sight of a good man, as some stomachs will rise at the sight
of sweetmeats. I was a Christian in name, but I could scoff at a Christian
indeed. I could honor the dead Saints in a formal profession, while I worried
the living Saints in a cruel persecution. I condemned all for Roundheads, that
had more religion than a Heathen, or knowledge of Heavenly things, than a child
in the womb has of the things of this life, or Conscience than an Atheist, or
care of his soul, than a Beast. I had always the basest thoughts of the best
men: making ill constructions of whatsoever they did or spoke; as the Scribes
and Pharisees dealt by our Savior.

Sect. 12. As, O what a poor slave did I hold the man of a tender conscience to
be! Yea, how did I applaud my self for being zealless and fearless; together
with my great discretion and moderation: when I saw this man vexed for his
zeal, that other hated for his knowledge, a third persecuted for the profession
of his Faith, etc. For, (being like Cain, Ishmael, Eliah, Michel, Pharaoh and
Festus) I thought their Religion Puritanism, their conscience of sin,
hypocrisy; their profession, dissimulation; their prudence, policy: their
faith and confidence, presumption; their zeal of Gods glory, to be pride and
malice, their obedience to Gods laws, rebellion to Princes; their execution of
justice, cruelty etc. If they were any thing devout, or forward to admonish
others, that so they might pluck them out of the fire; I conceived them to be
beside themselves, as our Savior was thought to be by his Kinsfolk, and St.
Paul by Festus, Mark 3.21. John 10.20. Acts 26.24. 1 Cor. 1.18. My religion was
to oppose the power of religion, and my knowledge of the truth, to know how to
argue against the truth. I never affected Christ's Ambassadors, that preached
the glad tidings of salvation, but had a spleen against them; yea, I hated a
Minister for being a Minister, especially if a godly and zealous one, that
spoke home to my conscience, and told me of my sins; much more if he would not
admit me to the Lords Table without trial and examination; yea, then like Ahab
to Eliah, I became his enemy, and hated him ever after; would impeach his
credit, and detain from him his dues. And are not all these strong evidences,
that I loved and served God, and my Redeemer as I ought? But to make it more
manifest what a rare Christian I was,

I thought my self a Believer; yea, I could boast of a strong Faith, when yet I
fell short of the very Devils in believing: for they believe the threats and
judgments contained in the Word, and tremble thereat James 2.19. Whereas I
thought them but Scare-crows to fright the simple withal: yea, I held Hell it
self but a fancy, not worth the fearing.

Because I was not notoriously wicked, but had a form of godliness, was civil,
etc I was able to delude my own soul, and put off all reproofs and threatenings,
by comparing my self with those, that I presumed were worse than my self; as
Drunkards, Adulterers, Blasphemers, Oppressors, shedders of blood, and the
like; counting none wicked but such. Yea, looking upon these, I admired my own
holiness, and thought my moral honesty would be sufficient to save me. Nor did
I know wherein I had offended.

And whereas the Law is spiritual, and binds the heart from affecting, no less
than the hand from acting: I was so blind and ignorant, that I thought the
Commandment was not broken, if the outward gross sin be forborne. Whence these
were my thoughts, I never brake the first Commandment of having many gods; for
I was no Papist, nor Idolater: nor the second, for I worshipped God aright. Nor
the third, for I had been no common swearer, only a few petty oaths. Nor the
fourth, for I had every Sabbath gone duly to Church. Nor the fifth, for I ever
honored my parents, and have been a loyal subject. Nor the sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, or tenth; for I never committed murder or adultery, never stole
ought, never bare false witness; nor could I call to mind that I had at any
time coveted my neighbors wife, servant, estate, etc. And nothing more common
with me, than to brag of a good heart and meaning, of the strength of my faith
and hope, of my just and upright dealing, etc. And because I abstained from
notorious sins, I thought my self an excellent Christian, if God was not
beholding to me for not wounding his Name with Oaths; for not drinking and
playing out his sabbaths, for not railing on his ministers, for not oppressing
and persecuting his poor members, etc.

Sect. 13. And yet had it been so, as I imagined: Admit I had never offended in
the least all my life, either in thought, word, or deed; yet this were but one
half of what I owe to God, this were but to observe the negative part of his
law, still the affirmative part thereof I had been so far from performing, that
I had not so much as thought of it. And to be just in the sight of God, and
graciously accepted of him; these two things are required: the satisfactory
part to escape hell, and the meritorious part to get heaven. And the true
method of grace is, Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. The Fig
tree was cursed, not for bearing evil fruit, but because it bare no good. The
evil servant was not bound hand and foot, and cast into prison, for wasting his
masters goods; but for not gaining with them. And those reprobates at the last
day shall be bid depart into everlasting fire; not for wronging or robbing of
any, but for not giving, for not comforting Christ's poor members, Mat. 25. So
that my case was most desperate! For though with that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. I
was apt to thank God and brag, that I was just, and paid every man his due, yet
I never thought of being holy, and of paying God his dues; as his due of
believing, or repenting, of new obedience; his due of praying, hearing,
conferring, meditating on his word and works, sanctifying his sabbaths, and
instructing my children and servants, teaching them to fear the Lord. His due
of love, fear, thankfulness, zeal for his glory, charity and mercy to Christ's
poor Members, and the like I should have served God in spirit, and according to
Christ's Gospel: as all that are wise hearted endeavor go live, and believe,
and hear, and invocate, and hope, and fear, and love, and worship God in such
manner as his word prescribes. I should have been effectually called, and
become a new creature by regeneration, being begotten and born anew by the
immortal seed of the word. I should have found an apparent change wrought in my
judgment, affections, and actions, to what they were formerly. The Old man
should have changed with the New-man, Worldly wisdom with Heavenly wisdom,
carnal love with spiritual love, servile fear for Christian and Filial fear,
idle thoughts for holy thoughts, vain words for holy and wholesome words, fleshly
works for works of righteousness: even hating what I formerly loved, and loving
what I formerly hated.

But alas! I have heard the Gospel day after day, and year after year: which is
the strong arm of the Lord, and the mighty power of God to salvation. That is
quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two Edged sword, and yet stood it out
and resisted, instead of submitting to Christ's call; even refusing the free
offer of Grace and Salvation. I have heard the Word faithfully and powerfully
preached for forty years, yet remained in my natural condition unregenerate,
without which new birth there is no being saved, as our Savior affirms, John
3.5 I had not trodden one step in the way to conversion; for the first part of
conversion is to love them that love God, 1 John 3.10, 11, 14. I should daily
have grown in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
but I was so far from growing in grace, that I had not one spark of grace or
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. I was all for
observing the second Table, without respect to the first; or all for outward
conformity, not at all for spiritual and inward holiness of the heart.

Sect. 14. Either what I did was not morally good for the matter, or not well
done for the manner; nor to any right ends: as out of duty and thankfulness to
God and my Redeemer, and out of love to my fellow members. Without which, the
most glorious performances, and the rarest virtues, are but shining sins, or
beautiful abominations. Gods glory was not my principal end, nor to be saved my
greatest care.

I was a good civil, moral honest hypocrite, or infidel; but none of these
graces grew in the garden of my heart. I did not shine out as a light, by a
holy conversation to glorify God, and win others. Now only to refrain evil,
except a man hates it also, and does the contrary good, is to be evil still:
because honesty without piety, is but a body without a soul.

All my Religion was either superstition or formality, or hypocrisy, I had a
form of Godliness, but denied the power thereof: I often drew near unto God
with my mouth, and honored him with my lips, but my heart was far from him,
Isa. 25.13. Mark 7.2, to 14. Mat. 15.7, to 10. All which considered, viz the
means which God had afforded me, and the little use I had made thereof, left me
in a far worse condition, then the very Heathen that never heard of Christ. So
that it was Gods unspeakable mercy, that I am not at this present frying in
Hell flames, never to be freed.

God has sent unto us all his servants the Prophets, rising up early, and they
have been instant in preaching the Gospel, both in season, and out of season:
but my carnal heart has ever been flint unto God, wax unto Satan: You shall
die if you continue in the practice of sin, I heard: but you shall not die, (as
says the Devil) I believed.

Sect. 15. Besides all this, Suppose I had none of these to answer for; neither
sins of Commission, nor sins of Omission: yet Original sin were enough to damn
me, no need of any more; and yet my actual transgressions have been such, and
so many, and my ingratitude therein so great, that it might have sunk me down
with shame, and left me hopeless of ever obtaining pardon for them. As see but
some small part of my monstrous and devilish ingratitude to so good a God, so
loving and merciful a Savior and Redeemer, that has done, and suffered so
much for me, even more than can either be expressed or conceived, by any heart,
were it as deep as the Sea!

Touching what God and Christ has done for me; in the first place he gave me
my self, and all the creatures to serve for my use; yea he created me after his
own image in righteousness and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the truth,
with a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed and happy
condition. But this was nothing in comparison; for when I was in a
sad-condition; when I had forfeited all this, and my self; when by sin I had
turned that image of God into the image of Satan, and wilfully plunged my soul
and body into Eternal torments: when I was become his enemy, mortally hating
him, and to my utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only
enemies Sin and Satan, not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement,
but a perverse and obstinate will to resist all means tending thereunto: he did
redeem me, not only without asking, but even against my will; so making of me
his cursed enemy, a servant; of a servant, a son; of a son, an heir, and coheir
with Christ, Gal. 4.7. But how have I required this so great, so superlative a
mercy? All my recompense of Gods love unto me, has been to do that which he
hates, and to hate those whom he loves.

Christ the fountain of all good, is my Lord by a manifold right, and I his
servant by all manner of obligations. First, he is my Lord by the right of
creation, as being his workmanship made by him. Secondly, by the right of
Redemption, being his purchase bought by him. Thirdly of preservation being
kept, upheld, and maintained by him. Fourthly, his by Vocation, even of his
Family, having admitted me a member of his visible Church. Fifthly, his also
(had it not been my own fault) by sanctification, whereby to possess me.
Lastly, he would have me of his Court by glorification, that he might crown me,
so that I was every way his God had raised me from a beggar to a great estate:
But how did I requite him? I would not, if possible, suffer a godly and
conscientious minister to be chosen, or to abide where I had to do, but to
bring in one that would flatter sin, and flout holiness, discourage the godly,
and encourage the wicked. I used both my own and all my friends utmost ability.
Much more might be mentioned, but I fear to be tedious.

Now argue with all the world, and they will conclude, that there is no vice
like ingratitude! But I have been more ungrateful to God, than can be expressed
by the best Orator alive. It was horrid ingratitude in the Jews, to scourge
and crucify Christ, who did them good every way; for he healed their diseases
fed their bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became man, and lived
miserably amongst them many years, that he might save their souls: but they
fell short of my ingratitude to God, in that most of them were not in the least
convinced, that he was the Messiah sent from God, and promised from the
beginning. But I have not only denied this Lord that bought me, but I hated
him; yea, most spitefully and maliciously fought on Satan's and Sins side
against him, and persecuted his children, and the truth with all my might: and
all this against knowledge and conscience, after some measure of illumination,
which cannot be affirmed of the Jews. Yet miserable wretch that I was, if I
could have given him my body and soul, they should have been saved by it, but
he were never the better for them.

Sect. 16. Lastly, to tell you that which is more strange! Notwithstanding all
this that has been mentioned, and much more: Yet I thought my self a good
Christian forsooth; yea, with that young man in the Gospel. I thought I had
kept all the commandments. Nor was I a whit troubled for sin, either original
or actual, but my conscience was at quiet, and I was at peace; neither did any
sin trouble me. Yea, I would applaud my self with that Pharisee, Luke 18.9, to
15. and say, I was not like other men: not once doubting of my salvation. I
ever refused to do what my Maker commanded, and yet confidently hoped to escape
what he threatened. Nor did I doubt of having Christ my Redeemer and Advocate in
the next life, when I had been a bitter enemy to him and his members in this
life. Here was blindness with a witness; as it is not to be believed how blind
and blockish men are, that have only the flesh for their guide; especially if
they have hardened their hearts, and feared their consciences with a customary
sinning. As I could give you for instance, a large catalogue of rare Examples
how sin has besotted men, and what stark fools carnal men are in spiritual
things, be they never so wise for mundane knowledge. But least it should be
taken for a digression or excursion, you shall have a list of them by
themselves, the which I will add as an Appendix to this Discourse, or Dialogue.
In the mean time I have given you a brief of my manifold provocations, and
great ingratitude, to my Maker and Redeemer (for otherwise I might be endless
in the prosecution thereof.) It remains that I should in like manner lay open
my Original Defilement; which is the Fountain whence all the former (whether
sins of commission, or sins of omission) do flow. But touching it, be pleased
to peruse that small Tract, entitled, A short and sure way to Grace and
Salvation: Or, Three Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, by R.Y from
p. 4 to p. 10.

Sect. 17. Loose Libertine. if this has been your case, no wonder it has
startled you; for to deal plainly with you, as you have done with me; what I
have heard from you, makes me tremble. For if such honest moral men, that live
so unreproveably as you have done, go not to Heaven, what will become of me,
that have been so openly profane, and notoriously wicked all my time? Yea, it
contented me not to do wickedly my self, and to damn my own soul, but I have
been the occasion of drawing hundreds to hell with me, by seducing some, and
giving ill example to others, (the infection of sin, being much worse than the
act.) As how many have I drawn to be drunkards, and swearers, and whoremongers,
and profane persons; Insomuch, that the blood of so many souls, as I have
drawn away, will be required at my hands. Yea, my life has been so debauched
and licentious, that I have brought a scandal upon the Gospel and made it
odious to the very Turks and Infidels, Romans 2.24.

Convert. Alas I what I did that was morally good, or what evil I refrained,
was more for self ends, or for fear of men's Laws, than for love of Christ's
Gospel. True, I went under the notion of an honest man, and a good Christian: I
was baptized into the Faith, and made a member of Christ's visible Church; but I
was so far from endeavoring to perform what I then promised, that in effect I
even renounced both Christ, and my Baptism, in persecuting him, and all that
sincerely professed his Name, thinking I did God good service therein, John
16.2. Gal. 1.13, 14. Phil. 3.6. Nor was it for want of ignorance, that you
thought so of me: for by nature (be we never so mild and gentle) we are all the
seed of the serpent, Genesis 3.15. and children of the Devil, John 8.44. Yea, the
very best moral man, is but a tame Devil, as Athanasius well notes. But it is a
true Proverb, The blind eat many a Fly, and all Colors are alike to him that
is in the dark.

Loose Libertine. So much the worse is my condition; for my conscience tells
me, there is not a word you have spoken of your self, but I can justly apply
the same unto my own soul, and a great deal more: for whereas you have been a
moral honest man, so that none except your self, could tax you for breaking
either Gods Law, or man's: I have been so wicked and profane, that I could most
presumptuously, and of set purpose, take a pride in my wickedness, commit it
with greediness, speak of it, defend it, joy in it, boast of it, tempt, and
enforce to it; yea, mock them that disliked it. As if I would send challenges
into Heaven, and make love to destruction, and yet did applaud my self, and
prefer my own condition before other men's: saying, I was no dissembler; yea, I
hated the hypocrisy of Professors: I do not justify my self, and despise
others, like the Puritans: I am not factious, schismatical, singular,
censorious, etc. I am not rebellious, nor contentious, like the Brownists and
Anabaptists. I am a good fellow, and love an honest man with my heart, etc. and
as touching a good conscience, I was never troubled in mind, as many scrupulous
fools are. I have a good heart, and mean as well as the precisest. But now I
see the Devil and my own deceitful heart deluded me so, that my whole life
hitherto, has been but a dream, and that like a blind man, I was running
headlong to Hell, when yet I thought my self in the way to Heaven. Just as if a
Beggar should dream that he were a King; or as if a Traitor should dream of his
being Crowned, when indeed he was to be beheaded; the case of Laodicea, Rev.
3.17. the young man in the Gospel, Luke 18.20, 21. and that Pharisee, spoken
of, Luke 18.11, 12.

Sect. 18. Convert. It was not your case alone, but so it fares with the worst
of sinners: Only it much rejoices me, that it has pleased God to open your
eyes, to see all this in your self. For flesh and blood has not revealed it
unto you. Yea, we are naturally so blind, and deaf, and dead in sin, and in
soul, that we can no more discern our spiritual filthiness, nor feel sin to be
a burden, than a blind Ethiopian can see his own blackness, or then a dead man
can feel the weight of a burden, when it is laid upon him, Acts 28.27. Isa. 6
9, 10.

And this common experience shows; for if you observe it, who more jocund,
confident, and secure, than the worst of sinners? They can strut it under an
unsupportable mass of Oaths, Blasphemies, Thefts, Murders, Adulteries,
Drunkenness, and other the like sins; yea, can easily swallow these spiders
with Mithridates, and digest them too: when one that is regenerate shrinks
under the burden of wandering thoughts, and want of proficiency. But why is it?
They are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. Revel. 3.1. Now lay a mountain upon a dead
man, he feels not once the weight.

To a Christian that has the life of grace, the least sin lies heavy upon the
conscience! but to him that is dead, let his sins be as heavy as a mountain of
lead, he feels in them no weight at all.

Again they are insensible of their sin and danger, because ignorant; for, for
what the eye sees not, the heart rueth not. Security makes worldlings merry,
and therefore are they secure, because they are ignorant. A dunce, we know,
seldom makes doubts: Yea, a fool, says Solomon, boasts and is confident,
Prove. 14.16. neither do blind men ever blush. And the truth is, were it not for
pride and ignorance, a world of men would be ashamed to have their faces seen
abroad. For take away from men's minds vain opinions, flattering hopes, false
valuations, imaginations, and the like; you will leave the minds of most men
and women, but poor shrunken things, full of melancholy, indisposition, and
unpleasing to themselves. Ignorance is a vail or curtain to hide away their
sins, whereupon they are never troubled in conscience, nor macerated with cares
about eternity; but think that all will be well.

The Devil and the Flesh prophecy prosperity to sin; yea, life and salvation,
as the Pope promised the Powder Traitors: but Death and Damnation (which Gods
Spirit threatens) will prove the crop they will reap. For God is true, the
Devil and all Flesh are liars.

When we become regenerate, and forsake sin; then the devil strongly and
strangely assaults us* as he did Christ, when he was newly baptized; and
Pharaoh the children of Israel, when they would forsake Egypt; and Herod the
children, when Christ was come to deliver his people. Whence commonly it comes
to pass, that those think best of themselves, that have least cause; yea, the
true Christian, is as fearful to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the
false is unwilling to be driven from it. They that have store of grace mourn
for the want of it, and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance. None
so apt to doubt their Adoption, as they that may be assured of it: nor none
more usually fear then they that have the greatest cause to hope. We feel
corruption, not by corruption, but by Grace, and therefore the more we feel our
inward corruption, the more Grace we have.

Contraries, the nearer they are one to another, the sharper is the conflict
betwixt them. Now of all enemies, the Spirit and the Flesh are nearest one to
another, being both in the Soul of a regenerate man, and in all faculties of
the soul, and in every action that springs from those faculties. The more
Grace, the more Spiritual life; and the more Spiritual life, the more antipathy
to the contrary; whence none are so sensible of corruption, as those that have
the most Living Souls.

Sect. 19. Now for Remedy of the contrary, there cannot be a better lesson for
carnal men to learn, than this, All the promises of God are conditional, to
take place, if we repent; as all the threatenings of God are conditional, to
take place, if we repent not. But wicked men, as they believe without
repenting; their Faith being mere presumption: so they repent without
believing, their repentance being indeed Desperation: and this observe, we are
cast down in the disappointment of our hopes, in the same measure, as we were
too much lifted up in expectation of good from them. Whence these peremptory
presumers, if ever they repent, it is commonly as Francis Spira, an Advocate of
Padua, did: and never did any man plead so well for himself, as he did against
himself.

One Star is much bigger than the Earth, yet it seems many degrees less. It is
the nature of fear to make dangers greater, helps less than they are Christ
has promised peace and rest unto their souls that labor, and are heavy laden,
and to those that walk according to rule, Mat. 11.29. Gal. 6.16. even peace
celestial in the state of grace, and peace eternal in the state of glory. Such
therefore as never were distressed in conscience, or live loosly, never had
true peace. Peace is the Daughter of Righteousness, Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God. But he who makes a Bridge of his own shadow,
will be sure to fall into the Water.

Those blocks, that never in their life were moved with Gods threatenings, never
in any straight of conscience, never groaned under the burden of Gods anger:
they have not so much as entered into the porch of this house, or lift a foot
over the threshold of this school of repentance, Oh! that we could but so much
fear the eternal pains, as we do the temporary: and be but so careful to save
our souls from torment, as our bodies. In the mean time, the case of these men
is so much the worse, by how much their fear is the less. It faring with the
soul, as with the body, Those diseases, which do take away all sense of pain,
are of all others most desperate. As the dead palsy, the falling sickness, the
sleepy lethargy, etc. And the patient is most dangerously sick when he has no
feeling thereof. In like manner, whilst they suppose themselves to be free
from judgment, they are already smitten with the heaviest of Gods judgments, a
heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.5.

In a Lethargy, it is needful the Patient should be cast into a burning Fever,
because the senses are benumbed, and this will waken them, and dry up the
besotting humors. So in our dead security, before our conversion, God is fain
to let the Law, Sin, Conscience, and Satan loose upon us, and to kindle the
very fire of Hell in our souls, that so we might be roused out of our security:
but thousands of these blocks both live and depart with as great hopes, as men
go to a Lottery, even dreaming of Heaven, until they awake in Hell. For they
too often die without any remorse of conscience, like blocks; or as an Ox dies
in a ditch. Yea, thousands that live like Laban, die like Nabal, (which is but
the same word inverted) whilst others, the dear children of God, die in
distress of Conscience. For it is not every good man's hap to die like Antonius
Pius, whose death was after the fashion and semblance of a kindly and pleasant
sleep. However St. Austins rule will be sure to hold, He cannot die ill, that
has lived well; and for the most part, He that lives conscionably, dies
comfortably, and departs rich. And so you see how it fares with the wickedest
and worst of men. Wherefore if you are truly sensible of your wretchedness, it
is a good sign, that you are in some forwardness to be recovered: and really to
become so good, as formerly you but dreamed, or imagined your self to be. And
indeed the very first step to grace, is to feel the want of grace, and the next
way to receive mercy, is to see your self miserable. Therefore our constant and
most diligent search should be to find out the naughtiness of our own hearts;
and to get strength from God against our prevailing corruptions.

Sect. 20. Loose Libertine. But is there any hope for one so wicked as I? who
have turned the grace of God into wantonness, applying Christ's passion as a
warrant for my licentiousness, not as a remedy, and taking his death as a
license to sin, his Cross as a Letters patent to do mischief. As if a man
should head his drum of rebellion with his pardon. For I have most spightfully,
and maliciously taken up Arms against my Maker, and fought against my Redeemer
all my days.

Convert. Do but unfeignedly repent you of your sins, and forsake your former
evil ways, and lay hold upon Christ by a true and lively faith; my soul for
yours, God is very ready to forgive them, be they never so many, and
innumerable for multitude; never so heinous for quality and magnitude. Yea, I
can show you your Pardon from the great King of Heaven, for all that is past,
the which you may read at large, Isa, 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.21, to 29. and 33.11. Joel
2.12, 13, 14. Yea, read 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. together with the story of Manasses,
Mary Magdalen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son; and you shall see presidents
thereof. Yea, the very murderers of the Son of God, upon their serious and
unfeigned repentance, and steadfast believing in him, received pardon and
salvation. And indeed despair is a sin which never knew Jesus. True every sin
deserves damnation; but no sin shall condemn, but the lying and continuing in
it. True repentance is ever blessed with forgiveness. And know this that Gods
mercy is greater than thy sin, whatever it be: you cannot be so infinite in
sinning, as he is infinite in pardoning, if you repent; yea, sins upon
repentance are so remitted, as if they had never been committed. I will put
away thy transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, Isa. 44.22. And
what by corruption has been done, by repentance is undone. As the former
examples witness. Come and let us Reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow, Isa. 1.18. Yea, whiter than
snow. For the Prophet David, laying open his blood guiltiness, and his original
impurity, uses these words, Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean; wash
me, and I shall be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51.7. And in reason, did Christ come
to call sinners to repentance? and shall he not show mercy to the penitent? Or,
who would not cast his burden upon him, that desires to give ease? As I live,
says the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.

Only, apply not this salve, before the ulcer be searched to the bottom: Lay
not hold upon mercy, until thou be'st thoroughly humbled. The only way to
become good, is, first to believe that you are evil, and by accusing our
selves, we prevent Satan; by judging our selves, we prevent God.

Are we as sick of sorrow, as we are of sin? Then may we hopefully go to the
Physician of our Souls, who came into the World only to cure the sick, and to
give light to them only, who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death. God
does not pour the Oil of Grace, but into a broken and contrite Heart.

Would thou get out of the miserable estate of Nature, into the blessed
estate of Grace? and of Satan's bond-slave, become the Child of God, and a
Member of Christ? Would thou truly know thine own Heart? and be very
sensible how evil and wicked it is? that so thou may have a more humble
conceit of thy self? Lay to heart these three particulars: 1. The corruption of
our nature, by reason of original sin. 2. Our manifold breach of Gods Righteous
Law, by actual sin. 3. The guilt and punishment due to us for them both. This
being done, thou will see and find thy necessity of a Redeemer. And it is
Thirst only that makes us relish our Drink, Hunger our meat: The full Stomach
of a Pharisee, surcharged with the superfluitics of his own Merits, will loath
the Honeycomb of Christ's Righteousness. This was it which made the Young
Prodigal to relish even servants fare, though before wanton, when full fed at
home. No more relish feels the Pharisaical heart in Christ's blood, than in a
chip: But O how acceptable is the Fountain of living Waters, to the chased
Heart panting and braying? The blood of Christ, to the weary and tired soul; to
the thirsty Conscience scorched with the sense of Gods wrath: He that presents
him with it, how welcome is he? even as a special choice man, one of a
thousand. And the deeper the sense of Misery is, the sweeter the sense of Mercy
is.

Sect. 21. Then if you would be satisfied for time to come, whether your
Repentance and Conversion be true and sound, these particulars will infallibly
inform you. If you shall persevere (when this trouble for sin is over) in doing
that which now you purpose, it is an infallible sign your Repentance is found,
otherwise not. If thou do call to mind the Vow which thou made in
Baptism, and do thy endeavor to perform that which then thou did promise.
If thou do square thy life according to the Rule of Gods Word, and not after
the Rudiments of the World. If thou art willing to forsake all sin, without
reserving one, (for otherwise that one sin, may prove the bane of all thy
Graces, even as Gideon had seventy sons, and but one Bastard, and yet that
Bastard destroyed all the rest that were legitimate, Judge. 9.5.) Sin is like
the Ivy in the Wall, cut off bough, branch, body, stump, yet some Sprigs or
other will sprout out again: Till the Root be plucked up, or the Wall be pulled
down and ruined, it will never utterly die.

Regeneration or New Birth, is a creation of new qualities in the soul; as
being by nature only evil disposed. Gods children are known by this mark, They
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. If Christ have called
you to his service, your life will appear more spiritual and excellent than
others.

As for your fails, it is a sign that sin has not gained your consent, but
committed a Rape upon your Soul, when you cry out to God. If the ravished
Virgin under the Law cried out, she was pronounced guiltless. A sheep may fall
into the mire, but a swine delights to wallow in the mire. Great difference
between a woman that is forced, though she cries out and strives, and an
alluring Adultress.

Again, the thoughts of the godly, are godly, of the wicked, worldly; and by
these, good and evil men are best, and truliest differenced one from another.
Would we know our own hearts, and whether they be changed by a new birth:
Examine we our thoughts, words, actions, passions, especially our thoughts will
inform us, for these cannot be subject to hypocrisy, as words and deeds are.

Sect. 22. Then by way of Caution, know, That a Child may as soon create it
self, as a man in the state of nature, regenerate himself. We cannot act in the
least, unless God bestows upon us daily privative grace to defend us from evil,
and daily positive grace, enabling us to do good. And those that are of Christ's
teaching, know both from the Word, and by Experience, that of themselves they
are not only weak, but even dead to what is good, moving no more than they are
moved; that their best works are faulty, all their sins deadly, all their
Natures corrupted originally. You has he quickened, that were dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Yea, we are altogether so dead in sin, that we
cannot stir the least joint, no not so much as feel our own deadness, nor
desire life, except God be pleased to raise and restore our souls, from the
death of sin, and grave of long custom, to the life of grace. Apt we are to all
evil, but reprobate and indisposed to all Grace and Goodness; yea, to all the
means thereof. My Powers are all corrupt, corrupt my will:
Marble to good, but Wax to what is ill.
Insomuch, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think, much less to
speak, least of all to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. John 15.4, 5. If we
have power to choose or refuse the object, to do these well we have no power. We
have ability, we have will enough, to undo our selves, scope enough Hell-ward;
but neither motion, nor will to do good, that must be put into us by him that
gives both power and will, and power to will.

Finally, Each sanctified heart feels this, but no words are able sufficiently
to express, what impotent wretches we are, when we are not sustained. So that
we have no merit, but the mercy of God to save us: nothing but the blood of
Christ, and his mediation to cleanse and Redeem us: nothing but his obedience
to enrich us. As for our good works, we are altogether beholding to God for
them, not God to us, nor we to our selves, because they are only his works in
us.

Whatsoever thou art, thou owe to him that made thee: whatever thou have,
thou owe to him that Redeemed thee. Therefore if we do any thing amiss, let
us accuse our selves: if any thing well, let us give all the praise to God. And
indeed, this is the test of a true or false Religion: that which teaches us to
exalt God most, and most to depress our selves is the true: that which does
most prank up our selves, and detract from God, is the false, as Bonaventure
well notes.

Sect. 23. Now to wind up with a Word of Exhortation; If thou be convinced,
and resolvest upon a new course; let thy resolution be peremptory and constant,
and take heed you harden not again, as Pharaoh, the Philistines, the Young man
in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did: resemble not the Iron, which is no longer
soft, than it is in the Fire; for that good (says Gregory) will do us no good,
which is not made good by perseverance. If with these premonitions, the Spirit
has vouchsafed to stir up in thine heart any good motions, and holy purposes
to obey God, in letting thy sins go; Quench not, grieve not the spirit, 1 These.
5.19. Return not with the Dog to thy vomit, least thy latter end prove
sevenfold worse than thy beginning, Mat. 12.43, 45. Oh it is a fearful thing
to receive tho grace of God in vain! and a desperate thing, being warned of a
Rock, wilfully to cast our selves upon it. Neither let Satan persuade you to
defer your repentance; no not an hour, lest your Resolution proves as a false
conception, which never comes to bearing. Besides, death may be sudden: even
the least of a thousand things can kill you, and give you no leisure to be sick.

Thirdly, If thou will be safe from evil works, avoid the occasions; have no
fellowship with the workers of iniquity: neither fear their scoffs; for this
be sure of, If your person and ways please God, the world will be displeased
with both: If God be your friend, men will be your enemies: if they exercise
their malice, it is where he shows mercy. But take heed of losing Gods favor
to keep theirs.

Beda tells of a Great man, that was admonished by his friends in his sickness
to repent: who answered, He would not yet; for that if he should recover, his
friends and companions would laugh at him: but growing sicker and sicker, they
again pressed him; but then his answer was, That it was now too late; for I am
judged and condemned already.

A man cannot be a Nathanael, in whose heart there is no guile, but the World
counts him a fool. But Christ says, Verily except ye be converted, and become
as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.3.

Again, Satan and your deceitful heart will suggest unto you, that a Religious
life, is a dampish and melancholy life: but holy David will tell you, That
light is sown to the Righteous, and joy to the upright, Psalm. 97.11. Isa.
65.14. And experience tells us, that Earthly and Bodily joys, are but the
body, or rather the dregs of that joy, which Gods people feel and are ravished
with. As Oh the calm, and quietness of a good Conscience! the assurance of the
pardon of sin, and joy in the Holy Ghost, the honesty of a virtuous and holy
life, how sweet they are! Yea, even Plato, an Heathen could say, That if
Wisdom and Virtue could but represent it self to the Eyes, it would set the
heart on fire with the love of it. And the like of a sinners sadness, as hear
what Seneca says; If there were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him,
no Hell to burn him, no man to see him; yet would he not sin, for the ugliness
and filthiness of sin, and the guilt and sadness of his Conscience. But
Experience is the best informer: wherefore take the counsel of holy David,
Psalm 34.8. O taste and see! that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that
trusts in him. To which accords that of holy Bernard, Good art thou, O
Lord, to the soul that seeks thee; what art thou then, to the soul that finds
thee? As I may appeal to any man's Conscience, that has been softened with the
Unction of Grace, and truly tasted of the powers of the World to come, to him
that has the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost; whether
his whole life be not a perpetual Hallelujah in comparison of his natural
condition: Whence they are able to slight all such objections, as he did. You
tell me that scrupling of small matters, is but stumbling at straws, that they
be but trifles: when I know your tongue can tell nothing but truth, I will
believe you.

Fifthly, Beg of God that he will give you a new heart, and when the heart is
changed, all the members will follow after it, as the rest of the creatures
after the Sun when it arises. But without a work upon the heart, wrought by
the spirit of God, it will follow its own inclination to that which it
affects, whatsoever the judgment shall say to the contrary. That must be
first reformed, which was first deformed. It is idle, and to no purpose to
purge the chaanel, when the fountain is corrupt. Whence the Apostle orderly
bids us, first, Be renewed in the Spirit of our minds; and then, Let him that
stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Yea, it is Gods own counsel to the men
of Jerusalem, Jer. 4. Wash thy heart from wickedness: that thou may be
saved, verse 14. It is most ridiculous to apply Remedies to the outward parts,
when the distemper lies in the stomach. To what purpose is it to crop off the
top of weeds, or top off the boughs of the Tree, when the Root and Stalk
remain in the Earth? As cut off the sprig of a Tree, it grows still; a Bough,
an Arm, still it grows; lop off the top; yea, saw it in the midst, yet it will
grow again; stock it up by the roots, then (and not till then) it will grow no
more: Whence it is that God says, Give me thine heart, Prove. 23.26. Great
Cities once expunged, the dorps and villages will soon come in of themselves:
the heart is the treasury and storehouse of wickedness, Mat. 12.34. such as the
heart is, such are the actions of the body which proceed from it, Mat. 12.35.
Therefore as Christ says, Make clean within, and all will be clean, otherwise
not, Mat. 23.26. therefore David's prayer is, Create in me a new heart, O Lord
and renew a right spirit within me, Ps. 51.10. Do thou the like, importune him
for grace, that you may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually
persevere, in doing and suffering his holy will: desire him to inform and
reform you so, that you may neither mis-believe, nor mis-live, to change and
purify your nature, subdue your reason, rectify your judgment, reform and
strengthen your will, renew your affections, and beat down in you whatsoever
stands in opposition to the Scepter of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly and lastly, If you receive any power against your former corruptions,
forget not to be thankeful, yea, study all possible thankfulness; for that you
and I are not at this present frying in Hell flames, never to be freed; that we
have the offer of Grace here, and Glory hereafter, it is his unspeakable
goodness. And there is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitatable to us,
both for the procuring of the good we want, or continuing the good we have,
than thankfulness. He will sow there (and there only) plenty of his blessings,
where he is sure to reap plenty of thanks and service. But who will sow those
barren sands, where they are sure not only to be without all hope of a good
harvest, but are sure to lose both their seed and labor? Consider what has
been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

And so much for the Second Part. An Appendix follows wherein you may have
instances of all sorts, how sin besots Men.

FINIS.
London, Printed by J. Hayes, and are to be sold by Mrs. Crips in
Popes-head-Alley, with nine and Thirty other Pieces composed by the same
Author. 1663.


