A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE against all Grief.

Extracted out of the choicest Authors, Ancient and Modern, both Holy and
Humane.

Necessary to be read of all that any way suffer Tribulation.

The Fourth Impression.

By R. YOUNG, Florilegus.

Imprimatur Thomas Gataker.

CHAP. 33. Use and Application of the former Reasons.
Use 1.
THese latter Reasons being dispatched, return we to make use of the former; for
I may seem to have left them, and be gone quite out of sight: though indeed it
cannot properly be called a digression, seeing the last of the former reasons,
was; That God suffers his Children to be persecuted and afflicted for the
increase of their Patience. First, if God sends these afflictions, either for
our Instruction, or Reformation, to scour away the rust of corruption, or to
try the truth of our sanctification, either for the increase of our patience,
or the exercise of our says, or the improvement of our zeal, or to provoke our
importunity, or for the doubling of our Obligation: seeing true gold flies not
the touchstone; Let us examine whether we have thus husbanded our affliction to
his glory, and our own spiritual and everlasting good. I know Gods fatherly
chastisements for the time, seem grievous to the best of his Children; Yea, at
first they come upon us, like Samsons Lion, look terrible in show; as if they
would devour us; and as Children are afraid of their friends when they see
them masked, so are we. But tell me, has not this roaring Lion prevailed
against thy best part? Have thou kept thy head whole? (I mean) thy soul; free?
For as Fencers will seem to fetch a blow at the leg, when they intend it at the
head; so does the Devil, though he strike at thy name, his aim is to slay thy
soul. Now instead of being overcome do thou overcome? Has this Lion yielded
thee any Honey of Instruction, or Reformation? Has thy sin died with thy fame,
or with thy health, or with thy peace, or with thy outward estate? Do thou
perceive the graces of Gods Spirit, to come up, and flourish so much the more
in the spring of thy recovery, by how much more hard and bitter thy winter of
adversity has been? Then thou have approved thy self Christ's faithful
Soldier, and a Citizen of that Jerusalem, which is above: Yea, I dare boldly
say of thee, as Saint Paul of himself, That nothing shall be able to separate
thee from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 39. To
find this Honey in the Lion, more then makes amends for all former fear and
grief: and in case any man, by his humiliation under the hand of God, is grown
more faithful and conscionable: there is Honey out of the Lion: or is any man
by his temptation or fall, become more circumspect after it? There is also
Honey out of the Lion, etc. For there is no Samson, to whom every Lion does not
yield some Honey; for as affliction sanctified, ever leaves some blessing
behind it, like the River Nilus, which, by overflowing the Land of Egypt,
fattens, and fills it, with flowers and fruits; so a fine wit, and a Christian
will, makes use of any thing: like the little Be, which will not off the
meanest flower, till she has made somewhat of it. Even Saul's malice shall
serve to enhance David's zeal: and the likelihood of losing Isaac, shall both
evidence and improve Abraham's love to God: or, Has the Lord made Hannah
barren? And does her adversary vex her sore, year by year; and grievously
upbraid her for it, so that she is troubled in her mind? why even that shall
make her pray, and weep sore unto the Lord, and make vows: yea, and when God
gives Samuel to her, she will give Samuel back again to God. Lastly, Saint Paul
in this School of Affliction, will learn in what estate soever he is,
(prosperous, or adverse,) therewith to be content: Phil. 4. 11. And thou may
foully suspect thy self, if thou be not the better for thy being the worse.
He is no true born Christian who is not the better for his evils, whatsoever
they be; no price can buy of the true believer, the gain of his sins. Yea,
Satan himself, in his exercise of Gods Children, advantageth them. And look to
it, if the malice and enmity of wicked men has beaten thee off from thy
profession, thou were at the best but a counterfeit, and none of Christ's own
Band. A little faith, even so much as a grain of Mustard Seed, would be able to
remove greater mountains of fear and distrust out of thy soul; then these: for
know this, that Good men are like Diamonds, which will shine in the dirt: yea,
they resemble Glow-wormes, which shine most in the dark; or Juniper, which
smells sweetest in the fire; or Pomander, which becomes more fragrant by
chasing; or Roses which are sweeter in the Still, then on the stalk.

Use 2.
2 If the malice of our enemies, as it is husbanded to our thrist (by a divine
and supreme providence) does make so much for our advantage and benefit here,
and hereafter; as namely, that it opens our eyes no less then peace and
prosperity had formerly shut them; that nothing does so powerfully call home
the conscience, as affliction; and that we need no other art of memory for sin,
besides misery; It commonly we are at variance with God, when we are at pe^ce
with our enemies, and that it is both hard and happy, not to be the worse with
liberty, as the sedentary life is most subject to diseases: if vigor of body,
and infirmity of mind, do for the most part lodge under one roof, and that a
wearish outside be a strong motive to mortification: if God, the All-wise
Physician, knows this the fittest medicine for our souls sickness, and that we
cannot otherwise be cured; if our pride forces God to do by us, as S^rtorius
did by his Army, who perceiving his Soldiers puffed up through many Victories,
and hearing them boast of their many Conquests, led them of purpose into the
lap of their Enemies, to the end that stripes might learn them moderation.

If this above all will make us pray unto him with heat and fervency: As
whither should we fly but to our Joshua, when the powers of darkness, like
mighty Aramites, have besieged us? If ever we will send up our prayers to him,
it will be when we are beleagur'd with evils.

If true, and saving joy be only the daughter of sorrow, if the security of
any people be the cause of their corruption, as no so^ner does the Holy Ghost
in sundry places say, Israel had rest; but it is added, They committed
wickedness: Even as standing waters soon grow noisome, and Vines that grow out
at large, become wild and fruitless in a small time: if it weans us from the
love of worldly things; and makes us no less enamoured with heavenly: as Zeno,
having but one flie-boat les^ him, hearing news that both it and all therein
was cast away, said, O Fortune, thou have done well to send me again to our
School of Philosophy: whereas if we find but a little pleasure in our life; we
are ready to do at upon it. Every small contentment glues our affections to
that we like, neither can we so heartily think of our home above, whilst we
are furnished with these worldly contentments: But when God strips us of them,
straightways our mind is homeward. If this world may be compared to Athens, of
which a Philosopher said, that it was a pleasant City to travel through, but
not safe to dwell in: If by smarting in our bodies, states, or names, we are
saved from smarting in our souls: If it was good for Naaman, that he was a
Leper; good for David that he was in trouble; good for Bartimeus that he was
blind; if with that Athenian Captain, we should have perished for ever, in
case we had not thus perished for a while; if our peace would have lost us, in
case we had not a little lost our peace: Then refuse not the chastening of the
Lord, neither be grieved with his correction, as Solomon advises, Prove. 3. 11.
And so much the rather,

1 First, because our struggling may aggravate, cannot redress our miseries.

2 Secondly, because the Lord will be sanctified either of us, or on us; one of
the two, as Saint Anstine speaks.

3 Thirdly, because that is little which thou suffer in comparison of what
thou deservest to suffer; for thou have deserved to be destroyed: and he that
has deserved hanging, may be glad if he escape with whipping. Besides, as David
told Saul, he could as easily have cut his throat, as he had, his coat: or as
Caesar boasted to Metellus, he could as soon make him hop headless, as bid it
be done: so the Lord may expostulate with thee, and much more.

Wherefore be patient, I say, but not without sense; be not of those Stoics,
(stocks rather you may style them) who like beasts, or rather like blocks, lie
under their burden, and account it greatest valor to make least ado, and lay
it as little as may be to heart: For if you mean to be the Kings sons, you
must bring him the fore-skins of an hundred Philistines: show him the fruit of
your former sufferings. But above all, let us not resemble the wicked; who if
affliction comes to them, receive the curse with cursing; and if the Devil
throw but one cross^ to them, they will take their souls and throw them again
to him, for they presently break out, either into some cursed rage, or into the
rage of cursing, or into some cursed action.

An usual thing, when men are crossed by the creatures (I might say, their own
husbands or children) to fall a cursing, and blaspheming them, to whom we may
say, as the Prophet did to Sennacherib: 2 Kings 19. 22. Whom have thou
blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy self? Even against the Holy
One of Israel. Whom are you angry withal? Does the rain and waters, or any
other creature displease you? Alas, they are but servants, if their Master bid
smite, they must not forbear: they may say truly what Rabshakeh usurped, Are we
come without the Lord? Isai. 36. 10. Yea, are we not sent of the Lord in love,
and to do you good, and to give you occasion of rejoicing afterward, if you
bear the Cross patiently, and make that use of it which others do, and the Lord
intends? Yea, Saint Paul could rejoice even in tribulation.

But alas, these are so far from rejoicing with that blessed Apostle, that they
rave in tribulation; and like some beasts, grow mad with baiting; or like
frantic men wounded, who finding ingredients prepared to dress them, tear them
all in pieces. But let us not be like them, if Satan robs us of a bag of
silver, let not us call after him, and bid him take a bag of gold also: If he
afflict thee outwardly, yet surrender not to him the inward; rail not at the
Hangman, but run to the Judge; fret not with Joash, 2 Kings 6. 33. but submit
with Hezekiah: Isai. 39. 8. When Gods hand is on thy back, let thy hand be on
thy mouth: If thou be wronged, call not thine adversary to account, but thy
self, and let it trouble thee more to do ill, then to hear of it; be more sorry
that it is true, then that it is known.

Yea, neither rage at the Surgeon, as madmen, nor swoun under his hand, as
Milk-sops; but consider with whom thou have to do: The Lord, the Lord strong,
merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; and
that will by no means clear the guilty, but visit the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third and fourth
generation: Exodus 34. 6, 7. And this (if any thing) will do: It was before the
Lord, says David, and therefore I will be yet more vile. Reproach in Gods
service, is our best preferment: the Lord so noble; the servant cannot be too
bumble: even Bucephalus, that disdained any other rider, in all his trappings
would kneel down to his Master Alexander, and go away Proud of his burden.

Yea, to go yet further, let us with good old Eli, (who was a good son to God,
though he had been an ill Father to his sons) even kiss the very rod we smart
withal; and say, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: for
whatsoever seems good to him, cannot but be good, howsoever it seems to us.
Yea, let us receive his stripes with all humility, patience, piety, and
thankfulness; resolving as that holy Martyr, John Bradford, who said to the
Queen (how much more did he mean it to the great King of Heaven and Earth) If
the Queen will give me life, I will thank her; if she will banish me, I will
thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank her; if she will condemn me to
perpetual imprisonment, I will thank her. A man will easily swallow a bitter
Pil, to gain health. The stomach that is purged, must be content to part with
some good nourishment, that it may deliver it self of more evil humors: and
the Physician knows what is best for the Patient: the Nurse better then the
Infant, what is good and fit for it. Now the Tenant is more noble then the
House; therefore why are we not more joyed in this, then dejected in the other?
since the least grain of the increase of grace, is more worth, then can be
equalled with whole pounds of bodily vexation. Yea, let us take them as tokens
and pledges of Gods love and favor, who loves his Children so, as not to make
wantons of them. They that would tame pampered Horses, do add to their travel,
and abate of their provender, as Pharaoh served the Children of Israel. Which
of us shall see pieces of Timber cut and squared, and plained by the Carpenter,
or Stones hewn and polished by the Mason, but will collect and gather, that
these are Stones and Timber which the Master would employ in some building? If
I suffer, it is that I may reign. And how profitable is that affliction, which
carries me to Heaven? Oh, it is a good change, to have the fire of affliction
for the fire of Hell: Who would not rather smart for a while, then for ever?
It Is true, these Waspes, wicked men, sting shrewdly, but the Hornet, Satan,
would sting worse a great deal. And not seldom does the infliction of a less
punishment, avoid a greater.

Neither must any man think to be always free from censures, aspersions, and
wrongs, nor sometimes from faults: The very Heathen could say, It is for none
but God to feel or want nothing. Indeed, many are too apt to expect it, and
therefore can bear nothing, like Minderides; the Sybarite, who was grieved for
that some of the Rose-leaves which he lay upon, were rumpled together: But this
is to vilipend, and undervalue his kindness; to make no rep^te, nor reckoning
of his deepest indulgencies, whereas the contrary, approves our sincerity
beyond all exceptions. Every man can open his hand to God while he blesses, but
to expose our selves willingly to the afflicting hand of our Maker, and to
kneel to him while he scourges us, is peculiar to the faithful.

3. Use.
3. Thirdly, if the sharp sufferings, and bitter conflicts, and sore travels of
Gods children, are usually the forerunners of a joyful issue; even the happy
birth of saving repentance: and that the sharp pain of the Chirurgions (...)
them, is only to ease them of a more durable and dangerous, yea, a far heavier
pain, the stone of the heart: If while their enemies go about to rob them, they
do but enrich them; As that Sexton, who in the night went to rob a Gentlewoman,
that had been buried the day before, with a (...), and having opened the
coffin, loosed the sheet, and chafed (...) to get it off, she having been but
in a swoone before: her spirits (...), she revived, and for many years after
lived comfortably. If they may be resembled to the five loaves in the Gospel,
which by a strange Arithmatick, were multiplied by Division, and augmented by
Substraction; then let none dare to flatter, or flesh themselves, because their
estate is prosperous; especially in an evil way: As it fared with Leah, who^ we
may hear thus chanting her happiness: God, says she, has given me my reward,
because I have given my maid to my husband: Genesis 30. 18. when she should rather
have repented then rejoiced. And the like with Micah, Judge. 17. 13. and Saul, 1 Samuel 23. 7. and Dionysius, when he found the winds favorable in his
navigation, after he had despoiled the Temple of all the gold therein. Neither
let such as suffer not, censure their brethren that do, as those three
mis-judged of Job, that he was an hypocrite, and a greater sinner then others,
and God had cast him off, or else it could not go so ill with him. Or as the
Jews censured our Savior, Isa. 53. 3, 4. And those Barbarians, Saint Paul,
Acts 28. 4. which is to condemn the generation of Gods children, Psalm. 73. 15.
But rather mistrust themselves, which was the use our Savior warned those to
make of it, who told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with
their sacrifices, Luke 13. 1, to 6.

And indeed, he is blind that judges of man's felicity by his outward
prosperity, or concludes of ones misery from his calamity: Eccles. 9. 1, 2. The
Sun of prosperity shines no less upon brambles in the wilderness, then
fruitful trees in the Orchard. The cold frost and snow of adversity, lights
upon Gardens, as well as the wild waste. Ahabs and Josiahs end, concur in the
very circumstances, the one destroys Religion. the other restores it: yet
both shot with an Arrow. Saul and Jonathan, though different in dispositions,
yet in their deaths they were not divided: Zedekiah a wicked man, had his eyes
put out: so had Samson, the valiant Judge of Israel, and Type of Christ. Moses
and Aaron, both were shut out of Canaan, as well as the malignant spies: so that
if we judge of men's persons by their outward conditions, we must needs err.

Yea, usually God does most afflict those, whom he best affects; dealing with
his children, as the good husband deals with his Trees; those in the Garden he
is ever and anon meddling with them, either lopping off the superfluous
branches, or scraping often the moss, or paring of the root, or digging and
dunging them; so using all good means to make them fruitful: whereas he lets
them alone which grow in the Hedg-row, or Forest, till at length he comes with
his Axe, and cuts them down for the fire. He was not the best Disciple that had
the bag: and fatted ware, you know is but fitted for the shambles. God puts
money indeed (as some Hoorders do) into these earthen boxes, that have only one
chinke to let in, but none to loc out, with purpose to break them when they are
full. What was Haman the better for his honor, while the King frowned on him;
or the happier for being lift up the ladder, when he was to come down again
with a rope?

And for ought thou know, (at least, if thou take not heed, for prosperity
is the more dangerous enemy of the two, and skillful to destroy,) thy
preservation is but a reservation; as it fared with Sodom and her sisters,
which were preserved from the slaughter of the four Kings, that God might rain
down Hell from Heaven upon them. And Sennacherib, who escaped the stroke of the
destroying Angel, that he might fall by the sword of his own sons, Isa. 37. 37,
38. Say then, one woe, the woe of adversity, (as thou accountest it) has passed
thee, perhaps there is a second, and a third, worse; behind: Revel. 9. 12, and
8. 13. The Philosopher would see a man's end before he pronounced him happy.
Yea, it may be, that which thou account'st thy primest privilege, may prove to
thee a snare, and may be granted thee rather out of anger then love, as the
Devil left Jobs tongue un-touched of all the rest, but why? in hope that
therewith he would have cursed God; or charged him with folly and cruelty: so
that we may say of prosperity, as Antigonus did of his garment; O noble, rather
then happy privilege! but of adversity, O happy rather then noble favor!

4 Use.
4. Fourthly, if Affliction be so profitable, and prosperity so dangerous as
has been shown; if it be our Isaacs use, first to feel us by tribulation, and
then to bless us; then away with those foolish queries, Why does God this, and
why that? why does he punish the innocent, and acquit the peccant? why does he
permit so many, and such notorious crimes? why is he so severe toward his own;
so gentle to others? Ask not (says Salvianus) why one is greater, another
less; one wretched, another happy? I know not Gods intent, but it is sufficient
satisfaction to me, that this is done by God. Why does a Physician give more
Wormwood, or Hellebore to this sick party, then to that? even because, either
his disease, or his constitution so requires it.

Neither let us value things as they seem, or according to sense; but rather
when we are best pleased let us be most suspicious: let us desire and choose
blessings, as he chose his friend; not him that would be plausible to his
humor for a day, but him that should be profitable to his mind during life.
Let us imitate Bees that pass over Roses and Violets, to set upon Thyme: If
crosses are not tooth some; let it suffice that they are wholesome: It Is not
required in Physic that it should please, but heal: unless we esteem our
pleasure above our health.

Experience tells us, that those things (for the most part) which are least
pleasing, are most wholesome: Rue is an herb most bitter to the taste, yet in
regard of the virtue, which is in it, we call; Herb of Grace: And Mithridate,
though of all other Electuaries it be most distastful; yet of all others, it is
the most wholesome.

The world hates thee, and deals most spitefully with thee; a good sign: It
has always been the portion of good men, to suffer at the hands of evil men;
as appears both by holy, and humane Writers: as for Divine Authority, you know
how it fared with the Prophets, Apostles, and our Savior Christ himself, whose
whole life, by reason of spiteful enemies, was but one continued cross. And as
touching secular; examples are infinite; whereof a few: In Athens, we read of
wise Socrates, good Phocion, just Aristides, victorious Milliades; but how
unworthily were they dealt withal? At Rome they had Marcus Cato, the pattern
of a wise and prudent man, a lively emblem of Virtue; how was he hated, thrust
down, spit upon, stripped both of his Senatorship, and Pratorship, cast into
prison, etc. Rutilius and Camillus were both exiled. Pompeus and Cicero both
yielded their necks to their Clients: Who so often cursed by the Popes, with
Bell, Book, and Candle, as Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory? though she
outlived seven of them.

But to leave examples; and come to reason: Is it not an evident sign, that if
the world hates thee, thou art none of the World? yea, therefore it hates thee,
because thy practice shames the world; and because thou discoverest, and
opposest her treasons and deceits. Wicked men are like dogs, in condition, who
will let a man amble a fair pace, quietly: but if he gallop through the Town,
though his errand be of importance, and to the King, perhaps, they will bark
and fly at him, which is a token to them, of perdition, but to thee of
salvation: Phil. 1. 28. yea, it is an evident sign, that they are of the stock
of Ishmael, and not the seed of Israel. I find many acts of deception in the
Saints; I find infirmity in those acts, but that any one of them has scoft
at, and hated another for goodness; I find not: or that have used to dispute
against it: Gregory Nazianzen, (I pray mind it seriously) told his friends;
that Julian would prove a notorious wicked man: he took such delight in
disputing against that which was good. Much less that any after regeneration,
have in this case been cruel. If we would know (says Chrysostom) a Wolf from
a Sheep (since their clothing is alike) look to their fangs, and their mouth,
if they be bloody: for who ever saw the lips of a Sheep besmeared with blood?
which being so; No matter though the gate be strait, and the way narrow, if the
end to which it leads be everlasting life.

5 Use.
5 Fifthly, if in conclusion the most malicious and damnable practices of our
worst and greatest enemies prove no other in effect to us, then did the malice
of Joseph's brethren, Mistress, and Lord to him: the first, in selling of him;
the second, in falsely accusing him; the third, in imprisoning him; (all which
made for his inestimable good and benefit;) then the malice of Haman to
Mordecai, and the Jews; whose bloody decree obtein'd against them, procured
them exceeding much joy and peace: then Balaacs malice to the children of
Israel, whose desire of cursing them, caused the Lord so much the more to bless
them, Numbers 23. Then the Devils spite to Job, who pleasured him more by his
sore afflicting him, then any thing else could possibly have done, whether we
regard his name, children, substance, or soul; then Judas his treason against
the Lord of life, whose detestable fact served not only to accomplish his will,
but the means also of all their salvations, that either befo^re or after should
believe in him: this should move wonder, to astonishment, and cause us to cry
out with the Apostle; O the deepness of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! Romans 11. 33. O the wonderful and sovereign goodness of our God!
that turns all our Poisons into Cordials; that can change our terrors into
pleasures; and makes the greatest evils beneficial unto us, for they are evil
in their own nature, and strong temptations to sin: James 1. 2. also fruits of
sin, and part of the curse, and work those former good effects, not properly by
themselves, but by accident; as they are so disposed by the infinite wisdom,
goodness, and power of God, who is able to bring light out of darkness, and
good out of evil: yea, this should tutour us to love our enemies. (We love the
medicine, nor for its own sake, but for the health it brings us) and to suffer
cheerfully whatsoever is laid upon us: for how can Gods Church in general, or
any member in particular but fare well, since the very malice of their enemies
benefits them? How can we but say, Let the World frown, and all things in it
run cross to the grain of our minds? Yet, With thee, o Lord, is mercy, and
plenteous redemption: thou make us better, by their making us, worse.

Objection. But perhaps thou have not proved the truth of this by thy own
knowledge; and particular experience.

Answer. If thou have not; thou shall in due time: the end shall prove it: stay
but till the conclusion, and thou shall see that there is no cross, no enemy,
no evils can happen unto thee, that shall not be turned to good, by him that
dwells in thee. Will you take Saint Panls word for it, or rather Gods own
word, who is Truth it self, and cannot lie? His words are, We know that all
things work together for the best, unto them that love God; even to them that
are called of his purpose, Romans 8. 28. And in Verse 35, 36. after he has
declared that Gods chosen people shall suffer tribulation, and anguish, and
persecution, and famine, and nakedness, peril, sword, etc. be killed all the
day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter; he concludes with,
Nevertheless, in all these things we are more then conquerours, through him
that loved us: and so goes on, even to a challenge of our worst enemies,
Death, Angels, Principalities and Powers, things present, and to come; height,
depth, and what other creature besides, should stand in opposition. What
voluminous waves be here, for number, and Power, and terror! yet they shall
not separate the Ark from Christ, nor a soul from the Ark, nor a body from the
soul, nor an hair from the body, to do us hurt. What says David? Mark the
upright man, and behold the just; for the end of that man is peace: Psalm. 37.
37. Mark him in his setting out, he has many oppositions; mark him in the
journey, he is full of tribulations; but mark him in the conclusion, and the
end of that man is peace. In Christ all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3. 22. How is
that? Why, we have all things, because we have the Haver of all things. And if
we love Christ, all things work together for our good; yea, for the best: Romans
8. 28. And if all things, (quoth Luther) then; even sin it self. And indeed,
how many have we known the better for their sin? Mary Magdalen had never loved
so much, if she had not so much sinned: had not the incestuous person sinned so
notoriously, he had never been so happy. God took the advantage of his
humiliation, for his conversion. Had not one foot slipped into the mouth of Hell,
he had never been in this forwardness to Heaven: Sin first wrought sorrow
(says Saint Augustine) and now godly sorrow kills sin; the daughter destroys
the mother: neither do our own sins only advantage us, but other men's sins
work for our good also.

Objection. But may some say, Can any good come out of such a Nazarite?

Answer. Yes, The advantage we have by Christ, is more then the loss we had by
Adam. If Arrius had not held a Trinity of Substances, with a Trinity of
Persons; and Sabellius an Unity of Persons, with an Unity of Essences; the
Mysteries of the Trinity had not been so clearly expl^ned by those great Lights
of the Church. If Rome had not so violently obtruded her Merits; the doctrine
of Justification only by faith in Christ, might have been less digested into
men's hearts. We may say here, as Saint Augustine does of Carthage and Rome; if
some enemies had not contested against the Church, it might have gone worse
with the Church. Lastly suppose our enemies should kill us, they shall not hurt,
but pleasure (...) yea, even death it self shall work our good. That Red Sea
shall put us over to the Land of Promise: and we shall say to the praise of
God, we are delivered, we are the better for our enemies, the better for our
sins, the better for death; yea, better for the Davil: and to think otherwise,
even for the present; were not only to derogate from the wisdom, power, and
goodness of God, but it would be against reason; for in reason, if he has
vouchsafed us that great mercy to make us his own, he has given the whole army
of afflictions, a more inviolable charge, concerning us, then David gave his
Host, concerning Absalom; See ye do the youngman, my son Absalom no harm. Now,
if for the present thou lackest faith, patience, wisdom, and true judgment how
to bear, and make this gain of the cross; Ask it of God, who gives to all men
liberally, and reproache^h no man, and it shall be given thee, Jam. 1. 5. For
every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above; and comes down from
the Father of lights: Verse 17.

6 use.
6 Sixthly, (for this point calling more for practice then proof, it behooves us
to be larger here, briefer there) If that which is one man's meat, proves
another man's poison; let it be acknowledged, that the fault is not in the meat,
but in the stomach: and that it is the wickedness of our hearts, and want of a
sincere endeavor, to make good use of Gods corrections, which causes him to
withdraw his blessing from them. Wherefore let it provoke us as we love our
selves, as we love our souls, through all the transitory, temporary, moment any
passages of this World; first, to strive after, and then to preserve the life
of our lives, and soul of our souls, sincerity, and integrity.

Again, if afflictions (which are in their own nature, evil, and unto others,
strong temptations to sin) by the goodness of God, do make so much for our
advantage, and benefit here, and hereafter: If our Heavenly Father turns all
things, even the malice of Satan, and wicked men, yea, our own sins to our
good: Romans 8. 28. If for our sakes, and for his Names sake, he even changes
the nature and property of each creature, rather then they shall hurt us; as it
is the nature and property of fire to burn, yet that vehement fire in
Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, did not burn the three servants of God. It is proper
to the Sea to drown those that be cast into it; yet it did not drown the
Prophet, in the very depth of it. It is proper for hungry ravenous Lions to
kill, and devour, yet they did Daniel no harm. And the like, when we need
their help. It is proper for the Sun to move, yet it stood still at the prayer
of Joshua: proper for it to go from East to West; yet for Hezekiahs
confirmation, it went from West to East: It is proper for Iron to sink in the
water, yet it swom when the children of the Prophets (...) need of it. In like
manner; It is proper for affliction to harden, and (...) worse, as well as for
riches and prosperity to ensnare: But as some Simples are by Art, made
medicinable, which are by nature, poisonable: So afflictions which are in
nature destructive; by grace, become preservative. And as evil waters when the
Unicorns born has been in them, are no longer poisonable, but healthful; or as
a Wasp when her sting is out, may awaken us by buzzing, but cannot hurt us by
stinging. so fares it with affliction, when God pleases to sanctify the same,
as he does to all that love him, Romans 8. 28. For of God it is, (without thanks
to Affliction, or our selves, or our sins) that we are bettered by them: All
the work is thine, let thine be the glory.

But lastly, (for though we can never be thankful enough for this, yet this is
not all) that we should find him a Savior, whom our enemies sinde a just
revenger; That we should be loosed from the chains of our sins, and they
delivered into the chains of Plagues; That the same Christ should with his
precious blood free us, that shall with his Word sentence them.

Again, if we were by nature the Seed of the Serpent, children of the Devil,
and Subjects to that Prince which rules in the air, even that spirit which now
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. We may learn by it, to be
humble and thankful, if changed to be the woman's seed, children of God, and
members of Christ: since we were once in so v^le a condition; for God found
nothing in us but Enmity, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Romans 7. 18, 25. We are not born, but
newborn Christians: And whereas he might have left us in that perishing
condition (being bound to none) and have chosen others; he has of his free
grace adopted us, and left others. What Is the reason? surely no reason can be
given, but O the depth! only this I am sure of, it is a mercy beyond all
expression! O my soul, thou have not room enough for thankfulness.

Wherefore let it provoke us so to love him, that we show forth the ^tues, and
fruits of him that has called us, and done all this for us, 1 ^ter 2. 9. But I
fear we sorseit many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy rent of
thankfulness.

For conclusion, If we be the seed of the Woman, and our enemies, the Seed of
the Serpent; let us go before them in goodness, as far as God has preferred us
before them in mercy: let us be able to say of our enemies, as Job of his, I
have not suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse unto his soul, Job 31.
30. Yea, let us send down water from our compassionate eyes, and weep for them
by whom we bleed. In brief, let us hate their opinions, strive against their
practice, pity their misguidings, neglect their censures, labor their
recovery, and pray for their salvation.

CHAP. 34.
That though God disposes of all their malice to his Childrens greater good,
yet they shall be rewarded according to their mischievous intentions.

Ob. IF it be so, that the malice of wicked men makes so much for the behoof of
Gods people; and that whatsoever they do unto us, is but the execution of Gods
will, and full accomplishment of his just decree; it may seem to make on their
side, and not only extenuate their evil, but give them occasion of boasting.

Ans. Although God disposes it to the good of his children, that he may bring
about all things to make for his own glory; yet they intend only evil in it,
as namely; the Dishonor of God, the ruin of men's souls (as I have proved in
the Drunkards Character) and the satisfying of their own serpentine enmity, and
thirst of revenge. We must therefore learn to distinguish betwixt the act of
God and of an enemy, as indeed Gods people do; When ye thought evil against me
(says Joseph to his brethren) God disposed it to good, that he might bring to
pass as it is this day, and save much people alive, Genesis 50. 20. God had no
hand in doing the evil, but God will have a hand in the disposing of it: When
Satan and wicked men have their wills, even therein also is Gods will
fulfilled, for Gods will is the highest cause of all things, Psalm. 115. 3, 4.
Yea, the holy God challenges to himself whatsoever is done in the City, Amos
3. 6. but so, as neither wicked men's sins shall taint him, nor his decree
justify them: the sin is their own, the good which comes of it is Gods, the
benefit ours; He does well, in suffering to be done, whatsoever is evil done,
says Saint Augustine, and is just in their injustice. God wills the same
action, as it is a blessing, trial, or chastisement of his children, which he
^es as the wickedness of the agent: because in dhe same thing which they did,
there was not the same cause for which they did it. The lewd tongue, hand, or
heart, moves from God, it moves lewdly from Satan: wicked men are never the
freer from guilt and punishment, for that hand which the holy God has in their
offensive actions. To instance in some examples; Satan did naught touching Job,
but what the Lord upon his request gave him leave to do; what then? Did God and
Belial join in fu filling the same act? No: sooner shall Stygian darkness
blend with light, the frost with fire, day with night: true, God and Satan
willed the self-same thing; but God intended good, Satan ill; Satan aimed at
Jobs, and God at his confusion. God used the malice of Pharaoh and Shimei unto
good; what then? God afflicted his people with another mind then Pharaoh, did;
God, to increase them, Pharaoh, to suppress them. The sin of Shimeis curse was
his own, the smart of the curse was Gods; God wills that as David's
chastisement, which he hates as Shimeis wickedness. God owed a revenge to the
house of Eli, and by the delation of Doeg, he took occasion to pay it, when the
Priests were slain: It was just in God, which in Doeg, was most unjust: Saul's
cruelty, and the treachery of Doeg, do not lose one dram of their guilt, by the
counsel of God: Neither does the holy counsel of God, gather any blemish by
their wickedness: If it had pleased God, to inflict death upon them sooner,
without any pretense of occasion; his justice had been clear from all
imputations. Now if Saul or Doeg be instead of a Pestilence or Fever; who can
cavil? The judgments of God are not ever manifest, but are always just.
Again, the curse of the Serpent bestowed blessedness on Man; yea, our first
Parents had been less glorious, if they had not wanted a Savior. What then?
Does Satan merit thanks? No, but the contrary; for he only intended the final
ruin and destruction of them and all mankind, with the dishonor of their
Maker. Lastly, the Devil does us good in this particular case, for while he
assaults us with temptations, and afflicts us with crosses, he in effect helps
us to Crowns. Yet still no thanks to Satan, for to be charitable is more then
his meaning; it is that Divine and overruling Providence of God, which we are
beholding unto, and to him give we the thanks.

But above all, our Saviors example will most excellently distinguish the ends
of God, Satan, and wicked Men; for if we observe, Judas delivered him to death
for gain, the Jews for envy, Pilate for fear; the Devil provoked each of them
through this enmity; Christ himself, to obey his Fathers will, God the Father
in love to sinners, and for their Redemption: each furthered one and the same
thing, but to contrary ends: so when this enmity breaks forth in the wicked,
Satan has a hand in it as a malicious author; as when he entered into Judas,
and made him betray Christ, Luke 22. 3. Man himself as a voluntary instrument,
as when Pharaoh hardened his own heart against the children of Israel, Exodus 9.
34. God as a most righteous Judge, and avenger, as when he also hardened
Pharoahs heart, so punishing his former hardness, with further obduration,
Exodus 9. 12. But how in this case? Even by permitting the seed of the Serpent,
from their own malicious inclination, to hate the seed of the Woman, not by
infusing this malice, but by withdrawing his grace when he sees it abused: he
does not infuse corruption, he does not withold the occasion; as when the
Rider gives his horse the raines, we say he puts him on.

Whence that distinction of adversities, as they come from Satan, they are
usually called temptations; as they come from Men, persecutions; as from God,
afflictions.

Now as God turned the treachery of Judas, not only to the praise of his
justice, mercy, wisdom, power, etc. but to the good of all believers: so he
turns this enmity of Satan and wicked men, to his childrens great advantage
(in stopping them in their courses of sin and keeping them in exercise) and his
own glory: And well may he work good by evil instruments, when every Prince and
Magistrate has the seat to make profitable instruments, as well of evil
persons, as of good: yea, when there is nothing in the world, be it gall it
self; yea, the excrement of a Dog, or the poison of a Serpent, but man's shallow
invention can find it is good for something: neither do two contrary poisons
mingled together prove mortal.

And thus you see that the will of God may be done thanklessely, when in
fulfilling the substance, we fail in the intentions, and err in circumstances.

Now see with the like patience, how it will fare with these men in the end.
Pomponius Atticus being destined to famishment, and receiving no manner of
sustenance for many days; contrary to the intention; was freed by means of
that abstinence from a violent pain, and recovered of a disease; which
otherwise had cost him his life. Prometheus being run in with a Rapier, and
Jason receiving a great blow on the breast, each was restored to health, from
dangerous and deadly impostumes, which otherwise were thought ineurable. And
this is our case, for even as that cured them, which their enemies intended
should have killed them; so this enmity of the Serpent and his Seed, c^res our
souls, and makes us everlastingly happy. Yet they intending only evil in it,
or at least the satisfying of their own wicked wills, (as they know better then
I, wherein they imitate the Weesel, which does a man pleasure in destroying of
Vermin, yet only intends the satisfying of her own hunger, not his good that
keeps the house) can no way assume the least praise to themselves, nor expect
the more favor. That which is ill of it self is not to be ventured on for the
good which comes by accident. It is no privilege to be an instrument of good
by evil means: Nor can you expect to fare better without a healing of your
errors, then the Worm in the stomach, which, when it has devoured all the
matter proper for it, dies it self: or Heleborus, which after it has wrought
the cure within the body, is cast up again, together with the Malady.

The Lord does often good to his Church, even by those Instruments whom for
their sins he means to cast into Hellfire. Ashur was his Rod to scourge
Israel; that done, they fell under a sharper lash themselves: Those Nations,
says God, shall serve the King of Babel seventy years, and when the seventy
years are accomplished, I will visit the King of Babel and that Nation for
their iniquities, and will make it a perpetual desolation, etc. Jer. 25. 11,
12. and 30, 16. even the greater sinners may punish the less, and prosper for
a time, Ezekiel 7. I will bring the most wicked of the Heathen, and they shall
possess their Houses, verse. 24. When iniquity has played her part, vengeance
leaps upon the Stage; the Comedy is short, but the Tragedy is longer.

We use rubbish to scour our vessels, when those vessels are cleared, we fling
away the rubbish. Bridges that help men over the stream, at last themselves rot
and sink in. When Balaams Ass had done speaking, humana voce, she lived an
Ass, and died an Ass: So when God has sufficiently afflicted the righteous,
by the rod of the wicked, he will fling the Rod into the fire which is
unquenchable, Isa. 33. 1.

And it stands with the strength of reason, for if God, says Saint Gregory,
strike so smartly those whom he spares; how heavy will his blows be on them
whom he condemns; and with what severity shall Castawayes be punished, when
his own children are so visited and afflicted. If Gods own Children, who are as
dear and near to him, as the Apple of his eye, or the signet on his right hand,
suffer so many and grievous afflictions here; what shall his adversaries suffer
in Hell? undo^btedly, when the Patient is made whole, he shall be preserved;
but the Plaster shall be thrown away: For as God does turn evil to good to
them that love him; so he turns good to evil to those that hate him.

Again secondly, if the wicked are punished for doing wrong to the wicked, much
more for wronging the just, and innocent: But we have many examples of the
former, as that of Adonibezeck, who having cut off the Thumbs and great Toes of
Seventy Kings that were wicked like himself, had also his his own Thumbs and
Toes cut off; Judge. 1. (...). 7. And Moab, of whom the Lord says, he has
burnt the bones of the King of Edo^ into lime, therefore will I send a fire
upon Moab^ and it shall devour, etc. Amos 2. 1, 2. If the greater Serpent
devours the less, there is a Dragon to devour him, therefore the enemies of
Gods Church, have no hope to escape. The everlasting punishments of the ungodly
are deferred, not remitted.

But all the evil thou do to the godly, is with thy tongue?

Answ. That Is bad enough, the Serpents hissing betrays his malice; and
Ishmael's tongue made him a Persecuter, as well as Doeg's hands; he did but
flout Isaac, yet Saint Paul says, he persecuted him Gal. 4. 29. Cham only
scoft at Noah, yet it brought upon him his Fathers curse, and Gods upon that.
The Athenians but scoft once at Silla's wife, and it had well nigh co^t the
razing of their City, he was so provoked with the indignity. And whatever thou
conceivest of it, let this fault be as far from my soul, as my soul from Hell.
For assuredly, God will one day laugh you to scorn, for laughing his to scorn:
and at last despise you, that have despised him in us.

CHAP. 35.
Other grounds of comfort to support a Christian in his sufferings. And first,
that God is specially present with his servants in their afflictions, takes
notice of their sufferings, and allayes their grief.

THis rub being removed, and the passage made clear, proceed we to other
grounds of comfort which the Word of God affords in this case, for the better
upholding, and strenghtening of a weak Christian in his sufferings: Wherein,
that we may not exceed, I will select out only five, because instructions, if
they exceed, are wont, like nails, to drive out one another.

First, we shall bear the Cross with the more patience and comfort; if we
consider, that God is specially present with his servants in their afflictions;
takes notice of their sufferings, and allays their grief. The troubles of a
Christian are very great for number, variety, and bitterness; yet there is o^
ingredient that sweetens them all, the promise of God, I will be with thee
introuble, and deliver thee, Psalm. 91. 15. And tho^ shall not be tempted above
thy strength, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Again, fear not; for when thou passest through the
water, I will be with thee; and through the floods, that they do not overflow
thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be butnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43. 1, 2. Lo, here are promises like
Flaggons of Wine, to comfort the distressed soul. Wherefore as Caesar said to
the trembling Mariner, Be not afraid; for thou carriest Caesar; so, O
Christian! be not afraid, for he that is in thee, for thee, with thee, that
guides thee, that will save thee, is the invincible King Jehova. And upon this
ground David was so comforted and refreshed in his soul, Psalm. 94. 19. that he
was able to say, Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: Why? For thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff
shall comfort me, Psalm. 23. 4. Yea, our Enemies can no sooner assault us with
their tongues, but God come in to our rescue. If ye be railed upon for the
name of Christ, (says Saint Peter) blessed are ye, for the Spirit of God
rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14. God is never so much enjoyed of us, as when we
are in the deep, with David, Psalm. 130. 1. and when we are worst of all
bestead with Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. When did Jacob see a Vision of
Angels? but when he fled for his life, making the cold earth his bed, and a
stone his pillow; or when was his heart so full of joy, as now that his head
lay hardest? When was Paul wrapped into the third heaven to hear words from
Christ not fit to be uttered, 2 Cor. 12. 2. 4. but as some of the learned
conceive, when he was bereaved of his sight. Stephen saw great happiness by
Christ, in his peace: but under that shower of stones, he saw heaven it self
open, Act. 7. When we are slain all the day long for his sake, with the
Martyrs, then we are given to see him with our eyes, as Job did, who till that
time had only heard of him by the hearing of the ear. Then we come to know
that the Lord, he is God, with Manasses 2 Chronicles. 33. 13. and that he is our
hope and strength and refuge, and a very present help in troubles, ready to be
found of all that seek to him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 4. 15. Psalm 9. 9, 10, and 46. 1.

The Israelites never fared so well, as when they lived at Gods immediate
finding, and at night expected their morrows breakfast from the clouds: When
they did daily ask and daily receive, their daily hread. Yea, even when they
were wandering in a forlorn wilderness, how did God as it were attend upon them
in their distress, to supply their wants? They have no guide, therefore God
himself goes before them in a pillar of fire; they have no shelter, the Lord
spreads a Cloud over them for a Canopy; are they at a stand, and want way; the
Sea shall part and give them passage; do they lack bread? Heaven it self shall
power down the food of Angels; have they no meat to their bread? a wind shall
send them innumerable Quails; do they yet want drink, behold a hard rock
smitten with a little wand, shall power them out water in abundance; have they
no supply of Apparel, their Garments shall not wax old on their backs; be
their Enemies too strong for them for want of Engines, the Walls of Jericho
shall fall down before them; are their enemies yet too many and potent,
hailstones shall fall and brain them: Lamps, Pitchers, and Dreams shall get
them Victory, the Sun shall stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley
of Ajalon: lack they yet a Land to inhabit, the Lord will cast out all the
inhabitants, and give them a Land which flows with milk and honey, etc.
Afflictions have this advantage, that they occasion God to show that mercy to
us, whereof the prosperous are incapable; as we further see in Hagar, Genesis 21.
17, 18, 19. And Manoah's Wife, Judge. 13. 3. to whom the Angel of the Covenant
had not been sent, if they had not been in distress.

It would not become a mother to be so indulgent to an healthful child, ss to
a sick: and in deed some have found their outward castigations so sweetened with
the inward consolations of Gods Spirit, that they have sonud and confessed
their receipts of joy and comfort, to be an hundred sold more than their
payments, even in this present life according to that promise of our Savior,
Mark. 10. 29, 30. So that a Christian is still a gainer in all his losses; yea,
he gains by his losses.

Now if we could but remember and lay to heart these promises, thus backed
with examples; when we feel the greatest assaults or pangs, how could we want
courage? But alas, most of us are like the Prophets servant, 2 King. 6. who
saw his foes, but not his friends: we are like Joseph's brethren, who saw him,
converst with him, were fed by him, yet knew him not. Like Peter, who when the
Angel brought him out of prison, and went before him; wist not that it was so,
but thought he saw a vision, Act. 12. 9. Christ at his Resurrection was so
changed, that his own Disciples knew him not; much more since his ascension may
he pass by us, as he did by Job, Chap. 9. 11. or meet us as he did Saul in
the way to Damascus; or walk and talk with us, as he did with the two
Disciples in the way to Emaus, Luke 24. 16. or stand by us while we are
seeking him, as he did by Mary in the Garden, Joh. 20. 1^. and yet we be
ignorant that it is he. Yea, he may be in us by his spirit; even whilst we
seel him not. Jacob saw him both asleep and awake, yet (says he) the Lord was
in this place, and I was not aware of it, Genesis 28, 16. at least we are apt to
think, that God is removed from us, when we any way suffer calamity; as the
Israelites do but want water, and presently they cry, Is the Lord among us, or
no? Exodus 17. 7. as if God could not be with them, and they a thirst; either
he must humor carnal minds, or be distrusted.

But both his presence and love, is the same in adversity, as it is in
prosperity; our sense only makes the difference, even as a Church, Castle, or
Town, is unmovable, and keeps one place; though to us it may seem sometime on
our right hand, other while on our left: as we change our standing, sitting,
or walking. Yet if some unusual crosses disturb our peace, presently there
breaks out a voice mixed with mur^uring, and despair, God has forsaken us. It
was a common complain^ with David. The Lord has forsaken us; thou have cast
off, and abhorred us: why have thou forsaken me etc.? Yea, the only Son of
God came to this, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet consider, did
God forsake either of them? he might be angry with David, more angry with
Christ, for the fins of all the world: and in their present sense, that anger
might work in them an apprehension of his forsaking them: but he did not
forsake them, nor will he forsake thee, if thou do not first forsake him.
Thou may think so, but God will not do so; but in the mean time, how can this
be well taken? we see our wretchedness, we do not see our blessedness: No
talk of his presence, of his absence we complain. Our cowardly spirits give
him for quite gone; yet he is not far from every one of us, Act. 17. 27. Yea,
this confession could Seneca make, (but like a Divine) God is near unto thee,
he is with thee, he is within thee: and surely if he had not been with these
Israelites, they had not lived; if he had been in them, they had not murmured.
We can think him absent in our want, and cannot see him absent in our sin;
yet, wickedness, not affliction, argues him gone: yea, he is then most
present, when he most chastises; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolations abound through Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

Again, God may be present with us, and yet we not be pleased; as the
Israelites repined for a King, when the Lord was their King: or Christ may be
with us, and yet we want something that we desire. Christ was in the Ship, and
yet (say the Apostles) we have no bread. Jesus was at the Marriage, yet says
his Mother, they have no Wine, Joh. 2. 3. We may want Bread and Wine, and yet
have Christ's company: but if food fail, it is because Manna is to come; if
Wine be absent, yet grace and salvation is present: if God takes away flesh,
and gives Manna; deny Sun and Moon, and gives himself; he does us no wrong.

Now why does God by his promise tie himself to be present with us; more
especially in affliction? but that he may resist our enemies, sustain us when
we faint, and crown us when we overcome; but that he may be exact in taking
notice of our particular sufferings, and as David says, Count our wanderings,
put our tears into his bottle, and enter all into his Register, Psalm. 56. 8. 9.
All our afflictions are more noted by that God that sends them, than of the
patient that suffers them; every pang, and stitch, and gird, is first felt of
him that sends it: could we be miserable unseen, we had reason to be
heartless: but how can it be but less possible to endure any thing that he
knows not, than that he inflicted not? As he said to Manoah by an Angel,
Thou art barren, Judge. 13. 3. so he says to one, thou art sick, to another,
thou art poor, to a third, thou art defamed; thou art oppressed to another;
that all-seeing eye takes notice from heaven of every man's condition, no less
than if he should send an Angel to tell us he knew it: and his knowledge
compared with his mercy, is the just comfort of all our sufferings. O God! we
are many times miserable, and feel it not; thou know even those sorrows
which we might have, thou know what thou have done, do what thou please.

CHAP. 36.
That all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not by
accident, chance or fortune, but by the especial providence of God.

Section 1.
2. We shall bear the cross with more patience and comfort. If we consider,
that all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not by
accident, chance, or fortune, but by the special providence of God; who not
only decrees and fore-appointeth every particular cross, Eccles. 3. 1. Romans
8. 28. 29. but even effects them, and brings them into execution, as they are
crosses, corrections, trialls, and chastisements: Isa. 45. 7. Amos 3. 6. and
also orders and disposes them; that is, limiteth and appoints the
beginning, the end, the measure, the quality, and the continuance thereof: yea,
he orders them to their right ends; namely, his own glory, the good of his
servants, and the benefit of his Church: Jer. 30. 11. Genesis 50. 19, 20. 2 Samuel
16. 10. Psalm. 39. 9. God uses them but as instruments, wherewith to Work his
good pleasure upon us. As what are our enemies, but God's Axes to cut us down,
not for the fire, but for the building: God's Masons to ^ew us here in the
Mountain, that we may be as the pollished corner stones of the Temple, Psalm.
144. 12. Or admit the Mason pulls down the House, it is not with an intent to
destroy it, but to re-edifie it; and raise it up again in better form and
fashion. Gods scullions to scowre up the vessel of his House, that they may
be meet for the Masters use.

If then they be but as instruments, and tools in the hand of the workman; we
must not so much look to the instrument, as to the Author, Genesis 45. 5. and 50
20. Well may the Priests of the Philistims doubt whether their plague be from
God, or by fortune, 1 Samuel 6. 2, 9. but let a Joseph be sold into Egypt, he
will say to his enemies, Ye sent not me hither, but God; when ye thought
evil against me, God disposed it to good, that be might bring to pass as it
is this day; and save much people alive: Or let a David be railed upon by any
cursed Shimei, he will answer, Let him alone, for he curses, even because
the Lord has bid him curse David: who dare then say, wherefore have thou done
so? 2 Samuel 16. 10. Or let a Micha be trodden upon, and insulted over by his
enemy, his answer will be no other than this. I will bear the wrath of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me: Micha 7. 9. The believer that is conversant in God's book,
knows that his adversaries are in the hands of God, as a hammer, ax, or rod, in
the hand of a smiter; and therefore as the hammer, ax, or rod, of it self can
do nothing, any further than the force of the hand using it, gives strength
(...) to it: so no more can they do any thing at all unto him, further than it
is given them from above; as our Savior told Pilate: Job. 19. 11. See this in
some examples; you have Laban following Jacob with one troop, Esau meeting him
with another, both with hostile intentions; both go on till the uttermost point
of their execution, both are prevented ere the execution: for stay but a while,
and you shall see Laban leave him with a kiss, Esau meet him with a kiss; of
the one he has an oath, tears of the other, peace with both. God makes fools
of the enemies of his Church, he lets them proceed that they may be
frustrate; and when they are gone to the uttermost reach of their teather, he
pulls them back to the stake with shame. Again, you have Senacherib let loose
upon Hezekiah and his people, who insults over them intolerably: 2 Kings 18.
Oh! the lamentable and (in sight) desperate condition of distressed Jerusalem;
wealth it had none, strength it had but a little, all the country round about
was subdued unto the Assyrian: that proud victor has begirt the walls of it
with an innumerable army, scorning that such a shovell-full of earth should
stand out but one day: yet poor Jerusalem stands alone, blocked up with a world
of enemies, helpless, friendless, comfortless, looking for the worst of an
hostile fury; and on a sudden, before an Arrow is shot into the City, a hundred
fourscore and five thousand of their enemies were slain, and the rest run away,
(...) Kings 19. 35, 36. God laughs in heaven at the plots of Tyrants, and
befools them in their deepest projects. If he undertake to protect a people,
in vain shall earth, and hell conspire against them. Nothing can be
accomplished in the Lower House of this world, but first it is decreed in the
Upper Court of heaven; as for example, what did the Jews ever do to our Savior
Christ, that was not first both decreed by the Father of Spirits, and registered
in the Scriptures for our notice and comfort? They could not so much as throw
the Dice for his Coat, but it was prophesied: Psalm. 22. 18. and in Psalm. 69.
21. It is foretold that they should give him gall in his meat, and in his
thirst, vinegar to drink; the very quality and kind of his drink is prophesied:
yea, his face could not be spit upon without a prophecy; those filthy
excrements of his enemies fell not upon his face, without God's decree, and the
Prophets relation: Isa. 50. 6. Yea, let the Kings of the earth be assembled,
and the Rulers come together; Let Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles
and the people of Israel, gather themselves in one league against him, it is in
vain; for they can do nothing, but what the hand of God and his Counsel has
before determined to be done: as Peter and John affirmed to the rest of the
Disciples, for their better confirmation and comfort: Act. 4. 26. to 29. No,
notwithstanding the Devil raged, the Pharisees stormed, Herod and Pilate
vexed, Caiaphas prophesied, all combined, and often sought to take him: yet no
man-laid hands on him (until his hour was come that God had appointed): so
that by all their plots, they were never able to do him any more hurt, than
only to show their teeth, Joh. 7. 30. If we are in league with God, we need
not fear the greatest of men.

Indeed, it was Pilates brag to Christ, know thou not that I have power to
crucify thee? Joh. 19. 10. And Labans to Jacob, Genesis 31. 29. I am able to do
you hurt; but they were vain cracks: for does not Pharaohs overthrow tell all
boasting Champions, that an Host is nothing without the God of Hosts. Yea,
Satan himself was fain to say unto God in Job's case, stretch out now thine
hand, etc. Job 1. 11. and 2. 5. True as Themistocles once said of his son; this
boy can do more than any man in all Greece: for the Athenians command the
Grecians, and I command the Athenians, and my wife commands, me, and my son
commands my wife: so the Churches adversaries in some places, may boast what
their Father the Devil can do: for he commands the Pope, and the Pope
commands the Jesuits, and the Jesuits command such a King, or Emperor, Rev.
17. ver. 12. 13. and that Emperor, or King, commands his Officers of State;
and they command the common people. And yet to speak rightly, even all these
can do just nothing of themselves, for he that sits in the heavens laughing
them to scorn, commands all.

Now it must needs comfort and support us exceedingly, if in all cases we do
but duly consider, that inequality is the ground of order, that superior
causes guide the subordinate, that this sublunary Globe depends on the
celestial; as the lesser wheels in a Clock do on the great one, which I find
thus expressed: As in a Clock one motion does convay,
And carry diverse wheels a several way;
Yet altogether by the great wheels sarce,
Direct the hand unto his proper course.


Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lordcommandeth it not?
Lamenta. 3. 37. Suppose the Legions of hell should combine with the Potentates
of the earth to do their worst, they are all nothing without God: as in
Arithmetic, put never so many Ciphers together, one before another, and they
make nothing; but let one figure be added, it makes them infinite. So is it
with men and Devils; if God be not with them, they are all but Ciphers: And
yet for the praise of his glory, and the good of his Church, these enemies of
his, whether they rise or sit still, shall by an insensible ordination perform
that will of the Almighty, which they least think of, and most oppose: The
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and their Rulers, (because they knew him not, nor yet
the words of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day) have fulfilled them
in condemning him, Act. 13. 27. so that as Saint Austin speaks, by resisting
the will of God, they do fulfill it: and his will is done by and upon them,
even in that they do against his will.

That even Satan himself is limited, and can go no further than his chain will
reach, we may see Rev. 20. 2. More particularly; he could not touch so much
as Job's body or substance, no not one of his servants, nor one limb of their
bodies, nor one hair of their heads, nor one beast of their herds, but he
must first beg leave of God, Job 2. 6. Nay Satan is so far from having power
over us living, that he cannot touch our bodies being dead; yea, he cannot
find them when God will conceal them, (witness the body of Moses): and I doubt
not, but as the Angels did wait at the Sepu^chre of their and our Lord: so for
his sake, they also watch (...) our graves: he could not seduce a false
prophet, nor enter into a Hog without license; the whole Legion sue to Christ
for a sufferance, not daring other than to (...), that without his permission
they could not hurt a very Swine.

And when he has leave from God, what can he do? he cannot go one hairs
breadth beyond his commission: being permitted, he could bring Christ himself,
and set him on the Pinnacle of the Temple, but he could not throw him down;
which even a little child might have done with permission. As the Lion, 1 King.
13, killed the Prophet, but neither touched the Ass whereon he road, no^ yet
the dead carkas contrary to his nature.

True Satan could boast even to Christ himself, that all the world was his, and
all the Kingdoms thereof, but when it came to the push, he could not enter into
a very Hog, without asking him leave, and having leave given him, he presently
carried the whole heard headlong into the Sea: Why did he not so to the man
possessed? no thanks to him, he had leave for the one, not so for the other,
and therefore a whole Legion of them were not able to destroy one poor simple
man, Matthew. 8. ver. 31. 32.

So that all our enemies are curbed and restrained by the divine providence of
our heavenly Father: Satan may be his Executioner, but God is the Judge, and
the Executioner cannot lay on a stroke more than the Judge appoints,

I confess Satan is so strong comparatively, and withal so crafty and
malicious, that we may with reverence and love, wonder at the mercy of God in
our delivery: But this is our comfort, first, that Spirit (as we have shown)
can do nothing without the God of Spirits. Secondly, we have the Angels aid,
as the Prophet Elisha against that bloody King, 2 King. 6. 17. Lot against the
Sodomites, Genesis 19. 10. Jacob against the fear of Esau, Genesis 32. ver. 24. 28.
Hezekiah against Senacherib, Isa. 37. 36. and England against that invicible
Navy of the Spaniards in Eighty eight. True, they appear not ordinarily, what
then? no more do the evil Angels, but the Word of God assures us it is so, the
Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers them,
Psalm. 34. 7. And do but thou get spiritual eyes, whereby thou mai'st see, as
with Moses, the invisible God, so the invisible Angels: do but pray as Elisha
for his servant, that thine eyes may be opened, and then thou shall see more
with thee, than against thee 2 King. 6. 16. 17.

Yea, had wicked men their eyes opened, as Ba^aam once had, they would at every
torn see an Angel stand in their way, ready to resist what they go about, as
he did: for this is one of the noble imploiments of those* glorious spi^its,
to give a strong, though invisible opposition to lewd enterprises: Many a
treacherous act have they hindered, without the knowledge of the Traitor. Yea,
O! God, many are the dangers which we see, and fear; innumerable, those we
neither see nor fear, Therefore to take away all attribution to our selves, even
when we know not thou do deliver us.

Now if it be fearful to think how great things evil spirits can do with
permission; it is comfortable to think how they can do nothing without
permission: for if God must give him leave, he will never give him leave to do
any harm to his chosen, be will never give him leave to do the least hurt to
our souls. Now as by way of concession, every greater includes the less, he
that can lift a Talent, can easily lift a Pound; so by way of denial, every
greater excludes the less. If Satan himself cannot hurt ^s, much less his
instruments, weak men: but for proof of this, see also an instance or two: that
a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without our heavenly Father; and that
without leave from him, our enemies cannot diminish one hair of our heads; we
have our Savior's express testimony, Matthew. 10. 29. 30. Let the
Powder-Traytors plot and contrive the ^uine of our state never so cunningly and
closey, let them go on to the utmost, (as there wanted nothing but an actor to
bring on that Catholic doomsday) yet before the match could be brought to the
Powder, their artificial fireworks were discovered, their projection,
prodition, deperdition, all disclosed, and seasonably returned on their own
heads: And the like of their invincible Navy. And of Pope Alexander the sixth,
who prepared a feast for diverse Cardinals and Senators, purposing to poison
them: but by the providence of God, they escaped; and he alone was poisoned.
Let Jezabel fret her heart out, and swear by her gods, that Eliah shall die,
yet she shall be frustrate; Eliah shall be safe. Let the red Dragon spout
forth floods of venom against the Church, the Church shall have wings given her
to fly away, she shall be delivered, Rev. 12. Let the Scribes and Pharisces,
with their many false witnesses accuse Christ never so, yet in spite of malice,
innocence shall find abbottors: and rather than he shall want witnesses, the
mouth of Pi^ate shall be opened to his justification. Yea, let Jo^as through
frailty run away from the execution and embassage of God's charge, and
thereupon be cast into the Sea, though the waves require him of the Ship, and
the Fish require him of the waves, yet the Lord will require him of the Fish:
even the Sea, and the Fish, had as great a charge for the Prophet, as the
Prophet had a charge for Niniveh: for this is a sure rule, if in case God gives
any of the creatures leave to afflict us, yet he will be sure to lay no more
upon us than we are able, or he will make ^s able to bear: yea, than shall make
for our good, and his glory. He has a provident care over all the Creatures,
even Beasts and Plants: and certainly we are more precious than Fowls and
Flowers; yet the Lord cares for them. Will the House-holder take care to water
the herbs of his Garden, or to fodder his Cattle, and suffer his Men and Maids
to famish through hunger and thirst? Or will he provide for his Men and Maids,
and let his own children starve? Surely, if a man provide not for his own, He
has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel: 1 Timothy 5. 8. Far be it
then from the great Hous-holder, and Judge of allthe earth, not to provide for
his dear Children and Servants, what shall be most necessary for them: indeed
we may fear our own flesh, as Saint Paul did; but God is faithful, and will
not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but will even give the issue
with the temptation, and in the mean time support us with his grace, 2 Cor. 12.
9. You have an excellent place to this purpose, Jer. 15. 20, 21.

Section. 2.
Objection. But we see by experience, that God gives wicked men power often
times to take away the very lives of the godly.

Answ. What then? If we lose the lives of our bodies, it is, that we may save
the lives of our souls; and attain the greater degree of glory, Luke 9. 24. and
so we are made gainers even by that loss. Now if God takes away temporal, and
gives eternal life for it, there is no hurt done us: he that promises ten
pieces of silver, and gives ten pieces of gold, breaks no promise. Peace be
unto this house, was the Apostles salutation, but it was not meant of an
outward peace with men of the world: and Christ faith, you shall have rest,
Matthew. 11. 28. but it is rest unto your souls. Again, thou have merited a
threefold death: if thou be freed from the two worser, spiritual, and
eternal; and God deal favorably with thee touching thy natural death, he is
merciful: if not, thou must not think him unjust. Though the Devil and the
world can hurt us, as well as other men, in our outward and bodily estates: as
the Devil had power over Job in his Ulcers, over his children in their death,
over Mary Magdalen that was possessed, and over that daughter of Abraham's, Luk,
13. whom he kept bound 18. years, ver. 16. yet they can do us no hurt, nor
endanger our souls; they shall lose nothing but their dross, as in Zachary 13.
9. Isa. 12. Let them sluice out our blood, our souls they cannot so much as
strike; let wild beasts tear the body from the soul, yet neither body, nor soul
are thereby severed from Christ. Yea, they can neither deprive us of our
spiritual treasure here, nor eternal hereafter; which makes our Savior say,
Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Helt, Matthew. 10.
28. The body is but the Bark, Cabinet, Case, or Instrument, of the soul; and
say it falls in pieces, there is but a pitcher broken; the soul a glorious
Ruby, held more fit to be set in the crown of glory, than here to be trodden
under foot by dirtie swine; and therefore so soon as separated, the Angels
convey her hence to the place of everlasting bliss. Alas, what can they do?
they cannot separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus, Rom, 8. 38. 39.
Yea, they are so far from doing us harm, as that contrariwise we are much the
better for them; In all these these things we are more than conquerours,
through him that loved us: ver. 37. Whatsoever then becoms of goods, or lives,
happy are we so long as (like wise Soldiers) we guard the vital parts,
while the soul is kept sound from impatience, from distrust, etc. Our enemy
may afflict us, he cannot hurt us.

Objection. Nevertheless, that which I suffer, is exceeding grievous.

Answer. Not so grievous as it might have been, for he that has afflicted
thee for a time, could have held thee longer; he that touches thee in part,
could have stricken thee in whole; he that laid this upon thy body, has power
to lay a greater Rod both upon thy body and soul. Again, there is no
chastisement not grievous; the bone that was dis-jointed, cannot be set right
without pain; no potion can cure us, if it work not; and it works not, except
it make us sick: Nay, my very disease is not so painful for the time, as my
remedy: how does it turn the stomach, and wring the in trails, and work a worse
distemper than that whereof I formerly complained? neither could it be so
wholesome, if it were less unpleasing, neither could it make me whole, if it
did not first make me sick. But we are contented with that sickness which is
the way to health. There is a vexation without hurt, such is this: we are
afflicted; not overpressed: needy; not desperate: persecuted, not forsaken:
ca^t down, but perish not, how should we? when all the evil in a City, coms
from the providence of a good God, which can neither be impotent, nor unme
cifull? It is the Lord, let him do what he will. Woe worth us! if evils could
come by chance, or were let loose to light where they l^st; now they are
overruled, we are safe. In the name of God then, let not the tall stature of
the Anakims, nor the combination of the Edomites, nor the politic counsels of
all the Achitopels and Machivillians, nor the proud looks not the big words of
all the Amaziahs, combining themselves together, deter or dismay you. Let not
the over-topping growth of the sons of Zerviah seem too hard for you; for God
is infinitely more strong and mighty to save us, than all our enemies are
todestroy us: and he has his Oar in their Boat, he has a special stroke in
all actions whatsoever, and can easily overreach, and make stark fools of the
wisest; by making their own counsels and endeavors like Hushai's, to overthrow
those intentions which they seem to support.

As touching the continuance of afflictions, God so orders and tempereth the
same, in his merciful wisdom; that either they be tolerable, or short; either
our sorrows shall not be violent, or they shall not last; if they be not light,
they shall not be long: grievous and sore trialls last but for a season, Pet. 1.
6. A little while, Joh. 16. 16. Yea, but a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17. He endures
but a while in his anger, (says the Psalmist) but in his favor is life;
weeping may abide for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30. 5. And
this had he good experience of; for if we mark it, all those Psalms whose
first lines contain sighs and broken complaints, do end with delight and
contentment; he began them in fear, but they end in joy: you shall see terrible
anguish fitting in the door, irremediable sorrow looking in at the window,
despair bordering in the margent, and offering to creep into the text; yet
after a sharp conflict, nothing appears but joy and comfort. God loves to send
relief, when we least look for it; as Elisha sent to the King of Israel, when
he was rending his clothes, 2 Kings 5. 8. Hear what the Lord thy Redeemer says
by Isaiah, For a moment in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a a little
season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee: Isa. 54. 8.
It is but a little, for a moment that his anger lasts, his mercy is
everlasting: and I hid my face, never turned my heart from thee: Joseph when
he lay down to sleep, was full of care about his Wives being with child; Matt.
1. 20. but he awakened well satisfied: ver. 24, To day a measure of fine
flower, is lower rated in Samaria, than yesterday of dung. Although Christ's
Star left the wisemen for a time, yet instantly it appeared again, and forsook
them not till they had found Christ; which was the mark they aimed at, Matt. 2.
9. Afflictions are like running waters, which make many grounds fruitful, but
tarry with none of them. Yea, it is a rule in nature, that violent things
cannot last long: The Philosophers could observe, that no motion violent is
wont to be permanent; and Seneca concludes, That if the sickness be tedious
and lasting, the pai^ is tolerable; but if violent, short: and so of spiritual
temptations, the which were so vehement upon Luther, that the very venom of
them drank up his spirits; and his body seemed dead; so that neither speech,
sense, blood, or heat, appeared in him; but this sharp fit lasted but for one
day: so if we suffer much, it shall not be long; if we suffer long, it shall
not be much. Some misery is like a Consumption, gentle, but of long
continuance; other like a Fever, violent, but soon over. If our sorrows be
long, they are the lighter; if sharper, the shorter. The sharp North-East wind
(says the Astronomer) never lasts three days, and thunder, the more violent
the less permanent. Wherefore cheer up thou drooping soul, if the Sun of
comfort ^ee for the present clouded; it will ere long shine forth bright again:
if now with the Moon thou art in the wane, stay but a little, thou shall as
much increase; for as days succeed nights, Summer, Winter; and rest travel; so
undoubtedly, joy shall succeed, and exceed, thy sorrow. Thy grief shall
dissolve, or be dissolved; yea, it is in some measure dissolved by hope for
the present. The Portugals w^ll rejoice in soul weather why? because they know,
fair will follow; and so may the believer, in his greatest exigents; because
God will shortly tread Satan under our feet, Romans 16. 20. Here also the
distressed soul may raise comfort to himself out of former experience; who is
he that has not been delivered out of some miserable exigent? which if thou
have, thou may well say unto God with the Psalmist, Thou have showed me
great troubles and adversities, but thou will return and revive me, and wilt
come again, and take me up from the depth of the earth, and comfort me Psalm.
71. 20. 21. For God's former actions are patterns of his future; he teaches
you what he will do, by what he has done: and nothing more raises up the
heart in present affia^ce, than the recognition of favors, or wonders passed:
he that has found God present in one extremity, may trust him in the next:
every sensible favor of the Almighty, invites both his gifts and our trust.

Objection. But thou will say with the Psalmist, thine e^emies have long
prevailed against thee, and God seems altogether to ^de his face, and to have
clean forgotten thee: and so thou fear he will for ever, Psalm. 13. 1, 2.

Answer. It is but so in thy apprehension, as it was with him; Gods deliverance
may over-stay thy expectation, it cannot, the due period of his own counsels:
for know first, that Gods works are not to be judged of, until the fifth act.
The case deplorable and desperate in outward appearance, may with one smile
from heaven find a blessed issue: Dotham is besieged, and the Prophets servant
distressed, they are in a grievous case (as they think); yet a very apparition
in the clouds shall secure them: not a squadron shall be raised, and yet the
enemy is surprised: 2 Kings 6. here was no slackness. The Midianites invade
Israel, and are suddenly confounded by a dream, Judge. 7. Mistress Honywood,
that Religious Gentlewoman, famous for her virtues, after she had been
distressed in her mind thirty years, without feeling the least comfort, not
being able to hold out any longer, (as a wounded spirit who can bear)? flung a
Venice-glass against the ground, and said to a grave Divine that sought to
comfort her, I am as sure to be damned, as this glass is to be broken; but
what followed? the glass was not broken, but rebounded and stood upright: at
the sight whereof, she was so confirmed, that ever after to her dying day,
she lived most comfortably: much like that of Apelles, who striving to paint a
drop of foam falling from a Horse mouth, after long study how to express it,
even dispairing, flung away his Pencill, and that throw did it. How opportunely
does God provide succors to our distresses? It is his glory to help at a
pinch, to begin where we have given over; that our relief might be so much
the more welcome, by how much it is less looked for: superfluous aid can
neither be heartily desired, nor earnestly looked for, nor thankfully received
from the hands of mercy. Besides our infirmity best sets off the glory of his
strength, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Spiritual consolations are commonly late and sudden;
long before they come, and speedy when they do come, even preventing
expectation: and our last conflicts have wont ever to be the forest, as when
after some dripping rain, it powers down most vehemently, we think the weather
is changing. When he means to ease us of our burden, he seems to lay on
heavier; wherefore trust in God killing, and l^ve God chiding, it is a good
sign of our recovery.

Section 3.
Again, in the next place thou must know, that man's extremity is Gods
opportunity; well may he forbear, so long as we have have any thing else to
rely upon: but we are sure to find him in our greatest exigents, who loves to
give comfort to those that are forsaken of their hopes, as abundance of
examples witness. When had the Children of Israel the greatest victories, but
when they feared most to be overcome? 2 King. 19. 35. Exodus 14. ver. 28, 29.
When was Hagar comforted of the Angel, but when her child was near fanished,
and she had east it under a Tree for dead? Genesis 21. 15. to 20. When was Eliah
comforted and relieved by an Angel, with a Cake baked on the coals, and a
Cruise of Water, but when he was utterly forsaken of his hopes? 1 Kings 19. 4.
to 7. When was the Sareptan relieved? it was high time for the Prophet to visit
her: poor soul she was now making her last meal: after one mean morsel, she
was yielding her self over to death. As long as Egypts flower lasted, Manna was
not rained. When did God answer the hopes of Sarah, Rebeccah, Rachel, the wife
of Manoah, and Elisabeth, touching their long and much desired issues? but when
they were barren, and past hope of children, by reason of age, Genesis 18. Judges
13, Luke 1. 6. 7. When did our Savior heal the woman of her bloody issue? but
after the Physicians had given her over, and she becoming much worse, had
given them over, when she had spent all she had upon them: for to mend the
matter, poverty, which is another disease was super-added, to make her
completely miserable. When man's help fails, then Gods begins. When did Moses
find succor, but when his Mother could no longer hide him, and he was put
into the River among the Bullrushes? she would have given all she was worth
to save him, and now she has wages to nurse him: she does but change the
name of mother into nurse, and she has her son without fear, not without
great reward. When Israel was in so hard a straight, as either to be drowned
in the Sea, or slain by the Sword; how miraculously did God provide an evasion
by dividing the waters? When Rochel, like Samaria, had a strong enemy without,
and a sore famine within; how miraculously did God provide an evasion, by
making the tide their Purveyor, to bring them in an Ocean of Shelfish? the like
of which was never known before, nor since. We read how Merline, during the
Massacre at Paris, was for a fortnight together, nourished with one egg a day,
laid by a hen, that came constantly to a haymow, where he lay hid in that
danger, When the English had lest Cales, and the Spainard was again repossest
of it; by some neglect or oversight, there was an English man left behind: but
how did God provide for his escape? it is worth the remembering, he was no
sooner crept into a hole under a pair of stairs, but instantly a Spider weavs a
web over the hole, and this diverted them; for when one of them said, here is
surely some of them hid, another replies, What a fool art thou, do thou not
see, it is covered with a firm cob-web: and so past him, that in the night he
ascaped. O! Savior, our extremities are the seasons of thy aid: even when Faux
was giving sire to the match, that should have given fire to the Powder, which
should have blown up Men and Monuments, even the whole State together; thou
that never sleep did prevent him, and disclose the whole design: yea, thou
did turn our intended Funeral into a Festival. And why does the goodness of
our God pick out the most needful times for our relief and comfort? but
because our extremities drive us to him that is omnipotent; there is no fear,
no danger, but in our own insensibleness: but because when we are forsaken of
all succors and hopes; we are fittest for his redress, and never are we
nearer to help: than when we despair of help; but because our extremities give
him the most glory, and our comfort is the greater, when the deliverance is
seen before it is expected. His wisdom knows when aid will be most seasonable,
most welcome: which he then loves to give, when he finds us left of all other
props. That merciful hand is reserved for a dead list, and then he falls us
not; as when Abraham had given Isaac, and Isaac had given himself for dead;
then God interposeth himself; When the knife is falling upon his throat, then,
then coms the deliverance by an Angel, calling, forbidding, commending him.
When things are desperate, then look most for God's help; for then is the time,
Psalm. 119. 126. Isa. 33. 9. 10.

And indeed, our faith is most commendable in the last act; it is no praise to
hold out until we be hard driven, but when we are forsaken of means, then
to live by faith in our God, is thought worthy of a Crown. O! wretched Saul,
had thou held out never so little longer without offering, and without
distrust, Samuel had come, and thou had kept the favor of God, whereas now
for thy unbelief, thou art cast off for ever, 1 Samuel 13. 10. to 15. To shut up
all in a word, were thy soul in such a straight, as Israel was between the Red
Sea and the Egyptians; the spirits of vengeance, (like those enemies) pursuing
thee behindo; Hell and death (like that Read Sea) ready to ingulf thee before;
yet would I speak to thee in the confidence of Moses, Exodus 14. ver. 13. Stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord. Thy Word O! God, made all, thy Word
shall repair all: hence all ye diffident fears, he whom I trust is omnipotent

Again Secondly, thou must know that God in his wisdom has set down a certain
period of time, within which he will exercise his children more or less; and
at the end whereof, and not before, he will relleve and comfort them again. As
we may perceive by Eccles. 3. 1. Act. 7. 25. Exodus 12. 41. Genesis 15. 13. Dan.
12. 1. 4. 11. Jer. 25. 11. Genesis 6. 3. Four hundred years he appointed to
Abraham and his seed, that they should be Sojourners in a strange land, where
they should be kept in bondage, and evil entreated, Genesis 15. At the end of
which time, even the self same day, they returned from the land of Egypt: that
was the precise time appointed, and the selfsame day it was accomplished: and
till then Moses undertook it in vain. Why were they so long kept from it? the
land was their own before, they were the right heirs to it, lineally descended
from him who was the first possessor of it after the flood: God will do all in
due time, that is, in his time, not in ours; if at any time the Lord deliver
us, it is more than he owes us. Let him (says Saint Augustine) choose his own
opportunity, that so freely grants the mercy. Again, he appointed that the
Jews should serve the King of Babylon seventy years; not a day, not an hour to
be abated, Jer 25. 11. but at the end thereof, even that very night, Dan. 9.
it was accomplished; neither did Daniel, (who knew the determinate time) once
pray for deliverance, till just upon the expiration. Thirty eight years he
appointed the sick man at Bethesda's Pool, Joh. 5. 5. Eighteen years to that
daughter of Abraham, whom Christ loosed from her disease, Luke 13. 16. Twelve
years to the woman with the bloody issue, Matthew. 9. 20. Three months to Moses,
Exodus 2. 2. Ten days tribulation to the Angel of the Church of Smy^na, Apocal.
2. 10. Three days plague to David, 2 Samuel 24. 13. Each of these groaned for a
time, under the like burden as thou do; But when their time which God had
appointed, was come, they were delivered from all their miseries, troubles, and
calamities; and so likewise ere long, if thou will patiently tarry the Lord's
leisure, thou shall also be delivered from thy affliction and sorrow, either
in the Morning of thy trouble, with David, Psalm. 30. 5. or at the Noon of thy
life, with Job, Chap. 42. 10 to 17. or toward the Evening, with Mr Glover, that
holy Martyr, who could have no comfortable feeling, till he came to the sight
of the stake: but then he cried out and clapped his hands for joy to his
friend, saying, O! Austin, he is come, he is come, meaning the feeling joy of
faith, and the Holy Ghost: Acts and monuments, Fol. 1555. Or at night with
Lazarus, at one hour or another thou art sure to be delivered, as time will
determine. Many were the troubles of Abraham, but the Lord delivered him out of
all. Many were the troubles of David, but the Lord delivered him out of all.
Many were the troubles of Joseph, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many
were the troubles of Job, but the Lord delivered him out of all: therefore he
can and will deliver thee out of all. But if he do not, (says Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego) yet we will not do evil to escape danger; because
Christ has suffered more for us: therefore if I perish, I perish, says
Hester. Be our troubles many in number, strange in nature, heavy in measure,
much in ^urthen, and long in continuance; yet God's mercies are more numerous,
his wisdom more wondrous, his power more miraculous; he will deliver us out of
all: Many are the troubles of the righteous. Yea, he rises higher, and calls
them millions, for so the words may be rendered; but the Lord delivers them
out of all: Psalm. 34. 19. How many? or how great soever they be? or how long
soever they continue? yet an end they shall all have: For the Lord either
takes troubles from them, or takes them from troubles, by receiving them into
his heavenly rest; where they shall acknowledge, that God has rewarded them as
far beyond their expectation, as he had formerly punished them less than they
did deserve.

Objection. Oh! but my condition is so desperate, and irrecoverable, that it is
impossible I should ever get out of it.

Answ. There is no impossibility (says Ambrose) where God is pleased to give a
dispensation: But bethink thy self, is it worse with thee than it was with
those beforementioned? and yet they were delivered; Or is thy case worse than
that of Jonas in the Sea, yea, in the Whales belly? and yet he was delivered:
Worse than Nebuchadnezzars grazing in the Forest among beasts, even until his
hairs were grown to be like Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws?
Dan. 4. 31. to 36. and yet he again reigned in Babell. Worse than Joseph's?
when he was thrown into a Pit, and left hopeless; or when sold to the
Ishmaelitish Merchants, and then cast into prison? yet after all this, his said
brethren were fain to become petitioners to him: Worse than Job when he sat
scraping his soars on the dunghill, had all his houses burnt, all his cattle
stolen, and his children slain? yet he was far richer afterward, than before.

How rashly then have thou judged of thy Makers dealing with thee? It were more
agreeable to reason and religion, to conclude the contrary; for both
experience, and reason teaches, that violent pressures, like violent motions,
are weakest at the furthest. When the morning is darkest, then coms day: yea,
usually after the lowest ebb, follows the highest ^ingtyde: And religion
teaches, that if we love God, all things, even the worst of afflictions shall
so concur, and cooperate to our good, that we would not have wanted them for
any good. Wherefore hold but fast to God, and my soul sor thine, neither
affliction, nor ought else shall hurt thee. You know, while Adam was at peace
with God, all things were at peace with Adam.

Now this doctrine well digested will breed good blood in our souls, and is
especially useful to bound our desires of release; for though we may be
importunate, impatient we may not be; stay he never so long, patience must
not be an inch shorter than affliction: If the bridge reach but half way over
the brook, we shall have but an ill favored passage. We are taught in
Scripture to praise patience, as we do a fair day at night; He that indureth
to the end shall be saved Matthew. 24 13. Whereas coming but a foot short, may
make us miss the prize, and loose the wager we runsor: and then as good never
have set foot out of doors. Much the better for that light which will not bring
us to bed! perseverance is a kind of all in all, continuance is the Crown of
all other graces; and heaven shall be the Crown of continuance.

But not ^ldom does the Lord only release his children out of extreme adversity
here, but withal makes their latter end so much the more prosperous, by how
much the more their former time has been miserable and adverse. We have
experience in Job, You have heard, says Saint James of the patience of Job,
and what end the Lord made with him. What end is that? the holy Ghost tells
you* That the Lo^d blessed his latter end, more th^n his beginning; and gave
him twice as much as he had before: for whereas at first he had 7000 Sheep,
3000 Camels, 500 yoke of ^xen, and 5^0: she Asses: after his reparation he had
14000 Sheep, 6000 Camels, 1000 yoke of Oxen and 1000 she Asses, every one
double: and whereas the number of his children remained the same they were
before* namely seven Sons, and three Daughters, the number of them were also
doubled* as the learned observe: for whereas his Beasts, according to the
condition of Beasts utterly perished; the souls of his Children were saved: so
that he had twice so many children also, whereof ten were wit^ him on earth,
and the other ten with God in heaven. Job 42. 10, to 14. And in Joseph, who was
bred up in the school of affliction from his infancy; yet when his turn was
come, one hour changes his setters of Iron into chains of Gold; his rags into
Robes, his stocks into a Chariot, his prison into a Palace, the noise of his
Gyves into a brooch; and whereas he was thirty years kept under, he ruled in
the height and luster of all honor and glory the space of eighty years. And
one minute made in Lazarus a far greater chang^, and preferment. And in David,
who for a long time was in such fear of Saul, that he was forced to fly for
his life, first to Samuel, where Saul pursued him; then to Jonathan, where his
grief is doubled, then to Ahimele^k, where is Doeg to betray him; after that
he flies to Achish, King of Gath; where being discovered, he is in greatest
fear of all, lest the King should take away his life; and lastly, when he
returns to his own Ziklag, he finds it smitten, and burnt with fire, and his
wives taken prisoners* and in the midst of all his grief, when he had wept
until he could weep no more; the people being vexed, intend to stone him; so
that, as he had long before complained, there was but a s^ep between him and
death; but mark the issue, though his heart were now not only brimfull, but
ran over with grief: yet within two days the Cr^n of Israel is brought unto
him, and he is anointed King, 2 Samuel 1. and for the present he was able to
comfort himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Yea, after th^s, when by
that foul sin of Adultery and Murder, he had brought more enemies about his
ea^s, (God, and men, and Devils) having once repented his fault, he was able
to say with confidence, O God! thou have showed me great troubles and
adversities, but thou will take me up from the depth of the earth, and
increase my honor, Psalm. 71. 20, 21. He kn^w well enough that it is Gods use
to bring comfort out of sorrow, as he brought water out of the rock, and that
cherishing was wont to follow stripes: And indeed, how often has a Tragic
entrance had a happy end? Like that we read of Michael, who was condemned to
death by the Emperor Leo, upon a false accusation; but before the execution,
the Emperor died, and Michael was chosen in his stead. And of Mordecay, who
being in the fore-noon appointed to the Gibbet, was in the afternoon advanced
next of all to the throne, And Queen Elisabeth of blessed memory, who reigned
at the same time that she expected to suffer, and was Crowned, when she
looked to be beheaded. God loves to do by his children, as Joseph did by his
Father; first, we must have our beloved Joseph a long time derained from us,
then he robbes us of Simeon; after that, sends for our best beloved Benjamin,
and makes us believe he will rob us of all our children at once, all the
things that are dear to us: But why is it? even that when we think to have
lost all, he might return himself, and all again with the greater interest of
joy and felicity. The Lord, says Hanna, kills and makes alive; first,
kills, and then makes alive; brings down to the grave, and raises up: The
Lord makes poor, and makes rich; brings low, and exalts; he raises the
poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the Dunghill; to set them
among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory: 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7, 8.
And why all this? but that in his own might, no man might be strong. ver. 9.
That which Plutaroh reports of Dionysius, (how he took away from one of his
Nobles, almost his whole estate, and seeing him nevertheless continue as jocund
and well contented as ever, he gave him that again, and as much more) is a
common thing with the Lord: and thousands can witness, that though they went
weeping under the burden, when they first carried the precious s^ed of
repentance; yet they still returned with joy, and brought their sheaves with
them, Psalm. (...). 26. 5. 6.

Objection. But thou think thou shall not hold out, if God should long delay
thee.

Answer. If he delay thee never so long, he will be sure to support thee
(...) long, 1 Cor. 10. 13. which is much at one upon the matter. If he suffer
thee to be sorely tempted, he will not suffer thee to be tempted above thy
strength: 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 16. His grace shall be sufficient for thee at the
least, 2 Cor. 12. 6. Phil. 1. 29. which was Paul's answer, and it may suffice
all suitors; the measure of our patience shall be proportionable to our ^ings,
and our strength equalled to our temptations, 1 Cor. 1^. ver. 13. Now if God do
either take away our (...), or give us (...), it is enough.

True, a Ship of never so great a burden, may be over-laden till it sink
again; or if we shall wear away all the steel with whetting; the Tool is left
unprofitable. But my thoughts (says God) are not as your thoughts, nor my ways
as your ways, Isa. 55. 8. God is n^ Tyrant to afflict th^e unmeasurably,
neither will he draw a sword to kill flie^; or call for Scorpions, when a rod
is too much. He that made the vessel, knows her burden, and how to ballace
her; yea, he that made all things, very good, cannot b^t do a^l things very
well. Indeed, God seems to w^astle with us, as he did with Jacob; but be
supplies us with hidden strength at length to get the better: And grace to
stand i^ affliction, and to gain by it, is better than freedom or deliverance.
The Bush which was a Type of the Church, consumed not all the while it burned
with fire; because God was in the midst of it. The Ship at Anchor is shrewdly
tossed to and fro, but cannot be carried away, either by waves, wind, or
weather: Sin, Satan, and the world may disturbus, but they can never destroy
us: Our head Christ being above, we cannot be drowned. There can be no
dis^nction, unless we could be plucked from his arms, that is Almighty; for
our life is hid with Christ in God, Colos. 3. 3. He does not trust us with our
own souls life, but* hides it in his Son Jesus: because if it were in our own
hands, we should easily be tempted to sell it, as Adam did for an Apple, and
Esau for (...) mess of Pottage: Whereas now we are safe, for to pluck us out
of his hands that is Almighty, requires an adversary stronger than himself.
Neither wants he ca^e; he that numbers our very hairs, what account does he
make of our souls? Nor love, for if he has bought us with his blood, and
given us himself, will he deny us any thing that is good for us?

Wherefore silence your reason, and exalt your says, (how pressing, or
peircing so ever you^ sufferings be) which pulls off the vizard from his face,
and sees a loving heart, under contrary appearances. Trust the mercy of God,
which is of infinite perfection; and the merits of Christ, which are of perfect
satisfaction: and then hope will bear up thy heavy heart, as bladders do an
unskilful swimmer: Otherwise, if thou shall walk by sense, and not by faith,
2 Cor. 5. 7. fear will no less multiply evils, th^n says would diminish them:
and thou shall resemble (...), who was not afraid of his burden, the shadow
only frighted him.

Section 4.
Objection. Although Christ in the Gospel has made many large and precious
promises, yet there are none so general which are not limited with the
condition of faith, and the (...) thereof, ^ained Repentance: and each of them
are so tied* and enrayled, that none can lay claim to them but true believers
which (...), and turn from all their sins to serve him in holines^, without
whi^ (...) man shall see the Lord: Heb. 12. 14. Isa. 59. 20. But I want there
(...) without which, how (...) I expect supportation in my su^erings; or an
happy deliverance o^t of them? however it fares with believers, whom Christ
has undertaken for: yea, I have such a wicked heart, and my sins are so many,
and great; that these comforts nothing concern me: for they that pl^w
iniquity, and sow wickedness, shall ^eap the same, Joh. 4. 8.

Answer. So our (...) be not wilful, though they be many and great; yet they
cannot hinder our interest in the promises of God.

Admit thou art a great sinner, what then? art thou a greater sinner than
Matthew, or Z^cheus, who were sinful (...); and got their livings by pilling,
and polling, oppression, and (...)? than Mary Magdulen, a common strumpet;
possessed of many Devils? than Paul, a bloody pers^cutor of Christ and his
Church? than the Thief upon the Cross, who had spent his whole life to the last
hour in abominable wickedness? than Manasses, that out-rageous sinner, and most
wicked wretch that ever was* an Idolater, a malicious Perseculo^ of the truth,
a d^filer of Gods holy Temple, a sacrficer of his own chil^ren unto Idols, that
is, Devils; a notable wi^ch, and wicked sorcerer; a bloody murderer of
exceeding many of the dear Saints, and true Prophets of the Lord; and one who
did not run headlong alone into all hellish impiety, but led the people also
out of the way to do more wickedly than did the Heathen, whom the Lord ca^ out
and destroyed? I am sure thou will not say thou art more wicked, the he was;
and yet this Manasses, this wretch, more like a Devil (...), than a Saint of
God, repented him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, was received, (I
cannot speak it without ravishing wonder of Gods bottomless and never
sufficiently admired mercy) was received, I say to grace, and obtained the
pardon of all his horrible sins, and most abo^nable wickedne^ And are not
these; and many the like examples, written for our learning; and recorded by
the holy ghost, to the end that we may gather unto our selves assurance of the
same pardon, for the same sins, upon the same repentance, and believing.

Are thy sins great? his mercies are infinite; had thou committed all the
sins that ever were committed, yet in comparison of Gods mercy, they are less
than a more in the Sun to all the world, or a drop of water to the whole Ocean:
for the Sea though great, yet may be measured; but God's mercy cannot be
circumscribed: and he both can and will, (...) easily forgive us the debt of
ten thousand millions of pounds, as one penny; and as soon pardon the sins of a
wicked Manasses, a^ of a righteous* Abraham, if we come unto him by unfaigned
repentance, and earnestly desire and implore his grace and mercy, Romans 5. 20.

The Tenure of our salvation is not by a covenant of works, but by a covenant
of grace; founded not on our worthines^s, but on the free mercy ^d good
pleasure of God; and therefore the Prophet well annexeth blessedness to the
remission of sins; Blessed is be whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1.

Yea, the more miserable, wretched, and sinful we are, the more fit objects
we are, whereupon he may exercise, and show the infinite riches of his
bounty, mercy, virtue, and all sufficiency. And this our spiritual Physician
can as well, and easily cure desperate diseases, even the remediless
Consumption, the dead Apoplex, and the filthy: L^prosie of the soul, as the
smallest malady, or least faintness. Yea, he can as well raise the dead, as
cure the sick, and as well of Stones as of Jews, make Abraham's: children. Did
he not without the Sun at the Creation, cause light to shine forth; and
without rain, at the same time, make the earth fruitful? why then should you
give your self over, where your Physician does not? Besides: what sin is there
whereof we can despair o^ ^e remission, when we hear our Savior pray for the
forgiveness of his m^rtherers, and blasphemers? And indeed, despair is a sin
which never knew Jesus.

It was a sweet saying of one at his death, When mine iniquity is greater than
thy mercy O God, then will I fear and despair; but that can never be:
considering our sins be the sins of men, his mercy the mercy of an infinite
God. Yea, his mercies are so great, that among the thirteen properties of God
mentioned Exodus 34. almost all of them appertain to his mercy, whereas one
only concerns his might, and only two, his justice. Again, shall it ever
enter into our hearts, to think that God gives us rules to keep, and yet break
them himsef? Now his rule is this, Though thy brother sin against thee seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, it
repents me; thou shall forgive him. The son angers his father, he does not
straight dis-inherit him, but Gods love to his people, exceeds a fathers love
to his son, Matthew. 7. 11. and a mothers too, Isa. 49. 1^.

I hear many menaces and threats for sin, but I read as many promises of mercy,
and all they indefinite, excluding none whose impenitency and infidelity
excludes not themselves: every sin deserves damnation, but no sin shall condemn,
but the lying and continuing in it.

Wherefore if our clamorous conscience, like some sharp fang'd officer, arrests
us at Gods suit, let us put in bail, two subsidue virtues, Faith, and
Repentance; and so stand the trial: the Law is on our side, the Law of grace
is with us, and this Law is his that is our Advocate; and he is our Advocate,
that is our Judge; and he is our Judge, that is our Savior; even the head of
our selves, Jesus Christ.

For the first of these; do but repent, and God will pardon thee, he thy sins
never so many, and innumerable for multitude, never so heinous for quality and
magnitude, Isa. 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18. and 33. 17. Yea, sins upon Repentance are so
re^itred, as if they had never been committed: I have put away thy
transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist; Isa. 44. 22. and what by
corruption has been done, by repentance is undone, as the former examples, and
many other, witness. Come and let us reason together, says the Lord: though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, Isa. 1. 18. yea
whiter; for the Prophet David laying open his blood-guiltiness, and his
original impurity, uses these words: Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be
clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow, Psalm. 51. 7.

And in reason; did he come to call sinners to repentance, and shall he not
show mercy to the penitent? Or, who would nor cast his burden upon him, that
does desire to give ease? As I live, says the Lord, I would not the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 18. 32. and 33. 11.

Section 5.
Ojection. Yea, but I cannot Repent.

Answer. In time of temtation, a man is not a competent Judge in his own case:
In humane Laws, there is a nullity held of words and actions exto^ted, and
wrung from men by fear: because in such cases, a man is held not to be a
freeman, (...) to have power or command in some sort, of himself. A troubled
soul (...) like troubled waters, we can discern nothing clearly in it;
wherefore (if thou can) lay aside prejudice, and tell me in cold blood, how
it fares with thee at other times, though indeed thy words at present are
enough to convince thee: For first, thou find sin a burden too heavy for
thee to bear, which thou did not formerly; what is the reason? are thy sins
more and greater? No, but the contrary: for though they appear more, yet they
are less; for sin, the more it is seen and felt, the more it is hated; and
thereupon is the less. Motes are in a room, before the Sun shines, but they
appear only then.

Again secondly, the very complaint of sin, springing from a displeasure
against it, shows that there is something in thee opposite to sin: viz. that
thou art penitent in affection, though not yet in action, even as a child is
rational in power, though not in act. Yea more, thou accusest, and condemnest
thy self for thy sins; and by accusing our selves, we prevent Satan; by
judging our selves, we prevent God. Neither was the Centurion ever so worthy,
as when he thought himself most unworthy: for all our worthiness is in a
capable misery; nor does God ever think well of him, that thinks so of
himself. But to let this pass.

Are not your failings, your grief? are they not besides your will? are they
not contrary to the current of your desires, and the main bent of your
resolutions, and endeavors? Do thou determine to continue in the practice of
any one sin? Yea, do thou not make conscience of all Gods Commandments, one
as well as another; the first table, as well as the second, and the second,
as well as the first, Matt. 5. 19. Do thou not grieve for sins of all sorts,
secret as well as known, original, as well as actual, of emission, as well as
commission, lesser, (viz thoughts) as well as greater: ye^* as well for the evil
which cleavs to thy best works, as for the evil works, Romans 7. 21. and as
heartily and unfaignedly desire that thou may never commit it, as that God
should never impute it? 2 Timothy (...). 19. Do thou not fear to displease him,
not so much because, he is just to punish, as for his mercy and goodness sake;
and more fear the breach of the Law, than the curse? Do thou not love rather
to be, than seem or be thought good; and seek more the power of godliness,
than the show of it? Ioh 1. 1. If so, well may Satan, and thine own conscience
accuse thee of impenitency, and unbelief; but Christ thy Judge never. Yea,
then, notwithstanding your failings, you may say with David, I have kept thy
Word, Psalm. 18. 21. 22. 23. for though this be not such a measure of keeping
as the Law requires; yet it is such a keeping, as God in Christ accepts: for
suppose thy knowledge is still small, thy says weak, thy charity cold, thy
heart dull, and hard, thy good works few and imperfect, and all thy zealous
resolutions easily hindered and quite overthrown with every small temtation: yet
God that works in us both the will and the work, will accept the will for the
work; and that which is wanting in us, Christ will supply with his own
righteousness: He respects not what we can do, so much as what we would
do; and that which we would perform, and cannot, he esteems it as though
it were performed: whereas, take away the will, and all acts (in God's sight)
are equal.

As the wicked sin more than they sin, in their desire, so the righteous do
more good than they do, in their will to do it. If there be a paratum cor,
though there be not a perforatum cor; a profer of blood, though no expense of
blood for the honor of Christ, it is taken for Martyrdom, as Origin testified
of one: Non ille Martyrio, sed Martyrium illi defuit. I know thy poverty, but
thou art rich, says the Spirit to the Church of Smyrna: poor in thy condition,
rich in thy affection to goodness: Facultas secundum voluntatem, non voluntas
secundum facultatem estimanda est; God esteems our charitable beneficence, not
only secundum quod habemus, but secundum quod tribuere velimus. We are
charged to forsake all houses, lands, friends, liberties, lives, for Christ;
yet many die with houses, lands, and riches, in their possession, whom Christ
receives and Crowns in Heaven, because they did part with all secundum animae
preparationem: What we would have done, shall be reckoned to us, as done; we
do it quoad conatum, though non quoad effectum? In like manner God takes a
heart desirous to repent and believe, for a penitent and believing heart;
volens and dolens, The vehement desire of godly sorrow, or a sorrow because we
cannot sorrow, goes for godly sorrow with God: so that to sigh and grieve for
what we cannot do, is to come short, and yet to do it too: for God likes the
will so well, that in his Son what we would do, is in acceptance done, 2 Cor. 8.
12. which textone brings in thus: O! what an unspeakable comfort was this
cordial verse to my afflicted soul; And well it might: for if we hate our
corruptions, and strive against them, they shall not be counted o^. It is not
I (says Paul) but sin that dwells in me: Romans 7. 20 for what displeases
us, shall never hurt us; and we shall be esteemed of God, to be what we
love, and desire, and labor to be.

The comfort of this doctrine is intended, and belongs to troubled consciences,
and those that would fain do better: but let no presumptuous sinners meddle
with it; for what have thou to do to take (I say not the childrens bread to
eat. Matthew. 15. 26. but even) the least parcel of Gods Word into thy mouth?
seeing thou hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50. 16. 17. But if thou be a weary
and heavy laden sinner: thou may comfort thy self thus: I do hateful things,
but I hate that I do; I break the Law, but yet I love the Law, as holy, just,
and good: Flesh is in me, but I am not in the Flesh: I must not fix mine eyes
only upon mine own resistance, or failings, but on God's assistance and
acceptance in his Son, by which I shall be able to leap over all walls and
impediments, Psalm. 18. 29. The Law is given, that Grace may be required; Grace
is given, that the Law may be sulfilled: by us, evangelically, for us, by
Christ (whose righteousness is ours) perfectly, as Saint Augustine speaks. The
Law is a glass to show us our spots, the Gospel a fountain to wash them away.
Wherefore cast not both thine eyes upon thy sin, but reserve one, to behold the
remedy: look upon the Law to keep thee from presumption, and upon the Gospel,
to keep thee from despair.

Can thou not aggravate thine own sins, but thou must (...), and call in
question Gods mercy, and Christ's all sufficiency, spoil him of his power and
glory? Though the grievousness of our sins should increase our repentance, yet
they should not diminish our faith, and assurance of pardon, and forgiveness.
As the plaster must not be less than the sore, so the tent must not be bigger
than the wound. It was a sweet and even co^rs which Saint Paul took, who when
he would comfort himself against corruption, and evil actions, Romans (...).
20. then; not I, but sin dwelling in me: when he would humble himself,
notwithstanding his graces, then; not I, but the grace of God in me, 1 Cor.
15. 10.

Section 6.
Objection. But I am not worthy the least mercy, I have so often abused it, and
so little profited by the means of grace.

Answer. I think so too, for if thou refusest the offer of mercy until thou
deservest it, woe be to thee: But if thou will take the right course; renounce
the broken reed of thine own free will, which has so often deceived thee; and
put all thy trust in the grace of Christ: The way to be strong in the Lord, is
to be weak in thy sels, be weak in thy self, and strong in the Lord, and
through faith thou shall be more than a Conqueror. Leav tugging and struggling
with thy sin, and fall with Jacob to wrestle with Christ for a blessing; and
though thy self go limping away, yet shall thou be a Prince with God, and be
delivered from Esau's bondage. But thou stand^st upon thine own feet, and
therefore fallest so foully: thou will like a child, go alone, and of thy self,
and therefore gettest so many knocks. And thou would accept of a pardon too,
if thou might pay for it: but Gods mercies are free, and he bids thee come
and buy without silver, and without price; or else he says, thou and thy money
perish. Thou would go the natural Way to work, What shall I do to inherit
eternal life? but it is impossible to inherit it by any thing that we can do;
for all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. Yea, if our
doings could have done it, Christ dyed in vain; whereas, if Christ had not
died, we had perished, every mothers child of us, 1 Cor. 15. 22. and 2 Cor. 5.
14, 15. Ephesians. 2. 1. Colos. 2. 13. Ezekiel. 18. 4. Job. 11. 50. Romans 5. 6. 8. and
14. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 3. Matthew. 18. 11.

O fool? do thou not know that our sins are his sins, and his righteousness,
our righteousness: Jer. 23. 6. Psalm. 4. 1. and that God esteems of Faith above
all other graces, deeds, or acts of thine? as what did our Savior answer, when
the people asked him, What shall we do that we might work the works of God?
The work of God is, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, Joh. 6. 28, 29.
and yet thou talkest of thy worthiness, and thou take this for humility too,
but it is pride; for if thou would deny thy self, and be nothing in thine
own eyes, renounce thine own righteousness, and wholly and only rest on thy
Savior Jesus Christ for thy salvation; thou would not hope the more in
regard of thine own worthiness, nor yet doubt in respect of thine own
unworthiness: But thou would first be worthy, and deserve of God; and then
accept of Christ, and deserve Christ at Gods hands, by thy good works, and
graces: which pride of thine, and opinion of merit, is a greater sin then all
thy other sins which thou complainest of: and except you do abandon it, and
wholly r^ly upon the grace, and free mercy of God for salvation, Christ shall
profit you nothing, Gal. 2. 16. and 5. 1. to 7. Colos. 3. 11. for nothing is
available to salvation, but faith, which works by love, Gal. 5. 6. whence it
is called righteousness through faith, ver. 5. Faith is the staff, whereupon
we stay our selves, in life and death; by says we are blessed, Gal. 3. 9. by
faith we rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5. 2. by faith we have access unto God,
Ephesians. 3. 12. by faith we overcome the world, 1 John 5. 4. the flesh, Gal. 5.
24. and this is the shield whereby we quench the fiery darts of Satan, and
resist his power, Ephesians. 6. 16. Yea, whosoever seeks to be justified by the
Law, they are abolished from Christ, and ^aln from grace, Gal 5. 4. Stand fast
therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
tangled again with the yoke of bondage. And say, Lord we are not worthy to be
servants, and thou make us sons; nay, heirs, and coheirs with thee, of
everlasting glory.

Objection. I grant the Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin: but
he is just, as well as merciful, and therefore he will not acquit the wicked
Exodus 34. 6. 7. but reward them according to their works, Revel. 20. 12. 13.
and 22. 12.

Answer. He will therefore pardon all thy sins, (if thou unfainedly. ^pent and
wholly rely upon Christ for thy salvation by a lively says) because he is
just: for as the Lord cannot in justice let sin go unpunished (for the wages of
sin is death Romans 6. 23. Death in the person, if not in the surety; and
therefore has punished the sins of all men, either in his Son, or will
thoroughly punish them in the parties themselves) so the same justice will not
admit, that the same fins should be twice punished; once in our Savior and
again, in the faithful: or that a debt once paid, should be required the second
time, 1 John 1. 9. Now that Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all the sins
of the faithful, and paid our debt even to the utmost farthing, it is evident
by many places of Scripture, as Isa. 53. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Heb. 9. 26. 1 Pet.
2. 24. Romans 3. 25. 26. 1 John 1. 7. 9. and sundry others.

Are we bound to perform perfect obedience to the Law? he performed it for us:
were we for disobedience subject to the sentence of condemnation, the curse of
the Law, and death of body and soul? he was condemned for us, and bore the
curse of the law; he died in our stead an ignominious death; did we deserve
the anger of God? he endured his fathers wrathful displeasure, that so he
might reconcile us to his father, and set us at liberty. He that deserved no
sorrow felt much, that we who deserved much might feel none: and by his wounds
we are healed, Isa. 53. 5. Adam eat the Apple, Christ paid the price. In a
word, whatsoever we owed, Christ discharged; whatsoever we deserved, he
suffered; if not in the self same punishments: (for he being God could not
suffer the eternal torments of Hell) yet in proportion, the dignity of his
person (being God and Man) giving value unto his temporary punishments, and
making them of more value and worth, than if all the world should have suffered
the eternal torments of Hell: for it is more for one that is eternal to die,
than for others to die eternal. Therefore was the Son of God made the Son of
man, that the Sons of men might be made the Sons of God; and therefore was he
both God and man: lest being in every respect God, he had been too great to
suffer for man; or being in every respect man, he had been too weak to
satisfy God.

Seeing therefore our Savior Christ has fully discharged our debt, and made
full satisfaction to his Fathers justice: God cannot in equity exact of us a
second payment, no more than the Creditor may justly require that his debt
should be twice paid; once by the Surety, and again, by the Principal.

Again secondly, it is the Lords Covenant made with his Church, and committed
to writing, Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 10. 16, 17. Psalm. 32. 10 Isa. 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18.
21, 22, 23. and 33. 11. Mal. 3. 17. Confirmed and ratified by his seals, the
Sacraments; together with his Oath, that there might be no place left for
doubting: for, God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise,
the stableness of his counsel; bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 17. 18.

And ^est the aff^icted conscience should object, that he entered into
covenant, and made these promises to the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men of
God; but not to such heinous and rebellious sinners, who have most justly
deserved, that God should pour out upon them the Vialls of his wrath, and those
fearful punishments threatened in the Law: All the promises made in the Gospel
are general, indefinite, and universal, excluding none that turn from their
fins by unfeigned repentance, and believe in Christ Jesus, resting on him alone
for their salvation, as appears, Isa. 55. 1. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Mark. 16. 16. Joh.
3. 14, 15, 16. 36. and 6. 37. 40. Act. 10. 43. 1 John 2. 1. Neither is there
any limitation or exception of this or that sin; for be they never so grievous
and manifold, yet if we perform the condition of faith and repentance, they
cannot debar us from receiving the benefit of God's mercy, and Christ's merits,
as appears, Isa. 1. 18. Titus 2. 14. 1 John 1. 7. 9.

And therefore unless thou conceivest of God, that he is unjust in his
dealing, untrue in his Word, a covenant-breaker; yea, a perjured person* (which
were most horrible blasphemy once to imagine,) thou must undoubtedly assure thy
self, that he will pardon and forgive thee all thy sins, be they in number
never so many and innumerable; or in nature and quality never so heinous and
damnable: if thou turnest unto him by unfeigned repentance, and laiest hold upon
Christ by a true and lively faith. For consider, does the Lord say he will
extend his mercy unto all that come unto him? does he invite every one? does
he say I would have all men saved, and none to perish? and do thou say, nay,
but he will not extend his mercy unto me, he will have me to perish,
because I am a grievous sinner? What is this but in effect, and at a distance
to contradict the Lord, and give the lie to truth it self.

Indeed God says not, Believe thou John, or Thomas, and thou shall be saved;
but he says, Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, which is
as good. And yet thou exceptest thy self, he excludes none; and do thou
exclude one, and that one thy self? He would have all men saved, and thou
come in with thy exceptive, All but me; Why thee? a precious singularity,
but beware of it: For whereas others that believe not the threatenings, flatter
away their souls in a presumptuous confidence; thou by not believing the
promises, wilt cast away thine, in a sullen prodigious desperateness, if thou
take not heed. For infidelity on both sides is the cause of all, of presumption
in them, of despair in thee, of impiety in every one.

But be better advised, believe the Lord who never brake his Word with any
soul. Thou will give credit to an honest man's bare word, and have thou no
affiance in the merciful promises of God, past to thee by Word, Oath, Seals,
Scriptures, Sacraments, the death of his own Son, and (I presume) the Spirits
testimony, if not now, yet at other times: take heed what thou do, for
certainly nothing offends God more, then the not taking of his Word.

Section 7.
Objection. I know well that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness,
unto every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. But I want faith.

Answer. This is the objection I expected: (for the true Christian is as
fearful to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the false is unwilling to
be driven from it) But is it so? or does Satan only tell thee so? I know it
is not so, I know that thou beleevest with some mixture of unbelief, and that
this is but a slander of Satan's; for as Satan slandereth us to God, Job 1. 9.
and God to us, Genesis 3. 4. 5. so he slandereth us to our selves, Job 16. 9. But
least thou should think I slander Satan; know, that you believe, even whiles
you complain of unbelief: for as there could be no shadow, if there were no
light, so there cannot be this fear, where there is no faith. They that know
not Christ, think it no such great matter to loose him. But if God once say,
this is my Son, Satan will say, if thou be the Son of God, Matthew. 3. 17. and
4. 3. That Divine testimony did not allay his malice, but exasperate it.
Neither can the happy building of, Lord I believe, stand without that column
to under-prop it, Help thou mine unbelief. And he that doubts not of his
estate, his estate is much to be doubted of; doubting and resolution are not
meet touch-stones of our success: a presumptuous confidence commonly goes
bleeding home, when an humble fear returns in triumph. As it fared between the
Philistims and Israel, 1 Samuel 17. 10. 11. The Philistims and Goliath were
exceeding confident of the victory, but Saul, and all Israel much discouraged,
and greatly afraid: yet Israel got the victory, and the Philistims with their
great Goliath were overcome, ver. 51. 52. They that are proudly secure of their
going to heaven, do not so frequently come thither, as they that are afraid of
their going to hell.

As it is in this world for temporal things, so for the World to come in
spiritual things; Cantant pauperes, lugent divites; poor men sing, and rich
men cry. Who is so melancholy, as the rich worldling? and who sings so merry a
note, as he that cannot change a groat? so they that have store of grace,
mourn for want of it; and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance. But
the hopes of the wicked fail them when they are at highest, whereas Gods
Children had those comforts in extremity; which they durst not expect.

As there is nothing more usual, than for a secure conscience to excuse when
it is guilty: so nothing more common than for an afflicted conscience to
accuse, when it is innocent; and to lay an heavy burden upon it self, where
the Lord gives a plain discharge: but a bleeding wound is better than that
which bleeds not. Some men go crying to heaven, some go laughing and sleeping
to hell. Some consciences as well as men, lie speechless before departure: they
spend their days in a dream, and go from earth to hell, as Jonas from Israel
toward Tarshish, fast a sleep. And the reason is, they dream their case is
passing good, like a man which dreams in his sleep that he is rich and
honorable, and it joys him very much, but awaking, all is vanished like smoke.
Yea, they hope undoubtedly to go to heaven, as all that came out of Egypt hoped
to go into Canaan, and inherit the blessed promises: when only Caleb and
Joshua did enter, who provoked not the Lord. And the reason of this reason is,
whereas indeed they are Wol^, the Devil and their own credulity persuades them
that they are Lambs.

The Philosopher tells us, that those Creatures which have the greatest hearts,
as the Stag, the Do, the Hare, the ^oney, and the Mouse, are the most
fearful: and therefore it may be; God refusing Lions, and Eagles, the King of
Beasts, and Queen of Birds; appointed the gentle Lamb, the fearful Dove for
his sacrifices. A broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise, Psalm.
^1 17. And sure I am Christ calls to his; only w^ary, and heavy-laden sinners,
Matthew. 11. 28. not such as feel no want of him, Mark, 2. 17. and will fill
only such with comfort, as hunger and thirst after: righteousness; not such as
are in their conceit righteous enough witho^ him, Luke 1. 53. Matthew. 15. 24.
And yet it is strange, (yea, a wonder) to see how many truly humbled sinners,
who have so tender conscience^, that they dare not yield to the least evil,
for the worlds goods, and refuse no means of being made better; turn every
(...) into reprobation, every dejection into rejection, and if they be cast
down, they cry out, they are cast away: who may fitly be compared to Ar^emon
in Plutarch, who when ever he went abroad, had his Iervants to carry a Canopy
over his head, least the heavens should fall and crush him: or to a certain
foolish melancholy Bird, which (as some tell) stands always but upon one leg;
least her own weight should sink her into the Center of the Earth; holding the
other over her head, least the Heavens should fall.

Yet be not offended, I cannot think the worse of thee; for good is that fear
which hinders us from evil acts, and makes us the more circumspect. And God
has his end in it, who would have the sins to dye, but the sinner to live.

Yea, in some respect thou art the better to be thought of, or at least the
less to be feared, for this thy fear: for no man so truly loves, as he that
fears to offend; as Salvianus glo^es upon those words, Blossed is (...) man
that fears always: And which is worth the observing, this fear i^ a
commendation often remembered in holy Scripture, as a special and infallible
mark of God's Children: as for example; Job (says the holy Ghost) was a just
man, and one that feared God, Job. 1. 1. Simeon a just many and one that feared
God, Luk, 2. 25. Corne^us a devout man, and one that feared God, Acts 10. 2.
And so of Father Abraham, a man that feared God, Genesis 22. 12. Joseph a man who
feared God, Genesis 42. 18. The Mid-wives in Egypt feared God, Exodus 1. 17. So
that evermore, the fearing of God (as being the beginning of wisdom) is
mentioned as the (...) note, which is as much as to say, if the fearing of God
once go before; working of righteousness will instantly follow after, according
to that of the wise man: He that fears the Lord, will do good.

And this for thy comfort, when Mary Magdalen sorrowed, and wept for her sins,
Luke 7, 50. Christ tells her, Thy faith has made the whole: intimating; that
this weeping, this repenting says, is faith indeed: And the like to the Woman
with the bloody issue, who presuming but to touch the hem of his garment, fell
down before him with fear and trembling, Mark 5. 27 to 35. And that humble
Canaani^e, Matthew, 15. 22. to 29. And that importunate blind man, Luke 18. 38.
to 43. As if this humble, this praying says; were only the saving faith.
Neither can thy estate be bad, for as Saint Ambrose told Monica weeping for
her seduced Son, Fieri non potest, ut filius istarum lachrymarum pereat: It
cannot be, that the son of those tears should ever perish.

Wherefore lift up thy self thou timorous fainting heart, and do not suspect
every spot for a plague token; do not dye of a mere conceit: for as the end of
all motion is rest, so the end of all thy troubles shall be peace: even where
the days are perpetiall Sabbaths, and the diet undisturbed feasts.

But as an empty vessel bung'd up close, though you throw it in to the midst
of the Sea, will receive no water, so all pleas are in vain to them that are
deas'ned with their own fears: for as Mary would not be comforted with the
^ight and speech of Angels, no not with the sight: and speech of Jesus himself,
till he made her know that he was Jesus; so until the holy Spirit sprinkleth
the conscience with the blood of Christ, and sheddeth his love into the heart,
nothing will do. No creature can take off wrath from the conscience, but he
that set it on. Wherefore, the God of peace give you the peace of God which
passes all understanding. Yea, O Lord, speak thou Music to the wounded
conscience, Thunder, to the feared; that thy justice may reclaim the one, thy
mercy relieve the other, and thy favor comfort us all, with peace and
salvation in Jesus Christ.

Section 8.
But secondly, if this will not satisfy, call to thy remembrance the time
past, and how it has been with thee formerly, as David did in thy very case,
Psalm 77. 2. to 12. And likewise Joh, Chapter 13. for as still waters represent
any object in their bottom clearly, so those that are troubled, or agitated,
do it but dimly, and imperfectly. But if ever thou had true faith begotten in
thy heart, Joh. 1. 13. by the ministry of the Word, Romans 10. 17. Jam. 1. 18.
21. and the Spirits powerful working with it, Joh. 3, 3, 5, 8. whereby thine
heart was drawn to take Christ, and apply him a Savior to thine own soul; so
that then were forced to go out of thy self, and rely wholly and only on his
merits: and that it further manifested it self by working a hatred of sin, and
an apparent change in thy whole life, by dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness; and that thou have not since, returned to thine old sins, like
the Dog to his vomit: if it has sometime brought forth in thee, the sweet friat
of heavenly and spiritual joy; if it has purified thine heart in some measure
from noisome lusts and affections; as secret pride, self-love, hypocrisy,
carnal confidence, wrath, malice, and the like: so that the spirit within thee
fights against the flesh. If thou can now say, I love the godly, because
they are godly, 1 John 3. 14. and have an hungring after Christ, and after a
greater measure of heavenly and spiritual graces, and more lively tokens of
his love and favor communicated unto thee: My soul for thine, thou have given
false evidence against thy self; for as in a gloomy day there is so much light
whereby we may know it to be day, and not ^ight; so there is something in a
Christian under a cloud, whereby he may be discerned to be a true believer,
and not, an hypocrite. But, to make it manifest to thy self, that thou art so.

Know, first, that where there is any one grace in truth, there is every one in
their measure. If thou art sure thou have love, I am sure thou have faith: for
they are as inseparable, as fire and heat, life and motion, the root and the
sap, the Sun and its light: and so of other graces. Or, do thou feel that
Christ is thy greatest joy, sin thy greatest sorrow; that when thou can not
feel the presence of the spirit in thy heart, thou go mourning,
notwithstanding all other comforts? Assuredly as that holy Martyr said, if thou
were not a wedding Child, thou could never so heartily mourn for the absence
of the Bridegroom. Thus I might go on, but a few Grapes will show that the
Plant is a Vine, and not a Thorn. Take but notice of this, and several graces
will one strengthen another, as stones in an Arch. As for example, Master
Peacock, Fellow of a House, being afflicted in conscience, (as thou art) and at
the point of despair; when some Ministers asked whether they should pray for
him, answered, By no means do no so dishonor God, as to pray for such a
Reprobate as I am: but his young Pupil standing by, said, (with tears in his
eyes) Certainly a Reprobate could never be so tender of Gods dishonor; which
he well considering, was thereby comforted and restored: when neither he with
his learning, nor any other Ministers with their sage advice, could do any good.

Again secondly, if ever thou had true faith wrought in thy heart, be not
discouraged; for as the former graces show, that thou have with Mary made
choice of that better part, which shall never be taken from thee: So this
grace of faith is Christ's wedding Ring, and to whomsoever he gives it, he
gives himself with it; we may lose the sense, but never the essence of it: It
may be eclipsed, not extinguished: Fides concussa, non excussa: The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance: as it is, Romans 11. 29. Friends are
unconstant, riches, honors, pleasures, are unconstant; the world is
unconstant, and life it self is unconstant; but. I the Lord change not,
Malachi. 3. 6.

In a swound the soul does not exercise her functions; a man neither hears,
nor sees, nor feels, yet she is still in the body. The Frantic man in his mad
fits, does not exercise reason; yet he has it: ^e loses the use for a time,
not the habit. Yea, a sober man has not always the use of his senses, reason,
and understanding, as in his sleep: shall we therefore conclude that this man is
senceless, unreasonable, and without understanding? it were most absurd: for if
we have patience but a while, our argument will appear manifestly false.

Trees (and so we are fitly called) be not dead in Winter, (which resembles
the time of adversity) because the sap is shut up in the root; and confined
thither by the cold frosts, that they cannot show themselves in the production
of leaves and fruits: for by experience we know, that for the present they
live, and secretly su^ nourishment out of the earth; which makes them spring
and revive again, when Summer coms: Yea, even whiles they are grievously sha^on
with the winds, and nipped with cold frosts, they are not hurt thereby; but
contrarily they take deeper root, have their worms and cankers killed by it;
and so are prepared, and made fit to bring forth more fruit, when the
comfortable Spring approaches, and the sweet showers, and warm Sunbeams fall
and descend upon them. Elementary bodies, lighten and darken, cool and warm,
die and revive, as the Sun presents, or absents it self from them, And is not
Christ to our souls the only Sun of reghteousness, and (...) of all comfort?
so that if he withdraw himself but a little, we become like plants in the
Winter, quite withered; yea, in appearance stark dead (...) or like Trees void
both of leaves and fruits though even then there remains faith in the heart, as
sap in the root, or as pre raked up in the ashes.

Which faith, though it be not the ^ie strong, yet it is the like precious
faith to that of Abraham's: whereby to lay hold, and put on the perfect
righteousness of Christ. The Woman that was diseased with an issue, did but
touch, and with a trembling hand, and but the hem of his garment, and yet went
away both healed, and comforted.

Well might I doubt of my salvation, says Bradford, feeling the weakness of my
faith, love, hope, etc. if these were the causes of my salvation: but there is
no other cause of it; or, of his mercy, but his mercy. Wherefore have thou but
a touch of sorrow for sin, a spark of hope, a grain of faith in thy heart? thou
art safe enough. The Anchor lies deep, and is not seen, yet is the stay of
all. The Bladder blown, may float upon the flood,
But cannot sink, nor stick in filt by mud.


But thou dreamest of a says without doubling, which some doungly boast they
have: but as no righteousness can be perfect without sin; so no assurance can
be perfect without doubting: Take the evenest balances, and the most equal
weights; yet at the first putting in; there will be some in-equality; though
presently after they settle themselves in a just poyse. Sin is a cloud that
often hinders the Sun from our eyes, yet it is still a Sun; the vision or
feeling of this comfort may be sometime suspended, the Union with Christ is
never dissolved.

An usual thing with believers to have their ebbing and flowing, waxing and
waning, Summer and Winter; to be sometimes so comfortable and courageous, that
we can say with David, Though I were in the valley of death, yet would I fear
none ill, Psalm. ^3. 4. otherwhiles again so deaded and dejected in our spirits,
that we are like him when he said, One day I shall die by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. Sometimes so strong in faith, that we can overcome the greatest
assaults; and with Peter, can walk upon the swelling waves: by and by so faint,
and brought to so low an ebb, that we fall down even in far less dangers, as
Peter began to (...) at the rising of the wind, Matthew. 14. 29. 30. And indeed,
if the wings of our faith be clipped, either by our own sins, or Satan's
temptations, how should not our spirits lie grovelling on the ground?

Sect. 9.
But thirdly and lastly, (for I hasten) suppose thou art at the last cast, even
at the very brink of despair; and that thy conscience speaks nothing but bitter
things, of Gods Wrath, bell and damnation; and that thou have no feeling of
faith, or grace; yet know that it is Gods use (and I wish we could all take
notice of it) to work in, and by contraries: For instance, in creating of the
world, he brought light out of darkness, and made all things not of something,
but of nothing; clean contrary to the course of Nature.

In his preserving of it, he has given us the Rainbow, which is a sign of
rain, as a certain pledge that the world shall never the second time be
drowned. He caused Elias his sacrifice to burn in the midst of water: and
fetches hard stones out of the midst of thin vapors. When he meant to bless
Jacob, he wrestled with him as an Adversary, even till he ^amed him: When he
meant to prefer Joseph to the Throne, he threw him down into the Dungeon; and
to a golden chain about his neck, he laded him with ^on ones about his legs,
Thus Christ opened the eyes of the blind, by anointing them with clay and
(...); more likely to put them out: And would not cure Laxarus till after he
was dead, buried, and stunk again; no question, to reach us, that we must be
cast down by the Law, before we can be raised up by the Gospel: that we
must dye unto sin, before we can live unto righteousness: and become fools,
before we can be truly wise.

In the work of Redemption, he gives life, not by life, but by death, and that
a most cursed death; making that the best instrument of life, which was the
worst kind of death: Optimum fecit instrumentum vitae, quod erat pessimum
mortis genus.

In our effectual vocation, he calls us by the Gospel, unto the Jews, a
stumbling block, and unto the world mere foolishness: And when it is his
pleasure that any should depend upon his goodness, and providence, he makes
them feel his anger, and to be nothing in themselves; that they may rely
altogether upon him.

Thus God works joy out of fear, light out of darkness; and brings us to the
Kingdom of heaven, by the Gates of hell: according to that 1 Samuel 2. ver 6. 7.
And wherein does thy case differ? He sends his Sergeant (...) arrest thee for
thy debt; commands thee and all thou have to be (...) But why? only to show
thee thy misery without Christ, that so (...) may seek to him for merby: for
although he hides his fatherly (...) as Joseph onoe did his brotherly, his
meaning is in conclusion to forgive thee every farthing, Matthew. 18. 26, 27.

And do thou make thy slight sufferings an argument of his displeasure? for
shame mutter not at the matter, but be silent: It is not said, God will not
suffer us to be tempted at all, but that we shall not be tempted above that
we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And assure thy self, what ever thy
sufferings be, thy says shall not fail to get the victory; as oil over-swims
the greatest quantity of water you can power upon it. True, let none presume;
(no not the most righteous) for he shall scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18. yet
let him not despair, for he shall be saved, Romans 8. 35.

Only accept with all thankfulness the mercy offered, and apply the promises
to thine own soul: for the benefit of a good thing, is in the use; wisdom is
good, but not to us, if it be not exercised; cloth is good, but not to us,
except it be worn; the light is comfortable, but not to him that will live in
darkness: a preservative in our pocket, never taken, cannot yield us health,
nor baggs of money being ever sealed up, do us any pleasure; no more will the
promises, (no nor Christ himself, that only summum bonum) except they are
applied: Yea, better there were no promises, than not applied. The Physician is
more offended at the contempt of his Physic in the Patient, than with the
loathsomness of the disease. And this I can assure thee, if the blood of Christ
be applied to thy soul, it will soon stanch the blood of thy conscience; and
keep thee from bleeding to death, 1 John 1. 7.

But secondly, instead of mourning continually as the tempter bids thee; rather
rejoice continually as the Apostle bids thee, 1 These. 5. 16. Neither think it
an indifferent thing, to rejoice, or not to rejoice; but know that we are
commanded to rejoice, to show that we break a commandment if we rejoice not:
Yea, we cannot believe if we rejoice not; for faith, in the commandments
breeds obedience; in the threatenings, fear; in the promises, comfort. True,
thou think thou do well to mourn continually; yea, it is the common
disease of the innocentest souls: but thou do very ill in it: for, when you
forget to rejoice in the Lord, then you begin to must, and after to fear, and
after to distrust, and at last to despair: and then every thought seems to be a
sin against the holy Ghost. Yea, howmany sins does the afflicted conscience
record against it self; repenting for breaking this commandment, and that
commandment; and never repents for breaking this commandment, rejoice
evermore.

But what is the reason? Ignorance: thou think thy self poor and miserable,
and only therefore think so, because thou know not thy riches and
happiness in Christ: for else thou would say with the Prophet Habbakuck, in
the want of all other things, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation, Habbak. 3. 17, 18. Thou would rejoice that thy name is
written in the book of life, as our Savior injoines, Luke 10. 20. though thou
had nothing else to rejoice in.

But it is nothing to be blessed, until we understand ourselvs to be so;
wherefore

Thirdly, wait Gods leisure with patience, and hold fast to him in all
pressures: Time (says Seneca) is the best Physic for most diseases, for the
body, and so likewise for the soul: if it be an afflicted conscience, waiting
Gods leisure for the assurance of his love, is the best remedy: and so in all
other cases.

Section. 10.
Ob. But when will there be an end of this long disease? this tedious
affliction? this heavy yoke of bondage? etc.

Answ. It is a sign of cold love, scarce to have begun to suffer for Christ
and presently to gape for an end: It was a far better speech of one, Lord, give
me what thou will, as much as thou will, when thou will. Thou art Gods
Patient, prescribe not thy Physi^ian. It is the Goldsmiths skill to know how
long his gold must be in the Crusible, neither takes he it out of that hot
bath, till it be sufficiently purified.

What if the Lord for a time forbear coming, as Samuel did to Saul; that he
may try what is in thee? and what thou will do, or suffer for him, that has
done and suffered so much for thee? as why did God set Noah about building the
Ark an hundred and twenty years, when a small time might have finished it? It
was for the trial of his patience. Thus he led the Israelites in the deserts
of Arabia forty years; whereas a man may travel from Ramesis in Egypt, to any
part of Canaan in forty days: this God did to prove them, that he might know
what was in their hearts, Deu. 8. 2. He promised Abraham a son in whom he
should be blessed; this he performed not, in thirty years after. He gave
David the Kingdom, and anointed him by Samuel, yet was he not possessed of it
in many years: in so much that he said, Mine eyes fail for thy Word, Psalm.
119. 123. Joseph has a promise that the Sun and Moon should do him reverence,
but first he must be bound in the Dungeon. This God does to try us, for in
these exigents we show our selves, and our dispositions.

What says God to his people in their misery? Psalm. 75. When I see convenient
time, I will execute judgment, ver. 2. he does not say, when you think the
time convenient. Let us tarry a little the Lords leisure, deliverance will
come, peace will come, joy will com; in mean while to (...) ^nt in misery,
makes misery no misery.

Again secondly, he may delay his coming for other ends of greater
consequence, Martha and Mary send to Christ, as desiring him to come and
restore Lazarus their sick brother to health, Joh. 11. 3. expecting him without
delay; now he loved both Martha and her Sister, and Lazarus, ver. 5. yet he
neglects coming for many days, lets him die, be put in the grave until he
stank; but what of all this? he that would not restore sick Lazarus to health,
restored dead Lazarus to life; which was a greater mercy than they either did,
or drst ask. Neither did this only increase their joy, and thankfulness, give
them occasion ever after to believe, and hope above and against all hope: but
it made many of the Jews believe (...) him, which before did not, ver. 45.

Thirdly and lastly; he delays thee the longer, that when he coms, he may
bring with him the greater recompense of reward: for be will comfort us
according to the days we have been afflicted, and according to the years that
we have seen evil, Psalm. 90. 15.

Neither will he stay overlong, for behold, says he, I come quickly, and my
reward is with me; to give every man according as his works shall be, Rev. 22.
12. and suffering is accounted none of the meanest works. So that the harder
the conflict, the more glorious the conquest. Wherefore hold out yet a little,
and help shall not be wanting to the combatants; not a crown to the
conquerours. Yea, fight to the last minute, for the eye of thy Savior is upon
the; if thou faint, to cheer thee; if thou stand to it, to second thee; if thou
conquer, to crown thee; whereas no combat, no conquest; no conquest, no
triumph.

Object. But my sufferings are so great, that if they continue, I shall never
be able ^o hold out.

Answ. True, if thou trustest ^o thine own strength; for perseverance is the
gift of God; yea, it is he that works in us both to will and to do at his
good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. For first, man's will is a fugitive Onesimus, and
God must call home that runagate, subdue that rebel, before we can choose that
which is good. Neither when we have begun, can we continue: perficit qui
efficit, He that begun a good work in us, will perform (...), Phil. 1. 6.
Jesus is the founder and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2 Neither can we of
our selves suffer for him: Datur pati, it is given to us to suffer for his sake,
Phil. 1. 29. Without me ye can do nothimg, Joh. 15. 5. not parum, but nihil;
But in him, and through him, all things. I can do all things through him that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. In our selves we are weak Captives, in him we
are more than Conquerours, Romans 8. 37. Whence it is, many sick men undergo
patiently such pressures, as when they were in health, they would not have
believed they could have born.

The truth of grace (be the measure never so small) is always blessed with
perseverance; because that little is sed with an everlasting spring. Yea, if
grace but conquer us first, we by it shall conquer all things else, whether it
be corruptions within us, or temtations without us: for as ^he fire which came
down from heaven in Elias time, licked up all the water, to show that it came
from God; so will this fire spend all our corruptions: No affliction without,
or corruption within, shall quench it. Wherefore do but thy endeavor to hold
out, I mean with patience; (for that Spirit which came in the likeness of a
Dove, will not com but upon a Dove,) and pray for divine assistance, this
sadness shall end in gladness, this sorrow, in singing.

But above all; pray unto God, for Prayer is the key of heaven, as Saint Austin
terms it; and the hand of a Christian, which is able to reach from Earth to
Heaven, and to take forth every manner of good gift out of the Lords Treasury.
Did not Elias by turning this Key one way, lock up the whole Heaven from
raining for three years and six months; and another while by turning the same
Key of prayer, as much another way, in the turning of a hand, unlock all the
doors and windows of heaven, and set them wide open, that it rained, and the
earth brought forth her ^uit.

Yea, as all Samsons strength lay in his hair, so all our strength lies in
Prayer: Prayers and tears are the Churches Armor, Prayers and patience her
weapons; and therefore when Pe^er was imprisoned by cruel Herod, the
congregation joined their forces to pray for him; and so brake his chains, blew
open the Iron Gates, and fetched him ou^t, Act. 12. 4. to 18. Arm^
Christianorum in adversis, alia esse non debent quam patientia, and precatio
says Salmeron.

Yea, prayer is so powerful, that it commands all things in Heaven and
Earth: It commands all the four Elements, Air, Iam. 5. 17. 18. Fire,
Ecclesiasticus 48. 3. Dan. 3. 27. ^ater, Exodus 14. 21. and 15. 25. Earth, Number.
16. 31. 32. 33. Nay, the Prayer of one devou^ man, is able to conquer an host
of enemies in battle, Exodus 17. 11. What shall I say? it has made the Sua
stand still in the Firmament one while, go back another; fetch fire and
hait-stones from heaven, thrown down the walls of Jericho, subdued Kingdoms,
stopped the mouths of Lions quenched the violence of fire, etc. Yea, Prayer is so
potent, that it raised^ the dead, 1 King. 17. 21. overcomes Angels, Genesis 19.
22. casts out Devils, Matthew. 17. 21. and that which is yet more wonderful,
overcomes him that cannot be overcome; and mastereth even God himself; for
does not the Lord say to Moses, ^et me alone? And Moses would not let him
alone, till he had obtained his petition, Exodus 32. 10. 14. And again to Jacob,
wrestling with him, let me go: and Jacob would not let him go, until he had
prevailed, Genesis 32. 16.

Wherefore, Pray upon all occasions and that without doubting: say not to God,
as the Leper said to Christ, If, thou will, thou can make me clean: for he
both can, and will, as that very text, Matthew. 8. 2, 3. proves. Yea, I would to
God we were but so willing, as he is, for he desires to be desired: Neither
has he his own will, except we have ours. Christ does ask no more of us, but
only that we would vouchsafe to ask him* True, the fainting heart that has
waited some time, may with the Psalmist mutter out some such speech, as this,
Has God forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77. 9. But if he forgets any of his,
he has lost his old wont; for who can no^inate one that ever came to Christ
with any lawful suit, that received a repulse? Who ever asked any thing of him
which was profitable for him to receive, and did not obtain his suit? Did not
the sick ever receive their health? The lame, their limbs? the blind their
sight? Did ever any sinner implore the forgiveness of his sins, which did not
receiv full remission and pardon? Yea, did not this our gracious King and
Redeemer, prevent his poor miserable subjects with his grace, in giving, before
they had the grace to ask; or more then they desired? The sick of the Palsy
asking but cure of his disease, received not only that, but the remission of
his sins also, Matthew. 9. Zacheus desired but to see his face, he became his
guest; and gave him salvation to boot, Luke 19. The Woman of Samaria requested
but elementary and common water, he offered unto her the water of life, Joh.
4. The people followed him to be fed by miracle with corporal food, he
offered unto them the bread of life, Joh. 7. The poor blind man desired but his
bodily sight, Christ illuminated the eye of his soul, Joh. 9.

Neither has honors changed manners with him, as is usual amongst men; for
he is a God immutable in goodness, and without change, or shadow of turning,
Jam. 1 17. so that if thou speak, he will hear; and answer thy suit in
supporting thee: so that thou shall be sure to persevere, and hold out unto
the end.

Section 11.
Object. But I have no evidence of divine assistance, nor can I pray for it to
purpose.

Answ. We have the presence of Gods Spirit, and grace many times, and feel it
not; yea, when we complain for want of i^, (as Pilate asked Christ what was
truth, when the truth stood before him). The stomach finds the best digestion,
even in sleep, when we least perceive it; and whiles we are most awake, this
power works in us, either to further strength, or disease, without our
knowledge of what is done within; and on the other side, that man is most
dangerously sick, in whom nature decays without his feeling, without his
complaint. To know our selves happy is good; but woe were to us Christians, if
we could not be happy, and ^now it not. As touching Prayer, every one is not
so happy as Steven was, to be most servent when they are most in pain; yea,
many in time of sickness (by reason of the extremity of pain) can hardly pray
at all: whence Saint James wishes us in affliction, to pray our selves; but in
case of sickness, to send for the Elders: that they may, as those in the
Gospel, offer up the sick person to God in their prayers, being unable to
present their own case, Jam. 5. 13. 14. 15. Yea, it were miserable for the best
Christian, if all his former Prayers and Meditations did not serve to aid him
in his last straights, and meet together in the Center of his extremity;
yielding, though not sensible relief, yet secret benefit to the soul: whereas
the worldly man in this case, having not laid up for this hour, has no
comfort from God, or from others, or from himself.

Besides, thou art happy in this, there is not the poorest and meanest of Gods
Children, but as he has the benefit of Christ's intercession in heaven, Romans
8. 34. Joh. 16. 26. so has he also the benefit of the Prayers of all the
Saints on Earth: we have the graces and gifts, each of other in common.

Yet, because thine own Prayer is most proper; and seeing it is the mi^des
Ambassador to God, and never saileth of success, if it be fervent, (as if our
prayers want success, they want heart, their blessing is according to their
vigor) pray that thou may pray better: If thy Leg be benum^d, go upon it a
little, and it will come to it self again. To which if thou ^in fasting, thou
shall do well; for prayers are made sat with fasting, as Tertullian speaks:
Yea, pray ^ft, though thy prayers be the shorter; weak stom^s which cannot
digest large meals, seed often, and little. O! (says holy Bernard most sweetly),
How often have thou (meaning prayer) sound ^ee lamenting, and despairing; and
lest me rejoicing, and triumphing!

And what though thou can not power out thy soul in a flood of words? The
Woman diseased with an issue of blood, said but within her self, she did not
speak to be heard of others, and yet Christ heard her, and answered her
request, Matthew: 9. 21. 22.

The Lord esteems the will for the deed, and the affection for the action;
Man sees the countenance, God the heart; man the deeds, but God the meaning.
Have thou but thoughts and desires, and can thou only express them with
sighs and groans? these speechless words, or rather no words, but a few poor
thoughts, conceived aright, pass all the flowing eloquence of Demosthenes and
Tully, yea, Tertullus and all the Orators that ever were in the world; for this
matter is not expressed with words, but with groanings; and these groanings are
from the blessed Spirit. A Father delights more in the stammering of his little
Child, than in the eloquence of the best Orator.

Neither is hearty prayer in our own power, but it is the gift of God, which at
sometimes in plentiful measure he bestows upon his children, and at other
times again he pulls back his liberal hand: that by the want thereof, we
may leern ^o ascribe the glory and praise of this grace to the giver, who
works in us the will and the deed: which praise otherwise, in pride of heart,
we would arrogate unto our selves, as being in our own power. Also that we
may more highly esteem it, and with more joy and diligence use it, when we have
it bestowed on us.

If it be asked why God reckons so highly of a sew sighs and groans? and why
the prayers of the faithful are so powerful? it is, because they be not
ours, but the intercession of Gods own Spirit in us, powered out in the name of
Christ, his own Son, in whom he is ever well pleased: for, as for us, we know
not what to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it solf makes request for us,
with sighs which cannot be expressed, Romans 8. 26. It is the Spirit whereby we
cry Abba Father, ver. 15. Gal. 4. 6.

Now if thou would have the Spirits assistance, and be heard of God, when
thou make supplication to him; do not (as too many do) fall into prayer
without preparation, and utter a number of words without devotion, or
affection: for no marvel, if we ask and miss, when we thus ask amiss, Jam. 4.
3.

Neither do as Children, which never look after their Arrow; but like Daniel,
Dan. 9. take notice of thine inlargements in prayer, and of thy success after.

Nor only pray, and no more; for to pray, and to do nothing else, is in effect
to do nothing less. But let your Prayers be ushered in, by Meditation, and
attend by zealous devotion, and then believing that you shall receie whatsoever
you ask in Christ's name, and according to his will, 1 John 5. 14. John 16. 23.
God will be sure to give you that you desire, 1 John 5. 14. 15. Mark 11. 23.
24. or that which is better for you, Deuteronomy. 34. 4, 5.

And suppose thou art not presently heard: yet continue asking still, as Peter
continued knocking till the door was opened: for after an ill harvest we must
sow, and after d^ls woe must wo^ God. Yea, if it be possible with the Woman of
Canaan, let delays, and seeming denialls increase the strength of thy cries.
And commonly they be earnest suits which issue from a troubled soul, like
strong streams in narrow straights, which bear down all that stands in their
way. Nothing so strong as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, ^or it overcame the
roaring Lion; yet the Prayer of Faith, from the knees of humility, and a broken
heart, will conquer even that Conqueror, Matthew. 15. 28.

And thus you see that nothing can befall us without the special appointment
of our good God, who not only takes notice of our sufferings, but sweetneth
them with his presence, takes our part, stints our enemies, and so orders the
whole, that our grief is either short or tolerable; and that though he is
oftentimes harsh, in the beginning, and progress, and late in coming; yet he
coms on the sudden, and is always comfortable, in the conclusion. And lastly,
that if he deser his help, it is on purpose that our trialls may be perfect,
our deliverance welcome; our recompense glorious. And may not this comfort thee?

CHAP. 37.
That stripes from the Almighty, are special tokens and pledges of his
adoption and love.

3 We shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if we consider,
that stripes from the Almighty are so far from arguing his displeasure, that
contrarily there are no better rokens and pledges of his Adoption and love: As
many (says God) as I love, I rebuke, and chasten, Rev. 3. 19. My Son (says
the Author to the Hebrews, out of Solomon's Proverbs) Despise not the chastening
of the Lord, neither faint when thou a^t rebuked of him: for whom the Lord
loves, be chasteneth; and he scourges every son whom he receives. If you
endure chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: for what son is
it whom the Father chastenith not? If therefore ye be without correction,
whereof all are partakers; then are ye bastards, and not so^s, Heb. 12. 5. to
13. Prove. 3. 11. 12. He is a Thistle, and not good Corn, that comes not under
the ^ail. Yea, what use of the grain it self, if it pass not the edg of the
sickle, the stroke of the ^ail, the wind of the Fan, the weight of the
^ilstone, the heat of the oven.

Many a man's fellicity drives him from God; and where happiness domi^eereth,
virtue is commonly banished. And does not experience show, that fear and joy,
sweet and sour, sharp and flat, one with another, do better than either alone:
for if you be too (...), you make the child a fool; if ^oo fond. a wanton. The
^ridle governs the horse, the spur quickens, him; the weight upon the line
makes the Jack go, the oil upon the wheel makes it go glib, and ^imble: The
sayls give the speed, the ballast steadiness to the motion of the shhip. And
hereupon God weighs out to us our favors and crosses in an equal balance;
and so tempers our sorrows, that they may not oppress; and our joys, that they
may not transport us. Each one has some matter of envy to others, and of
grief to himself.

Thou dealest mercifully with us, lest we should fall from thee, and despair;
thou beatest us, lest we should forget thee, and so perish, (says Saint
Austin:) He that knows our frame, knows we are best when we are worst, and
live holiest when we are miserablest: wherefore by affliction he separates
the sin, that he hates, from the sinner, whom he loves; and we are by much
the better for this scouring. It is the wont of Fathers to hold in their
Children, when they suffer the children of bondmen to go at large, and do as
they list; yea, when diverse children are playing the wantons, if we see a man
take one from the rest, and whip him soundly; we conclude that alone to be his
Child. Yea, wise and discreet Fathers will force their Children earnestly to
apply themselves to their study, or labor; and will not let them be idle,
although it be holy day: yea, constrain them to sweat, and ostentimes ^o weep,
when their Mothers would set them on their laps, and keep them at home all day
in the shadow, for burning their white. Jacob is bound Apprentice, while
profane Esau rides a hunting: of Elkanah his two wives, Hanna was in more
esteem with God, yet barren, and Peninnah less, yet she was fruitful 1 Samuel
1. They were all gross inconsequences; for Gedeon to argue Gods absence by
affliction, his presence by deliverances, and the unlikely-hood of success, by
his own disability, Judge. 6. 13. 15. (It is no argument, that Christ is not in
the Ship: because tempests, and storms arise.) The valiant man was here weak;
weak in says, weak in discourse; for rather should he have inferred Gods
presence upon their correction; for wheresoever God chastises, there he is;
yea, there he is in mercy; nothing more proves us his, than his stripes; he
will not bestow whipping, where he loves not: fond nature indeed, thinks God
should not suffer the wind to blow upon his dear ones, because her self makes
this use of her own indulgence; but none (out of the place of torment) have
suffered so much, as his dear Children. If he had said we are Idolaters,
therefore the Lord has forsaken us, because we have forsaken him; instead of,
the Lord has delivered us unto the ^ianites, therefore he has forsaken us;
the sequel had been as good, as now it is faulty; for sins, not afflictions,
argue God absent: Yea, commonly, the measure of our sufferings is according to
the measure of grace in us, and Gods love to us; He is a chosen vessel unto
me (says God to Ananias touching Paul;) therefore he must suffer great
things for my sake, Act. 9. 15. 16. Job, for a righteous and upright man, had
no fellow; by the testimony of God himself, Job 1. 8. Yet the next news we hear
of him, Job is afflicted in his Sons, in his substance, in his body; from the
crown of the head, to the soal of the foot. Saint Austin, when God called him,
was far more assaulted by Satan, than Alippius; because God had endued him with
greater learning and gifts, and intended him an instrument of bringing more
glory to his Name. And lastly, as Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his sellows, Psalm. 45. 7. so he was anointed with the oil os sadness
above his fellows: as was his back, so was his burden,; as were his parts, so
were his passions, and his strokes, answerable to his strength.

Never any have had so bitter draughts upon earth, as those he loves best: and
that of Saint Austin, is a sure rule, whom God smites not, he loves not: If
he do not think thee worthy of his Rod, he will never think thee worthy of his
Crown. Yea, where he uses not the Rod, he means to use the Sword. Never was
Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury shall
depart from thee, I will be quiet, and no more angry, Ezekiel, 16. 42. Thus not
to be angry, was the greatest anger of all. Never were the Jews more to be
pitied, than when their Prophet delivered these words from the Lord, why should
ye be stricken any more? Isa. 1. 5. Not to be afflicted, is to be sorsaken:
And as the sick man is in small hope of his life, when the Physician gives him
over; so his soul is in a desperare case, whom God forbeareth to chastise for
his sins. As many there be, who never knew what any sorrow meant^nless it were
such as Amnons, such as Ahabs, when they are crossed in their corruptions,
curbed in their lewd courses, or restrained of their wicked wills. But let them
take it for a fearful sign of some sore judgment to come: Saint Ambrose,
Bishop of Millain, as Paulinus relates, took into a Rich man's house as he
traveled, who, that he might bid him thoroughly welcome, entertained him both
with great cheer, and curteons discourses: and amongst other matters, told of
his continued happiness, and that he never suffered any ill all his days, but
had all things as he would; and happiness so flowing in upon him, that he
knew not what calamity meant: which conference did so startle Saint Ambrose,
that presently he took his leave, telling his company that he feared to stay
in that place, which never felt any disaster; and was no sooner gone thence, but
suddenly the house fell down, and proved a grave to all her inhabitants.
Polycrates, King of the Samians, never felt any ill all his life, his hopes
never fell short of his expectation, he could not wish for the thing which was
not fulfilled; what he willed, he did: Yea, having but once a Ring of
excellent rarity that fell into the water, this loss was recovered; for the
Fish was taken which had swallowed it, and was presented to Polycratus: but at
length all this his happiness epilogized in a gallo^es. None more happy than
great Pompey all his life, yet at last he was made to drink his own blood by
the hands of the Executioner. Who but Andronic^s, Emperor of the East for many
years? but at length he was see upon a scabbed Chamell, with a Crown of Onions
platted on his head, and in great mockery car^ed in triumph through the City.
And does nor sacred Writ certify, how Haman, whose command ere while almost
reached to Heaven, was instantly adjudged by the King to the Gibbet; while
Mordecai who was condemned to the balter, was all of a sudden made second in
the Kingdom.

Nevertheless, as Haman rejoiced in his preserment to the Queens Banquet, which
was the path way to his destruction: so, many think it the only argument of
Gods love, and that they are in favor with him, because they prosper in all
their ways: which would m^e a wise man the more suspicious, for, (as Seneca
that wise Roman says) he that has been longest happy, shall at length have
his portion of misery; and who so seems to be dismissed. is but deferred.

And commonly their change is not more doleful, than sudden; for as it often
happens, that in very fair weather a storm does arise: and as I have read of
certain Trees, which on Monday have been growing in the Forest, and before
Sunday following, under sail on the Sea: so the same hour has seen the knee
bowing to the head; and again, the head stooping, and doing reverence to the
knee, as every age gives instance: for else I might muster up a multitude of
examples for proof of the point. Or in case it seems better, yet it is worse
with them when their life and happiness shall end together: as it fared with
Belshazzar, who was sitting at a Feast merry, while on a sudden, Death came
like a Voyder to take him away. And Pope Adrian, who when he was to dye; brake
out into this expression: Oh my soul, whither art thou going? thou shall never
be merry again.

Neither are men of this world, whose bellies God fills with his hid
treasure, upon occasion of their outward prosperity, only apt to be brought
into a fools Paradise, of thinking themselves to be the special darlings of
God: but even the godly themselves have oftentimes their eyes so dazzled, with
the outward glittering and flourishing estate of the wicked, that thereupon
they are ready to say of them, The generation of Gods children, as it fared
with David, Psalm. 73. 15. But these are not sober thoughts, yea, they are
rather the dreams of men, drunk with the love of the World: for although it be
as common a phrase, as it is foolish, when any great matter falls to a man, O
he is made! yet experience proves, that it rather marrs than makes him; for not
seldom do men possess riches, as sick men do fevers, which indeed rather
possess them. And certainly, if riches were such pearls, as most men esteem
them, it is not likely the Lord would cast them to suh Swine, as mostly he
does: If such happy things, he would not throw them to such Dogs. As what
says Luther of the whole Turkish Empire? it is but a crum of bread, which the
master of the house, throws to his Dogs. And the truth is, what men think
most pleasing, (viz. to have their wills, and their lusts granted) is most
plaguing, Psalm. 81. 12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they
walked in their own counsels; so that the greatest temtation, is to be without
temtation: and the greatest affliction, not to be afflicted, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, because of some sore affliction,
and your weak knees, Heb. 12. 12. and know, that the worst of temporal
afflictions, are an insufficient proof of divine displeasure: yea, that stripes
from the Almighty, are tokens of his love, and seals of his Sonship.

Yea, fince he that has most grace, commonly complains of most discomfort,
confess that the palate is but an ill Judge of the favors of God: as it is in
great love no doubt, however it be taken, that the tender Father medicines his
Child for the ^orms, gives him Alo^s, or the like: the Child cries, and
sputters, and keckes, as if it were poisoned, yet still the Fathers love is
never the less: say it be bitter, yet bitter potions bring sweet health, and
who will not rather take a vomit, then hazard life? In the Sweating sickness in
England, their friends would stand by them and strike them over the faces with
sprigs of Rosemary, to keep them awake: the poor souls faint, and full of pain,
would cry out you kill me, but yet they must do it, or else they killed them
indeed: for all that slept, dyed. Look we (says Saint Ambrose) with the eyes
of our body, upon Lazarus estate, and we think it miserable; but, if with the
eyes of the mind, it will be otherwise; for how did the Angels do by him? but
as Nurses are wont to do by their little children, all the day long they carry
them about in their arms, and at night they lay them down in their beds to rest.

But the supernatural works of God, when we look upon them with our own eyes,
are subject to a dangerous misprision; the Sunbeams, (...) whom we are
beholding for our ^ight, if we eye them directly, blind us. Miserable men! we
are ready to suspect truths, to run away from our safety, to be afraid of our
comforts, to mis-know our best friends.

We usually think it a great sign of God displeasure, when he ruins our
estate, and brings us to nothing; when he in his wisdom knows, that these
riches would shipwreck the soul, were they not cast overboard: and his love
only forces him to it. A Mother seeing her little So^ brustled at by
Turcki-cocks catches him up, and strippeth him of his red coat, at which those
^des are offended; the child cries for his coat, but she regarding his good,
lets him weep, but satisfies him not. And the like of Enemies, we think
our selves mightily wronged by them: But God finds it to fare with us, as it
does with the Oak, which gains by the maims and wounds given it, and thereupon
spreads out thicker than before. Whence it is, God suffers them to live, and
domineer, as some Countries suffer Ravens, enacting ^aws to prohibit the
killing of them; that they may devour the Carrions, which else would corrupt
the air. And so in all other trials: for, be the root of this ^ee never so
bitter, yet the fruit is pleasant. Well may we carch a maim as Jacob did, but
such a blessing coms withal, that we would not (if wife) be without it. Say
it be a sore and fiery trial, yet better this fire to purge us, than Hell
fire to burn us. But all the skill is in making men see this; wherefore he
that opened the eyes of Paul, open ours.

But furthermore, as not to be afflicted, argues an absolute defect of
goodness; so if our troubles be light and few, it is because we are weak and
tender, for therefore God imp^th no more upon us, because he sees we can
(...) no more: The Physician will not suffer a milke-sop to see his vein
opened, but makes him wink or look another way: The Master gives not to his
sick servant strong meats, as he does to the rest, but more dainty fare; not
because he is worthier than the rest, but because he is weaker, and in
greater need. The skillful Armourer tries not an ordinary Piece with
musket shot. The wise Lapidary brings not his softer stones to the Stithy.

So that freedom from affliction is not a sign of potency, but of impotency.
Wherefore, when I am stronger, I will look for more; when I am a vessel fit
for this strong and new wine, I shall be filled with it; but not before, Mark
2. 22.

Indeed, the calling of God never leaves a man unchanged, nor does he employ
any in his service, whom he does not enable to the work he sets them about.
Will any make choice of a weak Champion? no more will God: he will either find
us fit, or make us fit to discharge the place he puts us in; as when he
called Saul to be a King, he gave him a Kings beart, 1 Samuel 10. 9 And when
he called the Apostles to that function, he gave them gifts answerable; so
when he calls any to suffer for him, be it Martyrdom; he gives them the
courage of Martyrs, as the times of Queen Mary, witness. But yet for the most
part he ^rains us up by degrees; (as we eat diverse things by morsels, and
easily digest them; which if we should eat whole, would choke us) and does not
make us fit to undergo great matters on a sudden. We must learn to fence in
the School, before we fight in the Field; and with wooden weapons men learn to
fight at the sharp: we must encounter with some beasts or other, (I mean
unreasonable men) before we fight with that fearful Goliath, death. And
indeed, if we do not learn to give entertainment to smaller crosses, the
harbingers, messengers and servants of death; how shall we be able to
entertain the Lord and Master, when he comes? Wherefore, as Jehoram said to
Jebu, when he marched furiously; Come thou peaceably? As if he should say,
if thou come peaceably, march as furiously as thou will: so let us say unto
God, provided, thy afflictions and chastisements be directed to us as
messengers of peace, and love; let them march toward us as furiously as thou
please, but in any case, let us not be without correction: for as Mariners
at Sea, find, that of all storms, a Calm is the greatest; so we; that, to be
exempt from misery, is the most miserable condition of all other.

Object. But thou fear that God has not pardoned thy sins, and this makes
him so severe against thee.

Answ. Many times after the remission of the sin, his very chastisements are
deadly; as is clear by David's example: and Lots, who had a sharp misery clap on
the heels of a sweet mercy: for he that was so beloved of God, that he saved
a whole City, could not save his own Spouse.

When God delivers us from destruction, he does not secure us from all
affiction. Grace was never given us for a Target against external evils.
Though we ^ee not condemned with the world, yet we may be chastened in the
world. Neither the truth nor strength of Jobs says could secure him from the
outward and bodily vexations of Satan, against the inward and spiritual, they
could, and did prevail: so no repentance can assure us that we shall not smart
with outward affliction; that can prevent the eternal displeasure of God; but
still it may be necessary, and good, we should be corrected: our care and
suit must be, that the evils which shall not be averted, may be sanctified.

CHAP. 38.
That Christ and all the Saints are our Partners, and partakers wito us in the
Cross; yea, our sufferings are nothing in comparison of theirs.

4 We shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort, if we consider
that Christ and all the Saints are our partners, and partakers therein; yea,
thy sufferings are nothing in comparison of what others have suffered before
thee. Look upon righteous Abel, thou shall see his elder brother Cain had
dominion and rule over him by Gods appointment, Genesis 4. 7. Yea, in the next
ver. thou shall see him slain by his brother: After him look upon Noab, a most
calamitous person as ever lived, as the Chronologer computes him: as for Lot,
he had his righteous soul vexed from day to day. Look upon Job, thou shall see
that miseries do not stay for a mannerly succession to each other, but in a
rude importunity throng in at once, to take away his children, substance,
friends, credit, health, peace of conscience, etc. leaving him nothing but his
wife, whom the Devil spared on purpose to vex him, as the Fathers think: so
that in his own apprehension, God was his mortal enemy; as hear how in the
bitterness of his soul he complains of his Maker, saying, He teareth me in
his wrath, he hates me; and gnasheth upon me with his teeth, he has broken
me asunder, taken me by the neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me lip
for his mark: his Archers compass me round about, he cleaeth my reins asunder,
and does not spare to pour out my gall upon the ground, he breaks me with
breach upon breach, and runs upon me like a Giant, Job. 16. Now when so much
was uttered, even by a nonesuch for his patience; what may we think he did
feel, and endure? Look upon Abraham, thou shall see him forced to forsake his
Country, and Fathers house, to go to a place he knew not, to men that knew not
him; and after his many removes, he meets with a famine, and so is forced into
Egypt, which indeed gave relief to him, when Canaan could not; showing, that
in outward things, Gods enemies may fare better than his friends: yet he goes
not without great fear of his life, which made it but a dear purchase; then he
is forced to part from his brother Lot, by reason of strife and debate among
their Heardsmen: after that; Lot is taken prisoner, and he is constrained to
wage War with sour Kings at once, to rescue his Brother; then Sarah his wife
is barren, and he must go childlesse, until (in reason) he is past hope: when
he has a Son, it must not only die, but himself must stay him. Now if that
bosom wherein we all look to rest, was assaulted with so many sore trials, and
so diverse difficulties, is it likely we should escape? Look upon Jacob, you
shall see Esau strive with him in the womb, that no time might be lost; after
that you shall see him fly for his life from a cruel Brother, to a cruel
Uncle; with a staff goes he over Jordan, alone, doubtful, and comfortlosse;
not like the son of Isaac. In the way he has no bed, but the cold earth; no
pillow, but the hard stones; no sheet, but the moist air; no Canopy, but the
wide Heaven: at last he is come fat to find out an hard friend, and of a
Nephew becomes a servant; aafter the service of an hard Appronticeship, has
earned her whom he loved; his wife is changed, and he is not only disappointed
of his hopes; but forced to marry another against his will, and now he must
begin another Apprenticeship, and a new hope, where he made account of
fruition: all which fourteen years he was consumed with heat in the day, with
frost in the night: when he has her whom he loves, she is barren: at last,
being grown rich, chiefly in wives and children, accounting his charge, his
wealth, he returns to his Fathers house, but with what comfort? Behold, Laban
follows him with one troop, Esau meets him with another; both, with hosile
intentions: not long after, Rachel, the comfort of his life, dies; his
children, the staff of his age, wound his soul to death: Rouben proves
incestuous, Judah adulterous, Dina is ravished, Sime on and Lovi are
murtherous, Er and Onan are stricken dead, Joseph is lost, Simeon imprisoned,
Benjamin (his right hand) endangered, Himself driven by famine in his old age,
to die among the Egyptians; a people that held it abomination to eat with him:
And yet before he was born, it was, Jacob have I loved, and before any of this
befell him, God said unto him, Be not afraid, I am with thee, and will do thee
good, Genesis 28. 15. And did so, even by these crosses, for that is my good (says
the Proverb) that does me good. Now what Son of Israel can hope for any good
days, when he heats his Fathers were so evil? It is enough for us, if when we
are dead, we can rest with him in the Land of Promise. Again, hear what David
says of himself; Thy arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore,
Psalm. 38. 2. And see what cause he had so to say; what were these Arrows? To
let pass those many that Saul shot at him, which were sharp and keen enough:
and those other of Doeg, when he flew fourscore and five of the Priests, and
the whole City of Nob, both man and woman, child and suckling, for showing him
kindness: Likewise Shimei's carriage toward him; also his distress at Ziglag,
and those seventy thousand which perished by the Pestilence, upon his numbering
the people, and the like. First, Nathan tells him from the Lord, that the sword
should never depart from his house; and that he would raise up evil against him
out of his own loins: here were as many Arrows as words. Again, the child which
he had by Bathsheba was no sooner born, but it died, there was another Arrow:
Tamar his daughter being marriageable, was destowred by his own Son Amnon:
there was two more: Amnon himself, being in drink; was killed by Absalom at a
Feast; there was another: This Absalom proves rebellious, and rises in Arms
against his own Father, and makeshim fly beyond Jordan, there was one more: He
lies with his Fathers Concubines in the fight of all Israel, there was
another: And how much do you think, did these Arrows wound the Kings heart, and
pierce his very soul? Lastly, look upon Lazarus, though Christ's bosom friend?
Joh. 11. thou shall see him labor under a mortaldisease, etc. though many
souls were gained to the Gospel, and cured by his being sick: Si amatur (says
Saint Austin) quomodo infirinatur.

Thus it were easy to show the like of Joseph, Jeremy, Daniel, John Paptist,
Peter, Paul, and all the generaton of Gods Children, and servants: For as the
Apostle gives a general testimony of all the Saints in the Old Testament;
saying, That some endured the violence of fire, some were racked, others were
tried by mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprsonments; some stoned, some
hewn in sunder, some slain with the sword, some wandered up and down in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented; some
forced to wander in Wildernesses, and Mountains, and hide themselves in Dens,
and Caves of the earth, being such as the world was not worthy of, Heb. 11. So
Ecclesiastical History gives the like general testimony of all the Saints in
the New Testament, and succeeding ages; for we read that of all the Apostles,
none dyed a natural death save only Saint John, and he also was banished by
Domitian to Pathmos: and at another time, thrust into a Tun of seething Oil at
Rome; as Tertullian, and Saint Jerome do report. As for other believers, there
was such a multitude of them suffered Martyrdom for professing the Gospel;
whereof some were stoned, some crucisied, some beheaded, some thrust through with
spears, some burnt with fire, and the like; (for we read of twenty nine
several deaths they were put unto) that Ecclesiastical History makes mention
of, two thousand which suffered the same day with Nicanor. And after that, in
the time of the Ten persecutions, were such an innumerable company of innocent
Christians put to death, and tormented; that Saint Jerome, in his Epistle to
Chromatius and Heliodorus, says, There was not one day in the whole year, unto
which the number of five thousand Martyrs might not be ascribed; except only
the first day of January, who were put to the most exquisite deaths and
torments, that ever the wit or malice, of Men or Devils could invent to
inflict upon them. Since which time, the Turk and the Pope have acted their
parts in shedding the blood of the Saints, as well as the Jews and Roman
Empeours, as appears in the Book of Acts and Monuments, and Rev. 17. where the
holy Ghost has foretold, that the Whore of Babylon should fight with the
Lamb, and they that are on his side, called, and chosen, and faithful, until
she were even drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus; which in part was fulfilled in England, under the Reign of
Queen Mary: when in one year a Hundred seventy six persons of quality were
burnt for Religion, with many of the common sort, and in France, where before
theselate bloody Massacres, there were two Hundred Thousand which suffered
Martyrdone, about Transubstantiation. And it is well known, that our Savior
Christ's whole life, even from his Cradle to his Grave, was nothing else but a
continued act of suffering; yea, he was the person, upon whom, as upon one
Center, all our sorrows met: He that had all, possessed nothing, except the
punishment due to our sins, which lay so heavy upon him for satisfaction; that
it pressed his soul as it were to the nethermost Hell, and made him cry out in
the anguish of his spirit, My God, My God, why have thou sorsaken me? so that
there is nothing befalls us, but has befalne our betters before us: and to be
free from crosses and afflictions, is the privilege only of the Church
triumphant. For, qui non est Crucianus, non est Christianus, says Luther:
there is not a Christian, that carries not his Cross. It is only Heaven, that
is above all winds, storms and tempests: Not has God (says Bernard) cast n^n
out of Paradise; for him to think to find out another Paradise in this world.

Now the way not to repine at those above us, is to look at those below us; we
seldom or never see any man served with simple favors. It is not for every one
to have his soul sucked out of his mouth with a kiss, as the Jews tell of Moses.

It is a great word that Zazomen speak; of Apollonius, that he never asked any
thing of God in all his life, that he obtained not. This is not our Paradi^e,
but our Pargatory; not a place of pleasure but a Pilgrimage; not a Triumph, but
a Warfare: We cannot say of this world as Tully reports of Siracuse in Sicily,
and others of Rhodes, that not one day passes in which the Sun shines dot
cl^arly on them. Yea, we think he speeds well, that lives as it were, under a
perpetual Equinoctial, having night and day equal, good and ill success in
the same measure: for these compositions make both our crosses tolerable, and
our blessings wholesom^ We that know not the afflictions of others, call our
own the heaviest; every small current is a torrent, every brook, a River; every
River a Sea: we make our selves more miserable than we need, than we should,
by looking upon our miseries in a multiplying glass; we measure the length of
time, by the sharpness of our afflictions, and so make minutes seem hours, and
days months. If we be sick, and the Physician promises to visit us to morrow
with his best relief; with what a tedious longing do we expect his presence?
Our imagination makes every day of our sorrows appear like Joshua's day, when
the Sun stood still in Gibeon. The Summer of our delights is too short: but the
Winter of our affliction goes slowly off. We are so sensible of a present
distress, and so ungrateful sor favors past, that we remember not many years
health so much, as one days sickness: it is true, former meals do not relieve
our present hunger, but this cottage of ours ruins straight, if it be not new
daubed every day, new repaired. What then? shall to-days Ague, make us forget
yesterdays health? and all Gods former favors? if he do not answer us in
every thing; shall we take pleasure in nothing? Shall we slight all his
blessings, because in one thing he crosses us, whereas his least mercy is
beyond our best merit? But if we think of our deliverance from the fire of
Hell, this is cause enough to make us both patient and thankful; though the
trifles we delight in be taken from us. Lord take away what thou please for
thy glory and my good, so long as thou savest me from the fire of Hell, and
thy everlasting wrath. Neither is there a better remedy for impatience, than to
cast up our receipts, and to compare them with our deservings. If thou look
upon thy sufferings, thou shall find them far easier than thy fins have
deserved; nothing to what thy fellow Saints, and Christ, thy elder brother has
suffered before thee: at a Lions den, or a fiery furnace; not to turn tail,
were a commendation worthy a Crown: do but compare thy own estate with theirs,
and thou shall find cause to be thankful that thou art above any, rather than
of envy or malice, that any is above thee, to domineer and insult over thee.
Yea, compare thine own estate with thine enemies, thou shall see yet greater
cause to be thankful; for if these temporary dolors which God afflicts his
people with, are so grievous to thee; how shall thine and Gods enemies (though
they suggest to themselves that God is all mercy, as if he wanted the other
hand of his justice) endure that devouring fire, that everlasting burning? Isa.
33. 14. Psalm. 68. 21. Does he make bloody wayls on the backs of his Children?
and shall bastards escape? does he deal thus with his Sons; what will he do
with his Slaves? cannot all the obedience of his beloved ones bear out one fin
against God, as we see in Moses, David, Zachary, etc. Where will they appear
that do evil, only evil, and that continually? The meditation whereof may be
of some use to thee: Thales being asked how adversity might best be born?
answered, By seeing our Enemies in worse estate than our selves.

CHAP. 39.
That the more we suffer here (so it be for righteousness sake) the greater
our reward shall be heareafter.

5 FIfthly, we shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if, with
Moses, we shall have respect unto the recompense of reward, which is promised
to all that (notwithstanding what they shall suffer) persevere in well doing.
Great are our trials, but salvation in heaven will one day make amends, when we
shall have all tears wiped, from our eyes, when we shall cease to grieve,
cease to sorrow, cease to suffer, cease to sin; when God shall turn all the
water of our tears, into the wine of endless comfort; Yea, when our reward
shall be so much the, more joyous, by how much more the course of our life
has been grievous.

First, see what promises are made to suffering; Blessed are they which mourn,
says our Savior, for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5. 4. Blessed are they
which suffer persecution for righteousness, for theirs is, the Kingdom of
heaven, ver. 10. They that suffer here for well-doing, shall be Crowned
hereafter for well-suffering. Blessed shall you be when men revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake, sasty.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, ver. 11. 12. And
nothing we suffer here, can be compared either with those woes we have
deserved in Hell, or those joys we are reserved to in Heaven.

When Marcus Marcellus, who was the first that saw the back of Hanniball in the
field, was asked how he durst enter into battle with him (...) he answered,
I am a Roman born, and a Soldier, and by him I shall make my renown
everlasting: How much more should the hope of life immortal, wihch is the life
of our lives mortal, when o^ ^ude, and encourage us in the Christian warfare?
And so it has done with thousands: Origin was so earnest to suffer with his
Father, when he was but sixteen years of age, that if his Mother had not kept
his clothes from him, he would have run to the place where his Father
suffered; to profess himself a Christian, and to have suffered with him: which
was a common thing with the Martyrs, making all have, lest they should miss of
that noble entertainment.

Yea, it has not only been common for men in a bravado, to encounter death
for a small flash of honor; but you shall see a bired servant venture his life
for his new master, that will scarce pay him his wages at the years end: And
can we suffer too much for our Lord and Master? who gives every one that
serves him, not ^lds and (...) Saul pretended, 1 Samuel 22. Nor Towns and
Cities, is Cicero is pleased to bo^st of (...): but even an hundredfold more
than we part withal in this life, and (...) mansions in Heaven, John 14. 2.
Therefore Bazil, when he was offered money and preferments to tempt him,
answered: Can you give me money that can last for ever? and glory that may
eternally flourish? And certainly nothing can be too much to endure, for those
pleasures which endure for ever. Yea, if the love of gain makes the Merchant
refuse no adventures of Sea: if the sweetness of honey makes the Bears break in
upon the ^ves, contemning the stings; Who would not get heaven at any rate, at
any cost or trouble whatsoever? But to go on, Behold, says God, it shall come
to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days, yet fear none of those things
which thou shall suffer. For be but thou faithful unto death, and I will give
the the Crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. And again, ^ssed is the man that endures
temtatation; for when he is tried he shall receive the Crow^ of life, Jam. 1.
ver. 12. A Crown without cares, without rivals, without (...), without end. Now
if you consider it,
The gain with hardness makes it far less hard;
The dangers great, but so is the reward.


The sight of glory future, mitigates the sense of misery pres^: For if Jacob
thought not his service tedious, because his beloved Rachell was in his eye;
what can be thought grievous to him, that has Heaven in his eye? Adrianus
seeing the Martyrs suffer such grievous things: he asked why they would endure
such misery, when they might ((...) ^ing) free themselves? to which one of them
aleadged that text, Eye has not seen, nor ear beard, etc. the ^eing whereof,
and seeing them suffer so cheerfully, did so convert him; that, afterward he
became a Martyr ton^.

Lastly (not to enlarge my self, as I might in promises of reward) Whosoever
shall forsake Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife,
or Children, or Lands, for my name sake; he shall receive an hundred-^old more,
and shall inherit everlasting life Matthew. 19. 29. This is ^reasure worthy our
hearts, a purchase worth our lives. Wherefore, eye not the stream thou wadest
through, but the firm Land thou tendest to.

And indeed, who is there that shall hear these promises, and compare the
seed-time with the Harvest; look up from the root to the fruit, consider the
recompense of the reward: (...) will not choose rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 25.
Who will not be willing to suffer with Christ, that he may also reign with
him 3 2 Timothy 2. 12. Who will not suffer these light afflictions which are but
for ^ment, when they cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of
glory 3 2 Cor. 4. 16. 17. Was Lazarus for a time extreme miserable? he is now
in Abraham's bosom. Yea, blessed Lazarus, thy sores and sorrows (...) ceased,
but thy joies are everlasting. Now me thinks if thou but considerest that thy
pain will shortly pass, but thy joies shall never pass away; it should prove a
notable sovereign Cordial to strengthen thee; not only against reproaches
which attend thy profession, but even against fire and fagg^t. Who would not
be a Philpot for a mo^th, o^ a Lazarus for a day, or a Stephen for an hour,
that he might be in Abraham's bosom for ever? nothing can ^ee too much to
endure, for those pleasures which endure fore^er*

It is true, if in this life only ^ce had hope in Christ, we ^re of all men
the most miserable, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1^. 1^. But thou must
consider, that as this life is our Hell, and ti^e wickeds Heaven, Job. 16. 20.
So the next life shall be their Hell, and our Heaven, ver. 21. 33. Prove. 16,
4. As Dives was in Abraham's bosom, when Lazarus was in torments; so Lazarus
was in Abraham's besome, when Dives was in torments, Luke 16. ver. 23. 25. And
herein we ^re no worse, than C^st; Did not his Spirit pass from the Cross,
into Paradise? Did not he first descend into Hell, and then had his ascension?
Suppose thy sufferings be great, what then? Assure thy self, that every pang
is a prevention of the pains of Hell, and every respite, an earnest of Heavens
rest; and how many stripes do thou esteem Heaven worth? It is true, flesh and
blood is so sensual, that it feels a little pain in the finger, a great deal
more than the health of the whole body. But let us better consider on it, and
behold at once the whole state of a Christian, we shall see his peace exceed
his pain; ye^, we shall see both the torments present, and the glory
following. Hope makes absent jales, present, wants, plenitude^, and beguiles
calamity, as good company does, the way. The poor traveller, in thinking of his
Inn, goes on more cheerfully, and the bond man, in calling to mind the year of
Jubilee. When the Apprentice calls to and that his years of covenant will now
shortly expire, and then he shall have his freed^ confirmed; the very
^emembrance thereof ^eth many labor some works seem more light, and less
grievous unto him: neither does he afterward repent it. Did it ever repent
Jacob, when he came to inherit his Fathers blessing, that he had endured a
long exile, and tedious bondage? Or Joseph, when he was once made Ruler in
Egypt, that he had formerly been sold thither and there imprisoned? and he had
never been a Courtier, if he had not f^st been a prisoner: Or did it repent the
Israelites when they came to inherit the Land of promise, that they had
formerly been forty years passing through a forlorn wilderness. Or which of
Gods servants did ever repent that they had passed the apprentiship of their
service here, and were now gone to be made free in glory? If so, let us do and
fu^er cheerfully, patiently, courageously, what God imposes upon us: knowing
that after we have swet and smarted but fix days at the utmost, then comes
our Sabbath of eternal rest, which will make a mends for all; knowing that
death ends our misery, and begins our glory, and a few groans are well bestowed
for a Preface to an immortal joy. Let then our eyes he continually on the
joys which follow, and not on the pain which is present; the pain neglected and
unregarded cannot be very discomfortable.

But that there is reward promised to those which suffer in Christ's cause, is
not all, for our reward shall be answerable to our sufferings: the greater our
sufferings are here, the greater shall our reward ^ee hereafter, Matthew. 16. 27.
The deluge of calamities may assault us, but they shall exalt us. By our
crosses sanctified, weight is added to our Crown of Bliss, for according to the
measure of our afflictions, God weighs unto us of his graces, that we may be
able to bear them, and according to the measure of our graces, he
proportioneth our glory, and sature happiness. Suffering for the Gospel is no
inferior good work, and every one shall be rewarded, though not. for, yet
according to his works, Psalm. 62. 12. Romans 2. 6. Rev 22. ver. 12. The Apostles
tell Christ, we have left all and followed thee, Matt^. 19. 27. Christ tells
them, when I sit on my Throne, ye s^ll sit on Thrones with me, ver. 28. They
that turn many unto righteousnes^ (...) shine as the stars in the Kingdom of
heaven, Dan. 12. 3. And they ^t suffer Martyrdom, shall be clothed with long
white Robes, and have Palms in their hands, Rev. 6. 9 11. Now, there be three
sor^ of Martyrs, Re and intention; intention, non re; re, non intention: in
both deed and intention, as was Saint Steven; in intention, not deed, as was
Saint John; in deed, not in intention, as were the innocents. But, where the
conflict is more hard, the conquest obtained shall be more glorious: for as
Chrysostom speaks, According to the tribulations laid upon, and born by us;
shall our retribution of glory be proportioned. And persecutors (says Bernard)
are but our Fathers Goldsmiths: working, to add pearls to the Crowns of the
Saints.

Yea, ever where more work is done, there more wages is given; and when the
fight, or conflict is sharper, and the victory harder, the glory of the triumph
is greater, and the Crown of reward more glorious. Whence it was that those
Saints in the Old Testament, which were racked and tortured, would not be
delivered, or accept of their enemies fair offers, to the end they might
receive a better resurrection, and a more glorious reward; Heb. 11. 35. Neither
would we wish our work easir; or our burden lighter, if we looked up to the
recompense of reward: for it may be well applied here, which was misapplied in
the trial of that holy man Job, We do not serve God for nothing. Though we
must not serve him merely for reward, as hir^lings, nor for fear as servants;
but as children, for love.

O that (when we suffer most) we would but meditate and look upon with the eye
of faith, the fullness of those joies, and sweetness of those pleasures, which
(having once finished our course) we shall enjoy at Gods righ^ hand for
evermore: Psalm. 16. 11. being such as eye has not seen, nor ea^ heard, neither
has entered into the heart of man to conceive: 1 Cor. 2. 9. For certainly the
remembrance thereof, would even raise up our souls from ou^ selves, and make us
contemn* and slight what ever our enemies could do; as it did our
forefathers: much more to slight reproaches, which are such hug-^ears to a
great many. And no marvel, if that which ha^ made so many contemn fire and
saggot, make us contemn the blasts of men's breath.

But I hope enough has been said, in showing that our enemies in stea^ of
robbing, enrich us; and in lieu of hurting, pleasure us; since they greate^ our
graces, and augment our glory; since if the conflict be more sharp, the Crown
will be more glorious. Wherefore if our trials be small, let us bear them with
patience, which makes even great burdens easy; if they be great and
grievous, let us bear them patiently too; since great is the weight of glory
that ensues them: whereas no suffering, no reward; yea, if we be not chastned
here, we shall be condemned hereafter, 1 Cor. 11. 32. And whether had you
rather rejoice for one ^it, or always? you would do both, which may not be;
you would be both Dives and Lazarus, have happiness both here and hereafter:
pardon me, it is a fond covetousn^sse, a^ idle singularity to affect it: What,
that you alone may fare better than (...) Saints? That God should strew Carpets
for your feet only, to walk (...) your Heaven; and make that way smooth for
you, which all Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Confessers, and Christ
himself have found rugged, and bloody? Away with this self-love, and come down
you ambitious sons of Zebedes; and ere you think of sitting near the Throne, be
contented to be called unto the Cup. Now is your trial: Let your Savio^r see
how much of his bitter potion you can pledge; then shall you see ho^ much of
his glory he can afford you. In all Feasts, the coursest meats are tasted
first: be content to drink of his Vinegar and Gall, and after you shall drink
new wine with him in his Kingdom. Besides, without some kind of suffering,
how shall your sincerity be approved? Even nature is j^d and cheerful whiles it
prospers, but let God withdraw his hand; no sight, no trust: The mother of
Micha, while her wealth lasts, can dedicate a good part of her silver to the
Lord, but now she has lost it, she falls a cursing, Judge. 17. 1, 2, 3.
Cataline, whiles poor, had many seeming virtues, but having feathered his nest,
you could hardly say, whether he was most lavish of his money, or of his
modesty. But to be equally good in a prosperous, and adverse condition, deserves
praise: When our resolution and practice is like that Maids in Plutarch, who
being set in the Market. to be sold, when a Chapman asked her, Will thou be
faithful, if I buy thee^ said; Yea, that I will, though you do not buy me.

We all are never weary of receiving, soon weary of attending; we are ready to
shrink from Christ, so soon as our profits or pleasures shrink from us: But if
with the Needle of the Compass, in the midst of tempestuous weather, we remain
always unmovable, and stayed upon one point; it is a sign the Loadstone of
the Gospel has changed our hearts; and we are governed by Christ, as the
Needle is by the North Pole. Wherefore if God should not frame outward things
to thy mind, do thou frame thy mind to endure with patience and comfort what
he sends; and this will be an Odor smelling sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable and
pleasant to God: yea, herein thou shall approve thy self with David, a man
after God's own heart; and you know, that as David was unto God according to
his heart, so was God unto David according to his.

CHAP. 40. Application of the former grounds.
ANd so you have the residue of the grounds of comfort, it remains that I
should apply them: For this Doctrine, though it be better* understood then
practiced, as Cassandra was better known than trusted: yet being both known,
applied, and duly trusted to, will (like the Sun) not only delight our
understandings with its contemplation, but also warm and quicken our
affections. Wherefore, is there any weak Christian so white^ver'd with
Nicodemus, that the reproaches and Persecutions which attend his profession,
make him ashamed of Christ, or cause him to think that it is in vain to serve
the Lord: whereby he is frighted our of the narrow way that leads to life?
Let him draw near, for I chiefly direct my speech unto him: Are afflictions and
persecutions so necessary and profitable, as has been showed? Does not God
only gain glory by our sufferings? but do they also bring us to repentance,
and amendment of l^fe? stir us up to prayer, wean us from the love of the
world, keep us always prepared for our enemies assaults, discover whether we
are sincere or no, make us humble, improve all Christian graces in us? Is God
more specially present with us in afflictions? Cannot our enemies diminish one
hair of our heads, without God's special leave and appointment? Has he
promised that we shall not be tempted above our strength? Are these stripes the
chiefest tokens and pledges of God's love and adoption? Were none of his
children ever exempted from the like? And lastly, shall our momentany
sufferings be rewarded with everlasting glory? Yea, shall our glory be
increased, as our sufferings have been more? Then let them serve as so many
^estoratives to thy fainting spirit; yea, Lift up thy hands which hang down,
and strengthen thy weak knees, Heb. 12. 12. For, I suppose thy fainting and
drooping is from fear, and thy fear from doubting, and thy doubting from
unbelief, and thine unbelief chiefly from ignorance of these things: and whence
is thine ignorance of these, but this? Thou have never been conversant in the
book of God; or if thou have, thou did never seriously ponder these
Scriptures which have formerly been rehearsed: for had thou seriously
considered them, thou would not have dared to make that an occasion of grief
and prejudice, which the Spirit of God makes the greatest cause of joy and
confirmation that can be. For, what can be spoken more express, direct, and
significant? What demonstrations can be given more sollid? What Fortifications
or Bulwarks so strong and safe agaiest the affronts of Satan, and the World?
Thou say thou art persecuted for well-doing, and therefore think it a
strange thing. God says it is, and ever has been common to all his children,
not Christ himself excepted.

Take notice of these things, (for it is the God of all truth and blessedness
that speaks them) and apply them to thy self, as if they were particularly
spoken to thee by name; even as when twenty be in a room, where is a fair
well-drawn picture; every one thinks the picture loo^ upon him: and have not
more modesty or manners (in leaving those dishes for thy betters) than will do
thee good. Be not like a Monkey which looking in a glass, thinks he sees
another Monkeys face, and not his own: And know withal, that it is no small
sin even to doubt, when we have God's command and warrant to secure us.

Thou think thy self miserable; God says, thou art blessed: Thou say,
thou art hated of the world; God says, thou art beloved of Christ; who has
chosen thee out of the world: Thou think it a shame to be reproached; God
says, It is thy glory: Thou grievest at it; God says, thou have great cause
to rejoice; for it shows thee to be born of God, thine enemies to be the seed
of the Serpent. Thou say, that all things go cross with thee; God says,
That all things shall work together for the best; it may be the increase of thy
temporal happiness: however, that it shall be for the improvement of thy
graces here, for the advancement of thy glory hereafter. Thou think it a
sign of displeasure; God says, it is to thy Enemies, a token of perdition, but
to thee, of salvation: Thou think thy self near forsaken; God says, The
spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon thee: Thou say, thou shall one day
perish; God says, that neither things present, nor things to come, shall ever*
be able to separate thee from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Thou think the Lord does not hear thee, because he does not presently
answer thee in the things that thou requirest: I tell thee, it were ill jor the
best of us, if we were permitted to be our own choosers: Let Peter have his
desire, and his Master shall not die; so Peter himself, and the whole world had
been lost. In unfit supplications we are most heard, when we are repelled: our
God often times does answer our prayers with merciful denials, and most
blesses us in crossing our desires. We may ask either bad things to a good
purpose; or, good things to a bad purpose; or, good things to a good purpose,
but in an ill season. Now, if we ask what is either unfit to receive, or
unlawful to beg, it is a great favor of our God to be denied: granting is not
always the effect of love; if so, then had Paul been less loved then Satan:
Satan begged but once, and had his paier granted, concerning Job: S. Paul
begged thrice that he might not be buffeted, yet was denied: Satan begged his
shame; who envied his success? Saint Paul that freedom from temptation, which
would have been worse had then wanted: yea, if granting were always an effect
of love; then was our blessed Savior less loved than Satan; for the Lord
would not let the Cup of his Passion pass from him upon his earnest prayer,
which he made as he was Man. But you must know, that denials in some cases are
better than grants: the Lord will not take away the body of sin from us upon
our earnest prayers, yet he grants us that which is equivalent; viz. Grace to
subdue our corruptions; and withal takes away the occasion of pride, which is
better: for certainly he is more supported of God, that has grace given him to
conquer a temptation; as had the Martyrs, in being able to suffer those
tortures; than another who is excused to fight.

Again, we must not measure God's hearing of our suit, by his present answer;
or his present answer by our own sense: touching the first, Zachary a long time
failed of a Son for all his Prayer; but when he had even forgot that Prayer, he
had a Son; the Angel brings him good news, Luke 1. 13. Thy Prayer is heard:
When did he make this Prayer? Not lately; for then he was gr^n old, and had
given over all hope of a child: so that his request was past over many years,
and no answer given.

The like example we have in Hannah, who pouring out her soul before the Lord,
in the trouble of her spirit; God did not immediately tell her by revelation
that she should conceive a Son, but he gave her for the present, faith; which
did work in her joy, and peace of conscience: for (says the text) she looked
no more sad; and when she had waited his leisure a certain time, The Lord
remembered her with a Son, 1 Samuel 1. There is nothing between God and thee, but
time; prescribe not his wisdom, hasten not his mercy, now his grace is enough
for you, his glory shall be more than enough hereafter. Tarry a little the
Lords leisure, deliverance will come, peace will come, joy will come: thy tears
are reserved, thine hunger shall be satisfied, thy sorrow shall be comforted:
In the mean while to be patient in misery, makes misery no misery: while we
consider that when a little brunt is once past, troubles will cease, but joies
shall never cease.

Wherefore, let us never give over, but in our thoughts knit the beginning,
progress, and end together; and then shall we see our selves in Heaven, out of
the reach of all our enemies.

2. To prove that we are not to judge of Gods answering our prayers, by our
own sense; I need but to instance the woman of Canaan, (as what can speed well,
if the prayer of faith from the knees of humility succeed not?) and yet behold,
the further she goes, the worse she fares; her discouragement is doubled with
her suit: It is not good (says our Savior) to take the childrens bread, and
cast it to dogs; here was cold comfort: yet stay but a while, he clears up his
brows, and speaks to her so comfortably, that 'twere able to secure any heart,
to dispel any fears. O Savior! how different are thy ways from ours, when
even thy severity argues favor! The trial had not been so sharp, if thou had
not found the says so strong, if thou had not meant the issue so happy: It
is no unusual thing for kindness to look sternly for the time, that it may
indear it self more, when it lists to be discovered.

It was cold comfort that the Cripple heard from Peter and John, when he begged
of them an alms; Silver and gold have I none: but the next clause, vise up and
walk, made amends for all. O God! we may not always measure thy meaning by thy
semblance; sometimes what thou most intendest, thou show least^ In our
afflictions thou turn'st thy back upon us, and hidest thy face from us, when
thou most mindest our distresses. So Jonathan shot the arrows beyond David,
when he meant them to him: So, Joseph calls for Benjamin into bands, when his
heart was bound to him in the strongest affection; so, the tender mother makes
as if she would give away her crying-child, whom she hugps so much closer in
her bosom. If thou pass by us whiles we are struggling with the tempest, we
know it is not for want of mercy, thou can^st not neglect us: Oh let not us
distrust thee! if thou come, it is to relieve us; if thou staiest, it is to
try us; howsoever, thy purpose is to save us. Surely God will work done, and
man must not be of his counsel. Wherefore many times he deals with wicked men,
as Eutrapilus sometimes did with his subjects; who when he was minded to do a
poor man a mischief, would give him abundance of wealth; whereas contrarily his
children find themselves crossed with a blessing. Possidonius tells us of Austin,
that when there was wait laid for his life; through God's providence he mist
his way; whereby his life was preserved, and his adversaries disappointed. As
when Isabel Queen of England was to repasse from Zealand into her own Kingdom,
with an Army, in favor of her Son against her Husband, she had utterly been
cast away, had she come unto the Port intended, being there expected by her
enemies: but Providence, against her will, brought her to another place, where
she safely landed. Yea, this I have seen, two men striving for the way, one
receiving a switch over the face, draws his Bapyer to kill the other; but by a
providence, in making the offer, his saddle swaied to the horse-belly; whereby
in all likelihood, the one was saved from killing, the other from hanging: for
before he could make after him, he was rid a mile. And have not some been
detained (by a violent storm) from coming home, whereby they have been exempt
from seeling the downfall of their house? Sure I am the letting fall of my
Glove in the dark, once proved a means of saving me from drowning; while
another stepping before me, found the danger to his cost. And indeed, how
infinitely should we entangle our selves, if we could sit down and obtain our
wishes! Do we not often wish that, which we after see would be our confusion;
because we ignorantly follow the flesh, and blinded appetite, which looks on
nothing but the shell and outside; whereas God respects the soul, and
distributeth his favor for the good of that, and his glory? It is an argument
of love in the Father, when he takes away the Child's knife, and gives him a
book. We, cry for riches, or liberty, or peace; they are knives to cut our
fingers: wherefore God gives us his Word, the riches of verity, not of vanity:
He gives us that glorious liberty to be the Sons of God, he gives us that
peace which the world cannot give, nor take away: wherefore let the Christian
understand, God his Physician, Tribulation his physic; being afflicted under
the medicine, thou criest, the Physician hears thee, not according to thy will,
but thy weal; thou can not endure thy malady; and will thou not be patient of
the remedy? No man would be more miserable, than he that should cull out his
own ways: What a specious show carried Midas his wish with it, and how did it
pay him with ruin at last? Surely I have seen matters fall out so
unexpectedly, that they have tutered me in all affairs, neither to despair, nor
to presume; not to despair, for God can help me; not to presume, for God can
cross me: One day made Marius Emperor, the next saw him rule, and the third
he was slain of his Soldiers. Well then, if with Paul thou have besought the
Lord often, that thy present affliction might depart from thee, and can not
be heard in the thing which thou desire; know that thou art heard in that
which is more conducible to thy profit: and consequently rejoice more in that
thy petition is denied, than if it had been granted. This was the use which
Saint Paul made of Gods denial, and he knew what he did, though he had as much
to boast, and rejoice of, as any one living: yet, says he, of myself I will
not rejoice, except it be, of mine infirmities: that is, afflictions,
reproaches, persecutions, inward temptations, fears, distrust, etc. But in
these I will very gladly rejoice, Why? That the power of Christ may dwell in
me: Note his reason, he had heard God say, that his power was made perfect
through weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. Neither had he only cause to rejoice in
his infirnities, but all God's people have the same cause to rejoice; for, what
the spirit of comfort speaks in this, and in all the former places recited, do
equally belong to thee for thy consolation, with all the regenerate; for
whatsoever was written afore-time, was written for thy learning and mines that
we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.
4. And accordingly, will a good hearer apply to himself whatsoever is written
in the Word; for as the stomach sends the strength of the meat into every,
member of the body: so we should send to the eye, that which is spoken to the
eye; and to the ear, that which is spoken to the ear; and to the tongue, that
which is spoken to the tongue; and to the hand, that which is spoken to the
hand; and so to the heart, and every faculty and member of soul and body: if we
hear comfort, we should apply it to fear; if we hear a promise, we should
apply that to our distrust; if we hear a threatening, we should apply that to
our presumption; and so fill up the gap still where the Devil would enter. And
indeed, had it not been for this Aqua coelestis, David had surely fainted in
his affliction, Psalm. 27. ver. 13. and 119. 72. but this good Word from heaven
fetch him again, when he was ready to sink: and indeed, if Moses and the
Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles will not comfort us in this case, then
as Abraham told Dives in another ca^ nothing will persuade, nor prevail.
Believe thou the former. Scriptures spoken by Christ, and his Apostles? I
know that thou believe, with some mixture of unbelief; and art almost
persuaded, not only to do, but to suffer cheerfully for well-doing. But why
do thou not altogether believe, that it is a blessed and happy thing thus to
suffer? Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12. That thou have great cause to rejoice and be glad
that thou art counted worthi to suffer shame for Christ's name? Acts 5. 41. Thou
see it is not for nothing that David acknowledges, It was good for him that
be was afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71. that Job blesses the time that ever he was
corrected, Job 42. That Jeremy prayed for correction as a good thing, Jer. 10.
24. That a whole Church voted the same, Lam. 3. 27. It is not for nothing that
Chr^t says, Blessed and happy are ye when men revile you, and persecute you:
That Saint James says, Count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse
temptations, James 1. 2. It is not for nothing that Saint Paul says, I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, an ^cessities, in persecutions, in
anguish, for Christ's sake, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 10. That Peter and John, when they
were beaten and imprisoned, departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's name, Act. 5. 41. For, even bearing
the Cross with Christ, is as great a preserment in the Court of Heaven, as it
is in an earthly Co^t for the P^nce to take off his own Roab, and put it on the
back of one of his servants; as you may perceive by the Lord's speech to Paul,
Act. 9. 15, 16. and 23. ver. 11. and our Savior Christ's words to his Apostles,
Ast. 1. 8. yea, to suffer for Christ (says Father Latimer) is the greatest
privilege that God gives in this world: and the story of Job is a book-case to
prove it: for did not God by him, as sometimes a Schoolmaster with his Pupil,
who when he has polished and perfected a good Scholar, brings him sorth,
provokes adversaries to set upon him with hard questions, and takes a pride to
see the fruit of his own labors. And in the wars, to have the bottect and
most dangerous services imposed upon them by their ^eneral, is accounted the
greatest honor: neither will he confer the same upon any, but the stoutest and
most valiant. This Rod of the Lord (like Abasuerus his Scepter) is never
stretched forth toward any of his, but in great love and favor. It is like the
kiss, which Cyrus, in Xenophon, gave to Chrysanthas, which was accounted a
greater and more special favor, than the Cup of gold which he gave to
Artabazus: Which being so, let us in this particular, imitate the Muscovitish
women, who will not think their husbands love them, unless they chastise them;
and the Indians, who are ambitious to be burnt with them; and the Thracians,
who are proud to wear their scarrs. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ
greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 25, 26. And the
Apostles esteemed it a grace, to be disgraced for him: and shall we grumble, or
think much at it? No: in the greatest extremity of straights, let us
acknowledge it a favor, and give him thanks: and so much the rather, for that
it is more acceptable to God, to give him thanks once in adversity, then six
hundred times in prosperity, as a grave Divine well observes: and indeed, it is
the sum of all Religion to be thankful to God in the midst of miseriex.

True, it is hard for Job, when the terrors of God fight against him, and the
arrows of the Almighty stick so sast (...) him, that the venom thereof has
drunk up his spirit, Job 6. 2, 3, 4. to think it a special favor and dignity,
but so it was, being rightly considered. It was hard for Joseph's br^hren to
hear him speak roughly unto them, take them for spies, accuse them of theft,
and commit them to prison, Genesis 42. 30. and think, it is all out of love; much
more hard for (...) to be cull*d cut from the rest, and committed to ward,
while his brethren are set at liberty, Verse. 24. and yet it was so; yea he
loved him best, whom he seemed to favor least: yet, such is the (...) of our
nature; that as weak eyes are dazzled with the ^ght which should comfort them,
so there is nothing more common with God's Children, than to (...) (...) causes
of (...) joy, and (...) with that which is intended for their confirmation.
Even Manoah conceivs death in that vision (...) and (...) did consist: Judge.
13. 22. And the Shepherds, Luke 2. who were sore afraid, when the Angel of the
Lord came to bring them good tidings of great joy to all people; viz. their
Saviors Birth, which ^as Christ the Lord, Verse. 9. 10. But what has been the
answer of GOD always to his children, in such their ecstasies, but this? Fear
not, Gideon, Judge. 6. 23. Fear not, Joseph, Mat. 1. 20. Fear not Zachary,
(...). (...). 13. Fear not Abraham, for I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward, Genesis 15. 1. Fear not, Paul, for I am with thee, and no man shall
lay hands on thee to do thee hurt, etc. Acts. 18. 9. 10. the words are often
repeated (as Pharaohs dreams were doubled) for the surenesse. Yea, to the end,
that we should be fearlesse in all our sufferings, so long as we suffer not as
evil doers, 1 Pet. 4. 15. Fear not, as one well notes, is the first word in the
Annunciation of Christ's Conception; and the first word in the first An^iation
of his Birth: and the first word in the first Annuuntiation of his
Resurrection, and almost the last words in his last exhortation, a little
before his death, are, Let not your hearts be troubled, and be of good comfort,
strengthening his followers, and sweet^ing his Cross by diverse forcible
reasons, (...) 21. Mark. 13. And the words of dying men have ever been most
emphatical, most effectual. Nay, more than all this, if yet thou will not be
comforted, look but Joh. 16. 20. and thou shall have thy Savior assure ^hee by
a double bond: His Word I say, Oath Ver^ly, verily, I say unto you. that though
for the present you do fear, and sorrow, and weep; yet all shall be turned into
joy, (...) that joy shall no man be able to take from you, v. 22. And so much
of the Patience of the Woman's seed. Innocence Felicity If you will see the
Malice of the Serpents seed: Subtly Misery

Read the three soregoing parts; viz. The cause and cure of Ignorance Error.
etc. The cure of Misprision. Characters of the kinds of preaching.

The last where^ sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews Well-yard.

A twofold PRAYER for the Morning and for the Evening, as also another to be
said at any time.
Jer. 1^ 25. Pour out thy fury upon them that know thee not, and upon the
families that call not on thy name.
Psalm. 145. 18. Romans 10. 12. The Lord is nigh and rich unto all that call upon
him in truth.
Isa. 65. 24. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking
I will hear.
Jer. 33. 3. Call unto me and I will answer thee, and show thee great and
mighty things, which thou know not.
1 John 5. 14. If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.
Joh. 16. 23. Mat. 21. 22. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
believing, he will give it you.
Psalm. 55. 17. Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I pray.
A PRAYER for the Morning. O Lord prepare our hearts to Pray.
O Most glorious LORD GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST our most merciful and loving
Father; in whom we live, and move, and have our being; in the multitude of thy
mercies we desire to approach unto thee, from whom all good things do proceed;
who know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in asking. It is
true, O Lord, if we should consider only our own unworthiness, and how we have
heretofore abused thy goodness and long-suffering toward us; we might rather
despair with Judas, and like Adam run from thee, then dare to approach thy
glorious presence. For we confess, O Lord, to the shame and confusion of our
own faces, that --

-- as we brought a world of sin into the World with us, and deserved to dye
so soon as we began to live; so ever since that thou have spared us, we have
done nothing but add sin unto sin, as thou have added mercy to mercy: For
we have been no less rebellious unto thee, then thou have been beneficial
unto us. We do daily and hourly break all thy commandments, adding unto that
our original corruption which we were conceived and borne in, all manner of
actual transgressions, by sins of Omission, sins of Commission, sins of
Ignorance, sins of Knowledge, sins against conscience; yea, sins of
Presumption and Will fullness, and that in thought, word, and deed. We have
sinned against thy Law, and against thy Gospel, against thy mercies, and
against thy judgments, against the many warnings, and the abundance of means,
afforded by thee to reclaim us, against the spirit ^of grace continually
knocking at the doors of our hearts, with infinite checks and holy motions, --
as our first Parents left us a large stock of sin, so we have improved the
same beyond measure; O that we could have so improved that stock of grace which
we have received from thee! But whereas thou gave us as large a portion, we
suddenly lost it. We were created indeed by thee, after thine own image, in
righteousness, and holiness, and in knowledge of the Truth: But alas! now our
understandings are so darkened and dulled, our judgme^ts so blinded, our wills so
perverted, our affections so corrupted, our reason so exiled, our thoughts so
surprised, our desires so entrapped, and a^l the faculties and functions of our
souls so disordered, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think, much
less to speak, least of all to do ought that is good. And yet usually like
Bladders, we are not more empty of grace, than we are blown up with pride:
whereby with Laodicea, we not once see our own spiritual misery and nakedness;
but think we are rich and good enough, as wanting nothing; when as scarce Our
ears have been always open to the (...), she unto thee; we have abused our
eyes to wantonness, our mouths to filthynesse, and our feet have been swift
to all evil, flow to ought that is good. any ^ark of grace yet appears in us.
Yea, so far have we been from loving and serving thee, that we have hated those
that do it, and that for their so doing. And so far have we been from
performing that vow which we made to Christ in our Baptism, when we took his
pressemony to be his Soldiers, and serve him in the field of this world,
against his and our enemies; that we have renounced our vow made ^o him, ^dd
fled from his standard; yea, fought for Satan and the World, seeking to win all
we could from Christ, by tempting to sin, and by persecuting such as were
better then ourselves; so that all our recompense of thy love unto us, has
been to do that which thou hate, and to hate those whom thou love. Yea, we
cannot deny but we have persecuted thee with Paul, denied thee with Peter,
betrayed thee with Judas, and crucified thee with those cruel Jews. And as we
have committed one sin on the neck of another, so we have multiplied, and
many times repeated them, by falling often into the same wickedness, whereby
our sins are become for number, as the sands of the Sea, and as the Stars of
Heaven. Now Lord it being thus with us, how can we expect that thou should
hear our prayers, and grant our requests? yea, how can we look for other at
thine hands, then great and grievous, yea, then double damnation? as most
justly we have deserved. Yet --

Yet most most merciful Father, being that thou have given thy Son, and thy Son
himself for the ransom of so many as shall truly repent, and unfainedly believ
in him, who has for our sakes fulfilled all righteousness; yet, suffered on
the Cross, and there made full satisfaction for the sins of all thine Elect.

And seeing thou have appointed Prayer, as one special means for the obtaining
of thy grace, unto which thou have annexed this comfortable promise, that where
two or three be gathered together in thy Name, thou will be in the midst of
them, and grant their requests; and since our Redeemet has assured (...), that
And likewise knowing, that mercy pleaseath thee, and that the sole perfection
of a Christian, is the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the
not-imputation of his own unrighteousness: whatsoever we shall ask thee in his
name, thou will give it us:

We are emboldened to sue unto thee our God for grace, that we may be able to
repent and believe.

Wherefore for thy promise sake, for thy Sons sake, and for thy great Names
sake, we beseech thee send down thy holy Spirit into our souls, regenerate our
hearts, change and purify our natures, subdue our reason, rectify our
judgments, strengthen our wills, renew our affections, put a stop to our
madding and straying fancies, beat down in us whatsoever stands in opposition
to the Scepter of Jesus Christ; and enable us in some measure, both to
withstand that which is evil, and perform that which is good and pleasing in
thy sight.

Yea give us repentance never to be repented of, and possess our souls with
such a dreadful awe of thy Majesty, that we may fear as well to commit small
sins as great ones, considering that the least sin is mortal without our
repentance, and thy mercy: as well fear to sin in secret as openly, since there
is nothing hid from thee: as well condemn our selves for evil thoughts as
evil deeds, considering that the Law is spiritual, binding the heart no less
then the hands; as well abstain from the occasions of fin, as sin it self; and
consider that it is not enough, to abstain from evil, unless we hate it
also, and do the contrary good. And because every day which does not abate of
our reckoning, will increase it; and that by procrastinating, we shall but heap
unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath: Good Lord, suffer us not, we
beseech thee, to defer our repentance, lest the custom of evil makes it
altogether unalterable in us: or lest we dye before we begin to live: or lest
thou resusest to hear us another day, calling upon thee for mercy: because we
refuse to hear thee now, calling to us for repentance. And now O Lord, since
thou have safely brought us to the beginning of this day, we beseech the to
defend, and dierct us in the same: and as thou have blessed us in our lying down,
and in our rising up, so protect and prosper us in our going forth, and in our
coming home: shield and deliver us from the snares of the Hunter, who lies in
wait for our souls; and is continually laboring our everlasting destruction.
And no less arm us against the allurements of the world, wherein we shall meet
with many provocations, and temptations: and that (...) may not lead ourselvs,
nor be Wherefore if we be not yet converted, let this be the happy hour of our
conversion; that as our bodies are risen by thy power, and providence from
sleep, so our souls may daily be raised from the sleep of sin, and the
darkness of this world; that so we may enjoy that everlasting light, which
thou have prepared for thine; and purchased with the blood of thy dear Son, our
Savior Jesus Christ. Give unto us, we beseech thee, a true, lively, and
justifying faith, whereby we may lay hold upon those gracious promises, which
thou have made unto us in him; and wherewith we may vanquish all our spiritual
adversaries. Seal up unto us the assurance of our salvation, by the testimony
of thy blessed Spirit. Give to led into temtation; give us wisdom to beware of
men, even of associating our selves with the vicious, like Joseph: lest
otherwise with David, we be drawn to dissemble: or with Peter, to deny thee:
for sin is of a catching, and infectious quality: and our corrupt hearts are
like tinder, which will kindle with the least spark: especially O Lord, keep us
from yielding to their solicitations, or following their customs, of drink ing,
swearing, slandering, and making the worst construction of thin^s: of mocking,
and scoffing at religion, or the religious: let not custom and example any
whit prevail with us, without, or against thy written Word; lest we miss of
the narrow way, which alone leads unto life: only give us wisdom, and
grace, to look upon thy Sons whole life: and see how he would speak, and do,
before we speak or do anything, and then having thy word for our warrant, and
thy glory for our aim; let no censures, not flowts of anydiscourageus. us thy
servants, that wisdom which descends from above, that we may be wise unto
our eternal salvation: so shall our hearts (instead of a Commentary) help us
to understand the Scriptures, and our lives be an Exposition of the inward man.
Give us grace, to account all things in this world even as dross, and dung,
that we may win Christ Jesus; and Heaven and happiness by means of him. Give
us single hearts, and spirits without guile, that we may love goodness for it
self, and more seek the power of godliness, then the show of it; and love the
godly for thy sake: and because they are godly. Grant that in the whole course
of our lives, we may do unto all others, as we would that they should do unto
us: considering, that whether we do good or evil, unto any one of thy members,
thou take it as done unto thy self. Discover unto us all our own fins, that
we may not be so forward to censure others, as we have been heretofore. Give
us patience to bear thy Fatherly chastisements, which through thy grace
sanctifying them to us, become both Medicines to cure us, and Antidotes to
preserve us from the sickness of sin: considering, that all the afflictions of
this life, are not worthy those joys which shall be revealed unto us. Finally,
good Father we beseech thee, enable us so to walk in thy fear; that in mirth we
be not vain, in knowledge we be not proud, in zeal we be not bitter; instruct us
by thy Word direct us by thy Spirit, mollify us by thy grace, humbleus by thy,
corrections, win us by thy benefits, reconcile our nature to thy will, and teach
us so to make profitofevery thing, that we may see thee in althings, and al
things in thee. And as we are suitors unto thy Majesty, for these thy blessings
spiritual: so likewise we humbly beg at thy merciful hands, all necessaries
appertaining to our temporal welfare: beseeching thee to bless us in our
persons, with health, strength, and liberty: in our estates, with sufficiency,
and the right use of it; cons^dering that is we spend what ^ee And in these
our prayers we are not mindful of our selves alone, but forasmuch as thou
have commanded us to pray one for another; as being the members of one and the
same mystical body: we beseech thee to bless thy whole Church Universal,
wheresoever dispersed, and howsoever distressed, or despised, far and wide over
the face of the whole earth: and vouchsafe unto thy Gospel such a free and
effectual passage, that it may sound throughout all Nations. Yea, we humbly
pray thee, let it convert and reclaim the Turks, Jews, Infidels, Indians,
Atheists, Epicures, Heretics, and Schismatics. Prevent all plots, and
projects against the Kingdom of thy Christ: let thy Word and Spirit alone,
bear rule in all places. Extend thy tender mercy O Lord, to all Protestants
beyond the Seas; to all Christians under the Turks, or other Infidels:
strengthen all such as suffer for thy cause, and let thy presence with them
counterpoyse whatsoever is laid upon them, and enable them to continue constant
in thy faith and truth to the end. More Particularly, be good unto that part of
thy Church planted here amongst us, in this sinful Land, and indue us with thy
grace as thou have already with other blessings; that they may not rise up
hereafter in judgment against us. be propitious to the Nobility, Gentry, and
Communalty. Bless the Tribe of Levi, all Ministers of thy Word and Sacraments;
let their lips, O God, preserve knolewdg, and their lives righteousness; and
for ever bless thou their labors: increase the number of those that are
saithfull and painful; and reform, or remove such as are either scandalous, or
idle: and for a constant and continual supply of their mortality, bless all
Schools of learning, and good literature; especially the Universities. Remember
in much mercy all that are afflicted, whether in body, or in mind, or in both;
whether in conscience, have upon our own lusts, we may ask, but we shall nor
receive: in our good names, with an (...) report: and so, bless and sanctify
unto us all the things of thislife, that they may be furtherances of us in the
way to a better. And seeing that it is in vain for us to labor, except thy
blessing go along with it: neither can our endeavors succeed well except thou
prosper them: bless every one of us in our several places and callings, and so
direct us in all we shall take in hand, that whatsoever we do, may tend to thy
glory, the good of others, and the comfort of our own souls: when we shall
come to make our final account unto thee sor them. groaning under fin; or for
a good conscience, because they will not fin: and as thou make them examples
to us, so teach us to take example by them, and learn wisdom by thy hand upon
them.

These, and all things else which thou know we stand in need of, we humbly
crave at thy merciful hands, and that for the alone worthiness, and
satisfaction of thy son: and the honor of our only Redeemer, and Advocate
Jesus Christ: to whom with thee O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be given as
is most due, all praise, glory, and dominion, the residue of this day, and for
evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Evening, which would be performed before Supper, and not when
we are more prone to sleep, then to pray.
O Eternal, Almighty, and incomprehensible Lord God; who art great and
terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and infinite purity: Creator, and Preserver
of all things, and Guider, and Governor of them being created: who fillest
Heaven and Earth with thy presence, and art every where at hand to receive, and
hear the prayers of all that repair to thee in thy Christ.

Thou have of thy goodness bestowed so many, and so great mercies upon us,
that we know not how to express thy bounty herein. Yea, we can scarce think
of any thing more to pray for, but that thou would continue those which thou
have bestowed on us already: yet we covet still, as though we had nothing, and
live as if we knew nothing of all this thy beneficence.

Thy blessings are without number, yet our sins strive with them which shall be
more: if we could count the numberless number of thy Creatures, they would not
be answerable to the number of thy gifts; yet the number of our offenses which
we return in lieu of them, are not much inferior thereunto. Well may we
confess with Judas, we have sinned, and there stop; but we cannot reckon their
number, nor set forth their nature. We are bound to praise thee above any
Nation We no sooner lived, then we de served to die; neither need we any more
to condemn us, then what we brought into the world with us: but thou have
spared us to this hour, to try if we would turn unto thee by repentance, as our
first Parents, and we have turned from thee by sin: yet thy mercy seems to
have been in vain, and thy long-suffering to no end: For whereas many have been
won by thy Word, we would not suffer it to change us; many have been reformed
by the Gross, but whatsoever: for what Nation under Heaven enjoys so much
light, or so many blessings as we? above any Creature, for all the Creatures
were ordained for our sakes: and yet Heaven, Earth; and Sea, all the Elements,
all thy Creatures obey thy Word, and serve thee as they did at first: yea, call
upon us to serve thee: only men for whom they were all made, ingratefully
rebel against thee. we would not suffer it to purge us; many have been moved
by thy benefits, but we would not suffer them to persuade us: yea, as if we had
contracted with the Devil, that we would abuse all thy gifts so fast as they
come: thy blessings make us proud, thy riches covetous, thy peace wanton, thy
mea^s intemperate, thy mercy secure; and all thy benefits serve us but as
weapons to rebel against thee. We have profaned thy days, contemned thy
ordinances, resisted thy Word, grieved thy Spirit, misused thy Messengers,
hated our Reprovers, slandered and persecured thy people, seduced our friends,
given ill example to our Neighbors, opened the mouths of thine and our
adversaries, to blaspheme that glorious Name after which we are named, and the
truth we profess: whereas meaner mercies, and far weaker means, have provoked
others no less to honor thee, and the Gospel; who may justly rise up in
judgment against us. Besides, (which makes our case far more miserable) we can
scarce resolve to amend; or if we do, we put off our conversion to hereafter:
when we were children, we deferred to repent till we were men: now we are men,
we defer until we be old men: and when we be old men we shall defer it until
death, if thou prevent us not: and yet we look for as much at thine hands, as
they which serve thee all their lives. Thou might have said before we were
formed; let them be Toads, Monsters, Infidels, Beggars, Cripples, or Bondslaves
so long as they live, and after that, Cast-awaies for ever and ever: but thou
have made us to the best likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and
placed us in the best Land, and appointed us to the best and only Inheritance,
even to remain in bliss with thee for ever: so that thousands would think
themselves happy, if they had but a piece of ou^ happiness. Perhaps we have a
form of godliness, but thou who search^st the heart, and triest the reins,
know that too often we deny the power of it: and that our Religion is much
of it hypocrisy, our zeal envy, our wisdom policy, our peace security, Why
should thou give us thy Son for a ransom, thy holy Spirit for a pledge, thy
Word for a guide, thy Angels for our guard; and reserve a Kingdom for our
perpetual inheritance? Why should thou bestow health, wealth, rest, liberty,
limbs, senses, food, raiment, friends, and the means of salvation upon us, more
then upon others, whom thou have denied these things unto? We can give no
reason for it, but that thou art merciful; and if thou should draw all back
again, we had nothing to say but that thou were just: which being considered,
why should any serve thee more then we, who want nothing but thankfulness? Why
should we not hate the Way to Hell, as much as Hell it self? and why should we
not make every cogitation, speech, and action of ours, as so many steps to
Heaven? yet (...) tho^ should now ask us what lust is assuaged, what
affection qualified, what passion expelled, what sin repented of, what good
performed since we began to receive thy blessings to this day? we must needs
confess against our selves, that all our thoughts, words, and works, have been
the service of the World, the Flesh, and the D^vel: yea, it has been the
course of our whole life, to leave that which thou command, and to do that
which thou forbiddest: yet, m^serable wretches that we are, if we could give
thee our bodies and souls, they should be saved by it; but thou were never the
richer for them. our life rebellion, our devotion dead^esse; and that we live
so securely, as if we had no souls to save. Thus while we look upon our selves,
we are ashamed to lift up our eyes unto thee; yea, we are ready to despair with
Cain: yet when we think upon thy Son, and the rich promises of the Gospel, our
fear is in some measure turned into joy: while we consider that his
righteousness for us, is more then our wickedness against our selves; only
give us faith we beseech thee, and settle it in thy beloved, that we may draw
virtue from his death and resurrection, whereby we may be enabled to die unto
sin, and live unto righteousness; and it suffices for all our iniquities,
necessities, and infirmities. Indeed, thy Word and Spirit may work in us some
flashes of desire, and purposes of better obedience; but we are constant in
nothing, but in perpetual offending, only therein we cease not: for when we
are waking, our flesh tempts us to wickedness; if we are sleeping, it
sollicites us to filthiness; or perhaps when we have offended thee all the
day, at night we pray unto thee: but what is the issue of our praying? First we
sin, and then we pray thee to forgive it; and then return to our sins again; as
if we came to thee for no other end, but to crave leave to offend thee: Or, of
thy granting our requests, we even dishonor thee, and blaspheme thy name, while
thou do support and relieve us; run from thee, while thou do call us; and
forget thee, while thou art feeding us: so thou sparest us, we sleep; and to
morrow we sin again. O how justly might thou forsake us, as we forsake thee;
and condemn us, whose consciences cannot but condemn our selves! But who can
measure thy goodness, who give all, and forgivest all? Though we be sinful,
yet thou love us; though we be miserably ungrateful, yet thou most
plentifully blessest us: What should we have, if we did serve thee, who have
done all these things for thine enemies? O that thou who have so indeared us to
serve thee, would also give us hearts and hands to serve thee with thine own
gifts. It is true, O Lord, as we were made after thine own Image; so by sin we
have turned that Image of thine, into the Image of Satan: but turn thou us
again, and we shall be turned into the Image and likeness of thy Son: And
what though our sins be great, yet thy mercy is far greater then our sins
either are, or can be: we cannot be so bad, as thou art good; nor so infinite
in sinning, as thou art in pardoning, if we repent. O that we could repent! O
that thou would give us repentance! for we are weak, O Lord, and can no more
turn our selves, then we could at first make our selves: yea, we are altogether
dead in sin, so that we cannot stir the least joint, no not so much as feel our
deadness, nor desire life, except thou be pleased to raise and restore our
souls from the death of sin, and grave of long custom, to the life of grace:
Apt we are to all evil, but reprobate and indisposed to all grace and
goodness; yea, to all the means thereof. We are altogether of our selves
unable to resist the force of our mighty adversaries, but do thou free our
wills, and set to thy helping hand, in casting down by thy Spirit our raging
lusts: and by thy grace subdue our untamed affections, and we shall henceforth
as much honor thee, as by our wickedness we have formerly dishonored thee.

Wherefore of thy goodness, and for thy great Names sake, we beseech thee take
away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of flesh: enable us to repent what we
have done, and never more to do what we have once repented, not fostering any
one sin in our souls.

Reform and change our minds, wills, and affections, which we have corrupted;
remove all impediments which hinder us from serving of thee, and direct all our
thoughts, speeches, and actions to thy glory, as thou have directed our eternal
salvation thereunto. Let not Satan any longer prevail, in causing us to defer
our repentance; since we know, that late repentance is seldom sincere, and that
sickness is no fit time for so And because infidelity is the bitter root of
all wickedness, and a lively faith the true mother of all grace and goodness:
nor are we Christians indeed, except we imitate Christ, and square our lives
according to the rule of thy Word: Give us that faith which manifests it self
by a godly life; which purifieth the heart, works by love, and sanctifies
the whole man throughout. Yea since, if our faith be true and great a work; as
many have found that are now in Hell: Neither is it reasonable, thou should
accept of our feeble and decrepit old age, when we have spent all the flower,
and strength of our youth, in serving of Satan, not once minding to leave sin,
until sin left us. saving, it can no more be severed from unfeigned repentance,
and sanctification, then life can be without motion, or the sun without light:
give us spiritual wisdom, to try and examine our selves, whether we be in the
faith or not: that so we may not be deluded with opinion only, as thousands
are. Yea, O Lord, give us firmly to resolve, speedily to begin, and continually
to persevere, in doing and suffering thine holy will: Inform and reform us so,
that we may neither mis-believe, nor mis-live: subdue our lusts to our wills,
submit our wills to reason, our reason to faith; our faith, our reason, our
wills, our selves, to thy blessed Word and Will. Dispell the thick mists and
clouds of our sins, which corrupt our souls, and darken our understandings;
separate them from us, which would separate us from thee: Yea, remove them out
of thy sight also, we most humbly beseech thee, as far as the East is from the
West; and in the merits of thy Son, pardon and forgive us all those evils,
which either in thought, word, or deed, we have this day, or any time
heretofore committed against thee: whether they be the sins of our youth, or of
our age; of omission, or commission; whether committed of ignorance, of
knowledge, or against conscience, and the many checks and motions of thy holy
spirit. Discover unto us the emptiness, vanity and insufficiency of the
things here below, to do our poor souls the least good; that so we may be
induced to set an higher price upon Jesus Christ, who is the life of our lives,
and the soul of our souls: considering, that if we have him, we want nothing;
if we want him, we have nothing. And now, O Lord, seeing the time approaches
which thou have appointed for rest; and because we can neither wake nor sleep
without thee, who have made the day and night, and rulest both: therefore into
thy hands we commend our souls and bodies, beseeching thee to watch over us
this night, and preserve Finally, O Lord, give unto us, and increase in us all
spiritual graces: inlighten our minds with the knowledge of thy truth, and
inflame our hearts with the love of whatsoever i^ good; that we may esteem it
our meat and drink to do thy blessed will. Give us religious thoughts, godly
desires, zealous affections, holy endeavors, assured persuasions of faith,
steadfast waiting through hope, constancy in suffering through patience, and
hearty rejoicing from love: regenerate our minds, purify our natures, turn all
our joies into the joy of the Holy Ghost; and all our peace into the peace of
conscience; and all our fears into the fear of sin, that we may love
righteousness, with as great good will, as ever we loved wickedness; and go
before others in thankfulness toward thee, as far as thou go in mercy
toward us before them. Give us victory in temptation, patience in sickness,
contentment in poverty, joy in distress, hope in us from all our spiritual,
and bodily enemies; from thievs, fire, and from all other dangers. troubles,
confidence in the hour of death: give us always to think and meditate of the
hour of death, the day of judgment, the joies of heaven, and the pains of hell;
together with the ransom which thy Son paid, to redeem us from the one, and to
purchase for us the other: so shall neither thy benefits, nor thy
chastisements, nor thy Word return ineffectual: but accomplish that for which
they were sent, until we be wholly renewed to the image of thy Son.

These things we humbly beg at thy fatherly hands, and whatsoever else thou
know in thy divine wisdom to be needful and necessary for our souls, or
bodies, or estates, or names, or friends, or the whole Church, better then we
ourselvs can either ask or think: and that for thy Names sake, for thy promise
sake, for thy mercies sake, for thy Sons sake, who suffered for sin, and sinned
not; and whose righteousness pleads for our unrighteousness: in him it is
that we come unto thee, in him we call upon thee, who is our Redeemer, our
Preserver, and our Savior; to whom with Thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be
ascribed as is most due, all honor, glory, praise, power, might, majesty,
dominion, and hearty thanksgiving, the rest of this night following, and for
evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer to be used at any time.
O Almighty, Eternal, most Glorious, and only wise God; giver to them which
want, comforter of them which suffer, and forgiver of them that repent; whom
truly to know, is everlasting life: We thy poor creatures acknowledge and
confess unto thee, who know the secrets and desires of all hearts: that --

-- of our selves, we are not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy Majesty with the least confidence, that thou
should hear our prayers, or accept of our services: but rather that thou
should take these our confessions, and accordingly condemn us to the lowest
place in Hell: for our continually -- we have used all our wisdom, to commit
the foolishness of sin: our whole conversation has been to serve Satan, and
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. We even suck in iniquity like water, and draw
on sin as it were, with cartropes. Neither is there any part, power, function,
or faculty, either of our souls abusing thy mercy, and those many means of
grace, which in ^hy long suffering thou have affoarded for our reclaiming. We
are the cursed seed of rebellious Parents, we were conceived in sin, and born
the children of wrath: And whereas thou might have executed thy fierce
displeasure upon us, so soon as thou gave us being; and so prevented our
further dishonouring thee: we have instead of humbling our selves before thee
our God, and seeking reconciliation with thy Majesty: done nothing from our
infancy, but added sin unto sin, in breaking every one of thine holy Laws,
which thou have given us as rules and directions to walk by, and to keep us
from sinning. Yea, there is not one of thy righteous precepts, which we have
not broken more times, and ways, then we can express: so far have we been from
a privative holiness, in reforming that which is evil: and a positive holiness
in performing that which is good: which thou may justly require of us, being
we had once ability so to do, if we had not wilfully lost it: for thou did
form us righteous and holy, had not we deformed our selves; whereas now like
Satan, we can do nothing else but sin, and make others sin too, who would not
so sin, but for us: for we have an army of unclean desires, that perpetually
fight against our souls: whereby we are continually tempted, drawn away, and
enticed through our own concupiscence. Yea, thou know, that the heart of man
is deceitful above all things; and that the imaginations thereof, are only,
and continually evil. O the infinitely intricate windings and turnings of the
dark Labyri^hs of man's heart! who finds not or bodies, which is not become a
ready instrument to dishonor thee: for as our heart is a root of all
corruption, a seed-plot of all sin; so our eyes, are eyes of vanity; our ears,
ears of folly; our mouths, mouths of deceit; our hands, hands of iniquity:
and every part does dishonor thee, which yet would be glorified of thee. The
understanding which was given us to learn virtue, is apt now to apprehend
nothing but sin; the will which was given us to affect righteousness, is apt
now to love nothing but wickedness; the memory which was given us to remember
good things, is apt now to keep nothing but evil things: for sin (like a
spreading leprosy) is so grown over us, that from the crown of our heads, to
the soal of our seet, there is nothing whole th^rein, but wounds, and
swellings, and sores full of corruption. Yea, our souls and bodies are even a
very sink of sin; for like the common shore, we have not refused to welcome
any, the most loathsome pollutions, that either the world, our own corruption,
or the Devil at any time has offered unto us. Or, admit we are exempt from
some evils, we may thank thee, and not our selves for it: for we are ready
without thy restraining grace, to run out into all manner of enormities
whatsoever: we are swift to all evil, but to all good immovable: when we do
evil, we do it cheerfully, and quickly, and easily; but if we do any good, we
do it faintly, and ra^ly, and slackly. When did we talk without vanity? when
did we give without hypocrisy? when did we bargain without deceit? when did
we reprove without anger, or envy? when did in himself an indisposition of mind
to all good, and an inclination to all evil? we hear without wearysomness?
when did we pray without tediousness? such is our corruption, as if we were
made to sin, in deed, in word, or in thought. O the pride, passion, lust, envy,
ignorance, awkwardnesse, hypocrisy, infidelity, vain thoughts,
unprofitableness, and the like; which cleaves to our very best actions! and how
full of infirmity are our primest performances! for we have not done any one
action legally justifyable all our days: neither can ought we do, abide the
examinatirn of thy strict justice, until it he covered with thy Sons
righteousness; and the corruption thereof washed away in his most precious
blood. Yea, if thou should behold these our prayers, as they be in
themselves, without having respect unto us in Christ Jesus; they would appear
no better in thy sight, then a menstruous cloth. And according to this our
inclination, has been our practice: we have yielded our hearts as cages to
entertain all manner of unclean spirits, when on the contrary we have refused
to yi^ld them as Temples for thine holy Spirit to dwell in. Yet, miserable
wretches as we are, we like our own condition so well, that we are not
willing to go out of our selves unto thee; who would new make us, according
to the Image of thy Son: for by long custom, we have so turned delight into
necessity, that we can as willingly leave to live, as leave our lusts: yea, we
love our sins so well, and so much above our souls, that (except thou change
our hearts) we shall choose to go to Hell, rather then part with them. Thou
have used all manner of means to reclaim us, but nothing will serve; neither
the menaces and terrors of thy Law, nor the precepts and sweet promises of thy
Gospel can do it: We are neither softened with benefits, nor broken with
punishments; thy severity will not terrify us, nor thy kindness mollify us.
No, should thou send an Angel from the dead to warn us, all persuasions
would be in vain, since we hear Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles
daily, and are never the better True, O Lord, there is a main reason of it,
which we cannot now help; for naturally we have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, hearts and understand not. Yea, we are quite dead in sin, until thou
do boar our ears, soften our hearts, and break in upon our consciences by
the irresistible power of thy Spirit, and by going along with thy Word, shall
quicken our souls, and regenerate the whole man anew: In the mean time we are
ready to receive all, and return nothing but sin and disobedience; wherein we
more then abound: for we have done more against thee this week, then we have
done for thee ever since we were born. And whereas the least of thy mercies, is
greater then all the courtesies of men, we are not so thankful to thee for
them all, as we are to a friend for some one good turn. Neither do we alone
lay the fault upon our inability, or want of supply from thee; but upon our own
perverseness, and want of endeavor, and putting sorth that strength and
ability, which thou have given us: for how long have thou (O most gracious God)
stood at the doors of our hearts; and how often have thou knocked, when we have
refused to open, and let thee in; And if at any time we have been overruled by
the good motions of thy holy Spirit, yet have we still returned (with the Dog)
to our vomit, and (with the Sow) refused the clear streams of thy
Commandments, to wallow in the mire of our filthy sins: whereby we have justly
deserved, that thou should have called us to an account in the dead of our
sleep, and have judged us to eternal destruction; and never have suffered us
again to have seen the light of the Sun: the remembrance of which, together
with our other rebellions, when we rightly consider them, makes us even
speechless like him in the Gospel: as neither expecting mercy, nor daring to
ask it.

Howbeit, when we call to mind thy manisold mercies, showed to Manasses, Paul,
Mary Magdalen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son, with many others; who were no
less vile then we, and who notwithstanding found thee more ready to hear, then
they were to ask; and to give above what they durst presume to beg: we stay
our selves, and receive some encouragement from the application of the merits
of Christ Jesus; which thou have promised, shall be a sufficient satisfaction
for all our sins: and the rather, for that then ca^est all that are weary and
heavy laden, with the burden of their sins unto thee; with promise that thou will ease them: and have promised, that though our sins be as red as scarlet,
thou will make them white as snow, and that thou will not the death of a
sinner, but that he turn from his wickedness and live: and that if a sinner
does repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his heart, thou will blot out
all his wickedness out of thy remembrance. And lest we should yet be
discouraged, thou who did no less accept the will of David, then the act of
Solomon, have further promised, that if there be but first a willing mind, thou will accept of us according to that which we have, and not according to that
which we bave not.

But forasmuch O Lord, as thou know, that is not in man to turn his own
heart, unless thou do first give him grace to convert; for thou O Lord, must
work in us both the will and the deed: and being that it is as easy with thee
to make us righteous and holy, as to bid us be such, O our God, give us
ability, and willingness to do what thou command, and then command what tho^
wilt; and thou shall find us ready to do thy blessed will. Wherefore give to
us, and increase in us all Christian graces, that we may know, and believe,
and repent, and amend, and persevere in well doing. Create in us O Lord, a new
heart, and renew a right spirit within us: take away from us our greedy desire
of committing sin, and enable us by the powerful assistance of thy grace, more
willingly to obey thee in every of thy commandments then ever we have the
contrary.

Be favorable to thy people every where; look down in much compassion upon thy
Militant Church, and every several member thereof: bless it in all places
with peace and truth, hedge it about with thy providence, defend it from the
mischievous designs, and attempts of ^hine, and her malicious enemy: let thy
Gospel go on and conquer, maugre all opposition; that Religion and uprightness
of heart may be highly set by with all, and all profaneness may be trod under
foot. More particularly, be merciful to this sinful Land; the civil
Magistrates, the painful Ministers, the two Universities; those people that sit
yet in darkness; all the afflicted members of thy Son. Lord, comfort the
comfortless, strengthen the weak, bind up the broken hearted, make the bed of
the sick, be a father to the fatherless, and Yea, let thy Spirit bear such rule
in every one of our hearts, that neither Satan that foreign enemy, and roaring
Lion, which seeks to devour us, may invade us; nor our own concupiscence,
that homebred traitor, may by conspiring with the world, work the ruin and
overthrow of our poor souls: but that all our wills which have been altogether
rebellious, our hearts which have been the receptacles of unclean spirits, and
our affections which are altogether carnal; may be wholyframed according to
thy holy and heavenly will. and that we may the better know how to avoid the
evil, and do the good, let thy word as a light, discover unto us all the
sleights and snares of our spiritual adversaries: yea, make it unto us as the
Star which led unto Christ; and thy benefits like the Pillar which brought to
the Land of Promise; and an husband to the widow; cloth the naked, feed the
hungry, visit the prisoners, relieve the oppressed, sanctify unto them all
their afflictions, and turn all things to the best to them that fear thee. thy
Cross like the Messenger, that compelled guests unto the Banquet. Prosper the
Armies that fight thy battles, and show a difference between thy servants, and
thine enemies, as thou did between the Israelites and the Egyptians; that
the one may be confirmed, and the other reclaimed. Give us, O Lord; to
consider, that although sin in the beginning seem never so sweet unto us, yet
in the end it will prove the bane, and ruin both of body and soul: and so
assist us with thy grace, that we may willingly part with our right eyes of
pleasure, and our right hands of profit, rather then sin against thee, and
wrong our own consciences: considering that it would be an hard bargain, for
us to win the whole world, and lose our own souls. These, Bless, preserve and
keep us from all the temptations of Satan, the world, and our wicked hearts:
from pride, that Lucifer-like sin, which is the forerunner of destruction;
considering that thou resistest the proud, and give grace to the humble: from
covetousness, which is the root of all evil; being taught out of thy word,
that the love of money has caused many to fall into diverse temptations, and
snares, which drown them in perdition and destruction; from cruelty, that
infernal evil, of which thou have said, that there shall be judgment
merciless, to him that shows not mercy: from hypocrisy, that sin with two
faces, whose reward is double damnation; and the rather, because wickedness
does most rankle the heart, when it is kept in, and dissembled; and for that in
all the Scriptures, we read not of an hypocrites repentance: from whoredom,
which is a sin against a man's own body, and the most inexcusable: considering
the remedy which thou have appointed against it: for the punishment whereof,
the Law ordained death, and the Gospel excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven:
from profanation of thyday, considering thou have said, that whosoever
sanctifies it not, shall be cut off from thy people; and did command that
he should be stoned to death who only gathered a sew sticks on that day: from
swearing, which is the language of hell; considering that because of oaths the
Land does mourn, and thou have threatened that thy curse shall never depart from
the house of the swearer: from drunkenness, that monster with many heads, and
worse than beast like sin, which in thy Word has many fearful woes denounced
against it: and the rather, for that it is a sin (like the pit of Hell) out of
which there is small hope of redemption. Finally, O Lord, give us strength to
resist temptation, patience to endure affliction, and constancy to persevere
unto the end in thy truth: that so having passed our pilgrimage here, according
to thy will, we may be at rest with thee hereafter, both in the night of death,
when our bodies shall sleep in the grave, and in the day of our resurrection;
when they shall awake (...) judgment, and both bodies and souls enjoy
everlasting bliss.

These, and all other good things, which for our blindness we cannot ask,
vouchsafe to give us thine unworthy servants, not for our sakes, but for thy
mercies sake; and for thy Son our Sa^iour Jesus Christ's sake, in whom thou art
well-pleased; and in whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the Cross for our
sins: who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God, world
without end.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still our defense; thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, ou^ salvation; thy
true and holy word our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort,
consolation, illumination, and sanctification, now and for ever,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving to be brought in to any, or every one of them, next before the
Conclusion, where the hand is placed.
ANd as we pray unto thee, so we desire also to praise thee: rendering unto thy
Majesty upon the bended knees of our hearts, all possible laud, and
thinksgiving, for all thy mercies and favors, spiritual and corporal, temporal
and eternal: For that thou have freely elected us to salvation from all
eternity; when thou have passed by many millions of others, both Men and
Angels, whereas we deserved to perish no less then they; and thou migh^est
justly have chosen them, and lest us: for that thou have created us Men, and
not Beasts; in England, not in AEthiopia, or any other savage Nation: in this
clear and bright time of the Gospel, not in the darkness of Paganism, or
Popery. For thine unexpressible love, in redeeming us out of Hell, and from
those unsufferable and endless torments, by the precious blood of thy dear
Son: who spared not himself, that thou might spare us. For calling us home
to thee by the Ministry of thy Word, and the work of thy good Spirit. For the
long continuance of thy Gospel with us, (the best of blessings). For sparing us
so long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. For justifying, and in
some measure sanctifying us, and giving us ground for assured hope of being
glorified in thy heavenly Kingdom. For preserving us from so infinite many
perils and dangers, which might easily have befalne us every day, to the taking
away of either our estates, our limbs, or our lives. For so plentifully and
graciously blessing us all our life long, with many and manifold good things;
both for necessity and delight. For peace of conscience, and content of mind.
For our health, wealth, limbs, senses, food, raiment, liberty, prosperity. For
thy great mercy in correcting us, and turning thy corrections to our good. For
preserving us in the night past from all dangers of body and soul; and for
infinite more mercies, of which we could not well want any one: and which are
all greatned, by being bestowed upon us, who were so unworthy; and have been so
ungrateful for the same. O that we could answer thee in our thankfulness, and
obedient walking, one for a thousand!

Neither are we unmindful of those national blessings, which thou have
vouchsafed unto our Land in general: as namely, that deliverance from the
Spanish Invasion in 88, and from that divelish design of the Gunpowder-Treason:
for preserving us from the noisome, and devouring Plague and Pestilence. Lord
grant, that our great unthankfulness for these thy mercies, may not cause thee
to deliver us into the hands of our enemies: and although we have justly
thereby deserved the same, yet we beseech thee, give us not up unto their
wills, neither suffer Popery ever to bear rule over us; nor thy blessed Word
and Sacraments to be taken away from us; but continue them unto us, and to our
posterity after us, if it be thy good pleasure; until the coming of thy Christ.

Babes that are inexpert in the Word of righteousness, use milk: but strong
meat belongs to them that are of full age, Heb. 5. 13, 14.


