A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE To drive out DISCONTENT In all that any way suffer
Affliction. As also the Benefit of Affliction; and how to Husband it so, that
the weakest Christian (with blessing from above) may be able to support himself
in his most miserable exigents. Together with the Wit, Generosity, Magnanimity
and Invincible strength of a patient Christian Rightly so styled, and as is
herein Characterised Extracted out of the choicest Authors, Ancient and Modern,
both Holy and Humane. Necessary to be read of all that any way suffer
Tribulation. The Second Part.

By R. Young, of Roxwell in Essex, Florilegus.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution,

2 Timothy 3.12. LONDON, Printed for the Author and are to be sold at his House
near the Wind-mills, next door to the three Colts: with more than forty other
pieces, by the same Author. 1668.

A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE To Drive out DISCONTENT, etc. PART. II.
CHAP. I.
IN the former part I have Shown the several Reasons, why God suffers the best
of his Children to be afflicted; with the manifold benefits and advantages they
make thereof. Now that some may be persuaded to make this use of their
sufferings, and that we may also put to silence the ignorance of others; (
foolish men who are mistaken in judging of this matter, supposing it a base
thing to suffer injuries unrevenged) see the Reasons which deservedly make Gods
children so patiently to suffer wrongs that the men^ of the world never dream
of: And how, through the study of virtue and Christian prudence, they make the
servile passions of their minds (fear and anger) subject to the more worthy
faculti^s of their souls, reason and understanding. The reasons thereof are
these.

1. Because it is more generous and laudable to forgive, than revenge*
Certainly, in taking revenge, a man is but even with his enemy; but, inpassing
it over, he is superior to him: for it is a Princes part to pardon: yea, quoth
Alexander, there can be nothing more noble, than to do well to those that
deserve ill. And St. Gregory, It is more honor to suffer injuries by silence,
than to overcome them by answering again. Princes use not to chide when
Ambassadors have offered them undecencies, but deny them audience as if
silence were the way royal to correct a wrong. And certainly, he enjoyes a
brave composedness, that seats himself above the flight of the injurious claw:
Like the Emperor Augustus, who though of a most tenacious and retentive
memory, would forget wrongs, as soon as they were offered: Or Agathocles,
Antigonus, and Caesar, who being great Potentates, were as little moved at
vulgar wrongs, as a Lion at the barking of Curre^* yea, the Orator gives it as
a high praise to Caesar, that he could forget nothing but wrongs, remember
nothing but benefits; and who so truly noble as he that can do ill, and will
not?

'True, It is not rare to see a great man vex himself at the neglect of a
peasant, but this argues a poor spirit: A true Lion would pass it by, with an
honorable scorn* You Will confess then it is Princely to disdain a wrong: and is
that all? No, forgiveness, says Seneca, is a valiant kind of revenge: and
none are so frequent in pardoning as the courageous: He that is modestly
valiant stirs not till he must needs, and then to purpose: Like the Flint, he
has fire in him, but it appears not, until you force it from him: Who more
valiant than Joshua? and he held it the noblest victory, to overcome evil with
good: for the Gibeonites took not so much pains in coming to deceive him; as
he, in going to deliver them. And Cicero more commends Caesar for overcoming
his own courage in pardoning Marcellus, than for the great victories he had
against his other enemies. Yea, a dominion over ones self is greater then the
Grand Signiory of Turkey. For as the greatest knowledge, is truly to know thy
self; so the greatest conquest, is to subdue thy self. He is a wiseman that can
avoid an evil, he is a patient man that can endure it, but he is a valiant man
that can conquer it. And indeed, for a man to overcome an enemy, and be
overcome by his own passions, is to conquer a petty village with the loss of a
large City. What says a Father? Miserable is that victory wherein thou
overcomest thine enemy, and the Devil in the mean time overcomes thee: thou
slayest his body, the Devil thy soul. Now we deem him to have the honor of the
war, that has the profit of it. But as an Emperor said of the means
prescribed him to cure his Leprosy (which was the blood of Infants) I had
rather be sick still, than be recovered by such a medicine: so will thou in
this case, if thou have either bowels or brains. Yea, if the price or honor of
the conquest be rated by the difficulty; then to suppress anger in thy self,
is to conquer with Hercules, one of the Furies: To tame all passions, is to
lead Cerberus in chains: and to endure afflictions and persecutions strongly
and patiently, is with Atlas to bear the whole World on thy shoulders as says
the Poet.

It is no shame to suffer ill, but to do it: to be evil, we are all naturally
disposed: to be holy and good, is the difficulty. Yea, every beast and vermin
can kill: it is true prowess and honor to give life and preserve it. Yea a
beast being snarled at by a cur, will pass by as scorning to take notice
thereof. I, but is it wisdom so to do? Yes, first, the ancient received
opinion is, that the sinews of wisdom, are slowness of belief and distrust.
Secondly, None more wise then Solomon, and he is of opinion, That it is the
glory of a man to pass by an offense, Prove. 19.11. We fools think it ignominy
and cowardice, to put up the lie without a stub: a wrong, without a challenge:
but Solomon^ to whose wisdom all wise men will subscribe, was of another
judgment; and to this of Solomon, the wisest heathen have set their seal:
Pittaeus the Philosopher holds, That, pardon is better than revenge, inasmuch
as the one is proper to the spirit, the other to a cruel beast. And Demos^henes
being reproached by one, answers, I will not strive with thee in this kind of
fight: in which he that is overcome is the better man. But, how Socrates, whom
the Oracle of Apollo pronounced the wisest man alive, and all the rest of the
Philosophers approved of it, both by judgment and practice; we shall have
occasion to relate in the reasons ensuing. No truer note of a wiseman than
this; he so loves as if he were to be an enemy, and so hates as if he were to
love again. We know a spark of fire falling upon a solid body, presently goes
out, which falling upon combustible matter kindles and burns: Now as with fire,
the light stuff and rubbish kindles sooner than the solid and more compact; so,
anger does sooner inflame a fool than a man composed in his resolutions. This
the Holy Ghost witnesses Eccles. 7. Be not thou of a hasty spirit to be angry;
for anger rests in the bosom of fools, verse. 9. So much fury, so much folly:
the more chafing, the less wisdom. I confess, I find some wise men
extremely passionate by nature, as there is no general rule but admits of some
exceptions: Even God himself, had particular exceptions, from his general
Laws: as the Cherubims over the Ark, was an instance against the second
Commandment: the Israelites robbing the Egyptians against the eight: the
Priests breaking the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.5. against the fourth: and Phin^as
killing Zimry, against the sixth, Numb. 25.8. And these, as they are more taken
with a joy, so they taste a discontent more heavily: In whom Choler like fire in
stubble is soon kindled, and soon out: for they are stung with a Nettle, and
allayed with a Dock: being like Gunpowder, to which you no sooner give fire,
but they fly in your face. And they say these hot men are the best natured; but
I say; then the best are naught: And it is a strange fit that transformes a
wiseman (with Apuleius) into an Ass; yea, a Tiger. And others again, none of
the wisest, who are free from being affected; And as they never joy
excessively, so they never sorrow inordinately; but have together less mirth
and less mourning; like patient Gamesters, winning and losing, are all one.
But for the most part, it is otherwise. Yea, impatience is the Cousin-german to
frenzy. How often have we heard men that have been displeased with others, tear
the Name of their Maker in pieces?

And lastly, This of all others is the most divine and Christian-like revenge;
witness our Savior Christ, who by death, overcame death (as David cut off the
head of Goliath, with his own sword) and even then tryumphed over his enemies,
when most they seemed to triumph over him, Col. 2.15. And the Martyrs, who are
said by the Holy Ghost, to overcome the great Dragon, that old Serpent called
the Devil and Satan, in that they loved not their lives unto the death, Rev.
12.11. Their conquering was by dying, not by killing: and, can the back of
Charity now bear no load? are the sinews of Love grown so feeble? And holy
David, who when he had Saul at his mercy, instead of cutting off his head, as
his servants persuaded him, only cut off the lap of his garmnet, and after
thought that too much al^o. And at another time, when the Lord had closed him
into his hands, finding him asleep in the Fort, instead of taking away his
life, as Abishai ^ounselled him, he took away his Spear, and instead of taking
away his blood from his heart, he takes a pot of water from his head. That this
kind of ^evenge for a man to find his enemy at an advantage, and let him depart
^ree, is generous and noble, beyond the capacity of an ordinary man: you may
hear Saul himself confess, 1 Samuel 24.17, to 23. Again, when the King of Syria
sent a mighty Host to take Elisha, and the Lord had smote them all with
blindness, and shut them into Samaria; what does the Prophet? slay them? No:
indeed the King of Israel would fain have had it so, his fingers itcht to be
doing: but Elisha commanded bread and water to be set before them, that they
might eat and drink, and go to their Master, 2 King. 6.22. So a Christian truly
generous, will omit no opportunity of doing good: nor do evil, though he have
opportunity: for to may, and will not, is the Christians laud.

Which yet is not all, for besides that it is the most generous, noble,
valiant, wise, divine and Christian-like revenge, to pass by and forgive
injuries; our Savior Christ, in whom is the fountain of all wisdom and
knowledge, as all the senses are in the head, Zach. 4.12. allows none for
magnanimous, but such as together with forgiving, bless those that curse them,
and do good to such as hurt them, Matthew. 5, 44. The case of Moses, Steven, and
many others; as I shall show in Chapter 31. which is true generosity indeed.
But how contrary is the opinion of the World, to the judgment of God, and the
wisest of men concerning valor?

CHAP. II.
2. BEcause suffering is the only way to prevent suffering; Revenge being one
of those remedies, which, not seldom, proves more grievous than the disease it
self. When once Xantippe, the wife of Socrates, in the open street plucked his
cloak from his back; and some of his acquaintance counseled him to strike her:
he answers, You say well; that while we are brawling and fighting together,
every one of you may clap us on the back and cry; Hoe, well said, to it
Socrates: yea well done Xantippe, the wisest of the twain. When Aristippus was
asked by one in derision, where the great high friendship was become, that
formerly had been between him and Aeschines? he answers, It is asleep, but I
will go and awaken it; and did so, least their enemies should make it a matter
of rejoicing. When Philip of Macedon was told that the Graecians spoke evil
words of him, notwithstanding he did them much good, and was withal counseled
to chastise them; he answers, Your counsel is not good, for if they now speak
evil of us, having done them good only; what would they then if we should do
them any harm? And at another time, being counseled either to banish, or put
to death one who had slandered him; he would do neither of both, saying, It was
not a sufficient cause to condemn him: and for banishing, it was better not to
let him stir out of Macedonia, where all men knew that he lied; th^n to send
him among strangers, who not knowing him, might admit his slanders for truth:
better he speak where we are both known, then where we are both unknown. And
this made Chrysippus, when one complained to him, that his friend had
reproached him privately; answer, Ah, but chide him not, for then he will do as
much in public* Neglect will sooner kill an injury, than Revenge. These
tongue-squibs, or crackers of the brain, will die alone, if we revive them not:
the best way to have them forgotten by others, is first to forget them our
selves. Yea, to contemn an enemy, is better then either to fear him, or answer
him. When the Passenger gallops by, as if his fear made him speedy, the Cur
follows him with open mouth and swiftness: let him turn to the brawling Cur,
and he will be more fierce; but let him ride by in a confident neglect, and the
Dog will never stir at him, or at least will soon give over and be quiet.
Wherefore, when aspersed, labor as the eclipsed Moon, to keep on our motion,
till we wade out of the shadow, and receive our former splendour. To vex other
men, is but to prompt them how they should again vexus. Two earthen pots
floating on the water, with this Inscription, If we knock, we crack; was long
ago made the Emblem of England and the Low Countries. When two friends fall
out, if one be not the wiser, they turn love into anger and passion, passion
into evil words, words into blows; and when they are fighting a third adversary
has a fair advantage to insult over them both, As have you not sometimes seen
two neighbors, like two Cocks of the Game pick out one another eyes, to make
the Lawyers sport; it may be kill them? As while Judah was hot against Israel
and Israel hot against Judah, the King of Syria smot them both. At least Satan
that common and arch enemy will have us at advantage. For as vain men delight
when two Dogs, or two Cocks are a fighting, to encourage and prick them forward
to the combat: Even so does Satan deal with us; Controversies* like a pair of
Cudgels, are thrown in by the Devil, and taken up by malcontents, who baste
one another while he stands by and laughs. And we cannot please the Devil
better: for as the Master of the Pit often sets two Cocks to fight together, unto
the death of them both; and then after mutual conquest, suppeth perchance with
the fighters bodies: Even so, says Gregory, does the Devil deal with men. He
is an enemy that watches his time and while we wound one another, he wounds
and wins all our souls. Thus, like the Frog and the Mouse in the Fable; while
men fight eagerly for a toy (the Kite comes (that Prince, and chief Foul that
rul^th in the air,) and snatcheth away both these great warriors. Or, like
two Emmets in the mole hill of this earth, we fight for the mastery; in mean
while comes the Robin-red breast and picks both up, and so devours them. But on
the other side, by gentleness we may as much pleasure our selves. It is said of
Aristides, when he perceived the open scandal which was like to arise, by
reason of the contention sprung up between him and Themistocles, that he
besought him mildly after this manner: Sir, we both are no mean men in this
Common wealth; our dissension will prove no small offense unto others, nor
disparagement to our selves: wherefore good Themistocles, let us be at one
again; and if we will needs strive, let us strive who shall excel other in
virtue and love. Aristippus and Aeschines two famous Philosophers, being fallen
at variance, Aristippus came to Aeschines, and says, Shall we (...) friends
again? Yes, with all my heart, says Aeschines; Remember th^^ says Aristippus,
that though I be your elder, yet I sought for peace: tru^ says Aeschines, and
for this, I will ever ackowledge you the more worthy man; for I began the
strife and you the peace. And we read of Euclid^^ that when his Brother (in a
variance between them) said, I would I might die if I be not revenged of thee;
he answered again, Nay, let me die for it* if I persuade thee not otherwise
before I have done: by which one wo^^ he presently so won his Brothers heart,
that he changed his mind, and they parted friends. Mild words, and gentle
behavior may be resembled to Milk, that quenches Wild fire; or Oil, that
quenches Lime which b^ water is kindled. And this was David's way of
overcoming, 1 Samuel 24* He whose Harp had wont to quiet Saul's frenzy, now by
his kindness, dot^ calm his fury, so that now he sheds tears instead of blood:
here was a victory gotten, and no blow stricken. The King of Israel set bread
and water before the host of the King of Syria, when he might have slain them,
2 King 6.23* What did he lose by it? or, had he cause to repent himself? No, he
did thereby so prevent succeeding quarrels, that as the Text says* the bands
o^ Aram came no more into the Land of Israel; And such a conquest is like that
which Evagrius records of the Romans, namely, That they got such a victory
over Cosroes, one of the Persian Kings, that this Cosroes made a Law, that
never after, any Kings of Persia should move war against the Romans. Actions
salved up with a free forgiveness, are as not done* so every wise Christian
will do good to them that do hurt to him, yea bless and pray for them that
curse him, as our Savior advises* neither is he a fool in it, for if grace
comes (and nothing will procure it sooner than prayers and good examples)
though before they were evil enemies; now they shall neither be evil, nor
enemies. It was a witty answer of Socrates, who replied when one asked him, why
he took such a man's bitter railing so patiently. It is enough for one to be
angry at a time. For if a wise man contend with a foolish man, says Solomon,
whether he be angry, or laugh, there is no rest. Prove. 29.9. whereas gentle
speech appeaseth wrath, and patience bridleth the secret pratlings of mockers,
and blunteth the point of their reproach. Had not Gideon, Judge. and. learned to
speak fair as well as to smite, he had found work enough from the swords of
Joseph's sons, but his good words are as victorious as his sword: his
pacification of friends better than his execution of enemies, Verse. 2, 3

Satyrus, knowing himself choleric and in that whirry of mind apt to
transgress, when he but suspected ill language from any, he would stop his
cars with wax, lest the sense of it should cause his fierce blood to sees in
his distempered skin. And Caesar, although he could moderate his passions,
having in that civil garboyl intercepted a Packet of Letters written to Pompey
from his Favorites, brake them not open but burnt them immediately. And Pompey
committed those Letters to the f^re before he read them, wherein he expected to
find the cause of his grief. Rage is not engendered, but by the concurrence of
cholers, which are easily produced one of another, and born at an instant. When
the stone and the sseel meets, the issue engendered from thence is fire, w^ereas
the sword of anger being struck upon the soft pillow of a mild spirit, is
broken. The shot of the Cannon hurts not Wool, and such like yiedling things,
but that which is hard, stubborn, and resisting. He is fuller of passion than
reason, that will flame at every vain tongues puff: A man that studies revenge,
keeps his own wounds green and open, which otherwise would heal and do well.
Anger to the soul, is like a coal on the flesh, or garment, cast it off
suddenly, it does little harm, but let it lie, it frets deep. Wherefore says
one, their malice shall sooner cease than my unchanged patience. A small injury
shall go as it comes, a great injury may dine or sup with me, but none at all
shall lodge with me, for why should I vex my self, because another has vexed
me? That were to imitate the fool that would not come out of the Pound, saying,
They had put him in b^ Law, and he would come out again by Law: or Ahab, who
because he could not have his will on Naboth, would be revenged on himself. As
the mad man tears his own hair, because he cannot come at his enemies, Or
Thamar, who defiled her self, to be revenged of her Father in law Judah. Or the
Hedge hog, which having laden himself with Nuts and fruits, if but the least
Filberd chance to fall off, as he is going to disburden them in his
storehouse, will fling down all the rest, in a peevish humor, and beat the
ground for anger, as Pliny writes. Or Dogs, which set upon the stone that has
hurt them, with such irefull teeth, that they hurt themselves more than the
thrower hurt them; and feel greater smart from themselves, than from their
enemy: which makes Archelaus say, it is a great evil, not to be able to suffer
evil. And certainly if we well consider it, we shall meet with vexations
enough that we cannot avoid if we would never so fain. We need not (like
Cercion in Suidas) wrestle, or (with foolish Pannus) go to law with every man
we meet. And yet some (as if they did delight to vex their own souls,) like the
Ethiopians, who, as Diodorus relates, lame themselves if their King be lame.

I might go on, and show you, that Greece and Asia were set on fire for an
Apple: That, not a few have suffered a sword in their bowels, because they
would not suffer the lie in their throats: And lastly, I might show, that if we
suffer not here with patience, we shall suffer hereafter with grief; for the
wages of anger is judgment, even the judgment of hell fire, Mat. 5, 22.

CHAP. III.
3. THey bear the slanders and reproaches of wicked men patiently, for that
they are false, and so appertain not unto them. Socrates being rayled upon, and
called by one all to naught, took no notice of it; and being demanded a reason
of his Patience, said, It concerns me not, for I am no such man. Diogenes was
wont to say when the people mocked him, They deride me, yet I am not derided, I
am not the man they take me for. This reason is of more force from the mouth of
an innocent Christian* If a rich man be called poor, or a sound Christian, an
hypocrite, he slights it, he laughed at it, because he knows the same to be
false, and that his Accuser is mistaken: whereas, if a Beggar be called
bankrup, or a dissembler, hypocrite, he will wince and kick, and be most
grievously offended at it. Yea, as soars and ulcers are grieved, not only at a
^ight touch, but even with fear and suspicion of being touched, so will an
exu^^erate mind, says Seneca. And as small letters offend bad eyes so least
appearances of contradiction will grieve the ill affected ears of guil^y
persons, says Plutarch. For, let men's tongues, like Bells, give but an
indefinite, and not a significant sound, they imagine them to speak and mean,
whatsoever their guilty consciences frame in the fancy, and whisper in the
ear: which are those evil surmises of corrupt minds, the Apostle taxes, 1 Timothy 6.4. When like Caius the humanist, one thinks every word spoken, tends to
his disgrace, and is as unwilling to bear, as forbear reproaches. But where the
conscience is clear, the case is altered. Marius was never offended with any
report that went of him, because if it were true, it would sound to his praise,
if false, his life and manners should prove it contrary. And indeed, the best
confutation of their slanders, is not by our great words, but by our good
works. Sophocles being accused by his own children, that he grew D^tard, and
spent their Patrimonies idly, when he was summoned, did not personally appear
before the Magistrates, but sent one of his new Tragedies to their perusal,
which being read, made them confess, This is not the work of a man that dotes.
So against all clamours and swelling opprobries, set but thine innocence and
good life, thou need do no more. That body which is in good health, is
strong, and able to bear the great storms and bitter cold of Winter, and
likewise the excessive and intemperate heat of the Summer; but with a crazie
and distempered body, it is far otherwise: Even so, a sound heart, and clear
conscience, will abide all trials: in prosperity it will not be lifted up, in
adversity, it will not be utterly cast down: whereas, the corrupt heart and
festered conscience, can endure nothing, even a word, if it be pleasing, puffs
him up with pride, if not, it swells him with passion. A guilty conscience (like
Glass,) will sweat with the least breath, and like a windy instrument, be put
out of tune with the very distemper of the air: but when the soul is steeled
with goodness, no assaults of evil can daunt it. I more fear what is within me
(says Luther) then what comes from without: The storms and wind without, do
never move the Earth, only Vapors within, cause Earthquakes, Jam. 4.1. No
greater sign of innocence when we are accused, than mildness, as we see in
Joseph, who being both accused and committed for forcing his Mistress, answered
just nothing that we can read of, Genesis 39.17, 18. And Susanna, who being
accused by the two Elders of an h^ynous crime (which they ^lone were guilty
of,) never contended by laying the fault upon them, but ^ppeals unto God
whether she were innocent or no. And Hannah, whose ^eply to Ely (when he falsely
accused her of drunkenness) was no other ^ut, Nay my Lord, count not thine
Handmaid for a wicked woman, 1 Samuel ^ 15, 16. Neither is their a greater
Symptom of guiltiness, than our ^reaking into choler, and being exasperated
when we have any thing laid to ^ur charge; witness Cain, Genesis 4.9. That Hebrew
which struck his fel^ow. Exodus 2.13.14. Saul, 1 Samuel 20.32, 33, Abner, 2 Samuel
3.^. Jeroboam, ^ King. 13.4 Ahab, 1 King. 22.27. Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
Uzziah ^ Chron. 26.19. Herod the Tetrarch, Luke 3.19.20. The men of Naza^eth,
Luk 4 28, 29. The Pharisees Ioh. 8.47.48. And the High Priests and Scribes,
Luke 20.19, 20.

Sin and falsehood are like an impudent strumpet, but innocence and truth will
veil themselves, like a modest Virgin, 2 Pet. 2.18. The more false the matter,
the greater noise to uphold it. Paul is nothing so loud as Tertullus: The
weakest cause will be sure to forelay the shrewdest counsel, or the lowdest
Advocates: Error has always most words, like a rotten house, that needs most
props and crutches to uphold it. Simple truth evermore requires least cost,
like a beautiful face, that needs no painting; or a comely body, which, any
decent apparel becomes. We plaster over rotten posts, and ragged walls;
substantial buildings are able to grace themselves. So that as sparks flying
up, show the house to be on fire, and as corrupt spittle shows exulcerate
lungs; so a passionate answer argues a guilty conscience. Why does the Hare use
so many doublings? but to frustrate the scent of the Hounds. And this is one
reason why the former are compared to Sheep and Lambs (Emblems of innocence)
which being harmed, will not once bleat; and the latter unto Swine, which will
roar and cry if they be but touched. A good Conscience is not put out of
countenance with the false accusations of slanderous tongues: it throws them
off, as St. Paul did the Viper, unhurt. Innocence and patience are two Bucklers
sufficient to repulse and abate the violence of any such charge; the Brestplate
of Righteousness, the brazen wall of a good conscience, fears no such
Canons. The Conscionabl^ being railed upon, and reviled by a foul mouth, may
reply as once a Steward did to his passionate Lord, when he called him Knave,
etc. Your Honor may speak as you please, but I believe not a word that you
say, for I know my self an honest man. Yea, suppose we are circled round with
reproaches our conscience knowing us innocent, like a constant friend, takes us
by the hand and cheers us against all our miseries. A good spirit, will be, as
Simon to Christ, its Cross-bearer. A just man says chrysostom, is
impregnable, and cannot be overcome: take away his wealth, his good parts
cannot be taken from him, and his treasure is above: cast him into prison and
bonds, he does the more freely enjoy the presence of his God: banish him his
Country, he has his conversation in Heaven: kill his body, it shall rise
again: so he fights with a shadow that contends with an upright man.

Wherefore, let all who suffer in their good Names, if conscious and guilty of
an enemies imputations, repent and amend: if otherwise, contemn them; own them
not so much, as once to take notice thereof. A wicked heart is as a harrill
powder to temptation; let thine be, as a River of water. Yea, seeing God
esteems men as they are, and not as they have been, although formerly thou have
been culpable; yet now thou may answer for thy self, as Paul did for
Onesimus, Though in times past I was unprofitable, yet now I am profitable: and
oppose to them that sweet and divine sentence of sweet and holy Bernard, Tell
me not, Satan, what I have been; but, what I am, and will be. Or that of Beza
in the like case; Whatsoever I was, I am now in Christ a New Creature: and that
is it which troubles thee, I might have so continued long enough ere thou
would have vexed at it, but now I see thou do envy me the grace of my
Savior. Or that Apothegme of Diogenes to a base fellow, that told him he had
once been a forger of money; whose answer was, It Is true, such as thou art now,
I was once; but such as I am now thou will never be. Yea, thou may say, by
how much more I have formerly sinned, by so much more is Gods power and
goodness now magnified. As St. Austine hearing the Donatists revile him for the
former wickedness of his youth; answered, The more desperate my disease was, so
much the more I admire the Physician. Yea, thou may yet strain it a peg
higher, and say, the greater my sins were, the greater is my honor: as, the
Devi^s which Mary Magdalen once had, are mentioned for her glory.

CHAP. IV.
4. HE bears the Cross patiently, because it is counterpoysed and made sweet
with more than answerable blessings. Satan and the world may take many things
from us, as they did from Job, viz. health, wealth, outward peace, friends,
liberty, credit, etc. but they can never take God from us, who gives all: and
at the same time supplies the want of these, with comforts far surpassing,
and transcending them. As when a Courtier gave it out, that Queen Mary (being
displeased with the City) threatened to divert both Term and Parliament to
Oxford; an Alderman asked whether she meant to turn the Channel of the Thames
thither or no: if not (says he,) by Gods grace we shall do well enough. For
what are the things our enemies can take from us, in comparison of Christ, the
Ocean of our comfort, and Heaven the place of our rest? And therefore in the
midst of misery we say with Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Quest. But with what comforts does the Lord supply our losses?

Answ. The assurance of the pardon of sin alone, is able to clear all storms
of the mind: it teaches misery, as sickness, poverty, famine, imprisonment,
infamy, etc. to laugh: not by reason of some imaginary epicycles, but by
natural and palpable reasons. Yea, let death happen, it matters not: When ^
Malefactor has sued out his pardon, let the Assizes come when they will, ^he
sooner the better.

But, to this is added the peace of conscience (the marrow of all comforts,)
^therwise called the peace of God, which passes all understanding, and
sur^asseth all commending; and never did man find pleasure upon earth, like ^he
sweet testimony of an appeased conscience, reconciled unto God, cleansed ^y the
blood of the Lamb, and quieted by the presence of the holy Ghost. Yea, had
thou (who most dotest upon the world) but these comforts, thou ^ouldest not
change them for all that Satan once offered to our Savior, and are now
accepted by many. O good life (says an Ancient Father) that a Joy art thou in
time of distress! And another, Sweet is the feli^ity of that man, whose works
are just, and whose desires are innocent: though he be in Phaleris Bull. For
these are privileges which ma^e Paul ^appier in his chain of Iron, than
Agrippa in his chain of Gold, and Peter more merry under stripes, than Caiphas
upon the Judgment seat: and Ste^en the like: For though he was under his
persecutors for outward condi^ion, yet he was far above them for inward
consolation. Neither had weal^hy Craesus so much riches, in his coffers, as
poor Job had, in his conscience. Yea, how can he be miserable, that has Christ
and all hs merits made sure ^o him; that has his Name written in Heaven.
Surely, his soul must ^e brim full of brave thoughts, that is able to refresh
himself with this Me^itation, God is my Father, the Church my Mother, Christ
the Judge my ^lder Brother and Advocate, the holy Ghost my Comforter, the
Angels mine attendance; all the Creatures mine, for use, the stock of the
Churches Prayers mine for benefit; the world mine Inn; Heaven my home. God ^s
always with ^e, before me, within me, overseeing me; I talk with him in
Prayer, he with me in his word, etc. Sure if these be the accusto^ed meals of a
good soul, it cannot choose but keep natural heat from de^aying, and make it
happy.

But behold yet a greater privilege; These comforts do not only support and
refresh us, and so supply our losses in common calamities; but even in ^he
midst of tortures and torments, which otherwise were intolerable: The natural
man's stomach cannot (of all enemies) endure hunger; yea a ^rison, where he must
always lie under hatches, makes him all amort: but ^orthy Hawks could clap his
hands for joy in the midst of the flames. And ^incentius (as Luther reports)
made a sport of his torments, and gloried, ^hen they made him go upon hot
burning coals, as if they had been ^oses. And another that I read of, say; My
good friends, I now find it true ^ndeed, he that leaves all to follow Christ,
shall have in this world centuplum ^ hundred fold more; I have it in that
centuplum peace of conscience with me (...) parting. And this made Ignatius
say, he had rather be a Martyr then a ^onark. Nor did he ever like himself,
before he was thus tried: for when ^e heard his bones crush between the wild
beasts teeth, he said, now I begin to be a Christian. And Anaxarchus being laid
along in a Trough of stone, and smitten with Iron sledges by the appointment of
Nicocreon (...) Tyrant of Cyprus, ceased not to cry out, strike* smite and
beat; it is not An^^archus, but his vail you martyr so. And a Child in
Josephus, being all (...) to death with biting snippers at the commandment of
Antiochus, could (...) with a loud, assured, and undaunted voice; Tyrant, thou
losest time, lo I (...) still at mine ease: what is that smarting pain? where
are those torme^^^ which whilome thou did so threaten me withal? my
constancy more tro^bles thee, than thy cruelty me. And how many more of those
Martyrs (...) Queen Maryes Reign, were even ravished, before they could be
permitt^^ to die? so great, and so passing all expressing, is the peace and
comfort (...) good conscience.

Now as the Priests of Mercury when they eat their figgs and honey, (...) out,
O how sweet is truth! so if the worst of a Beleivers life in this (...) be so
sweet; how sweet shall his life be in Heaven! but I Will hold you (...) longer in
this.

A man that has his sins pardoned, is never completely miserable, (...)
conscience again turns his enemy: whereas on the contrary; take the (...) happy
worldling that ever was, if he have not his sins pardoned, he is co^pleatly
wretched (though he sees it not:) suppose him Emperor of (...) whole world, as
Adam, when he was in Paradise, and Lord of all; what (...) it avail him so long
as he had a tormentor within, a self-condemni^^ conscience? which told him,
that God was his enemy, and knew no oth^^ th^n that hell should be his
everlasting portion? Certainly this like a dam^ could not choose but put out all
the lights of his pleasure, so that Paradise ^^self was not Paradise to him:
which is the case of all wicked men, be the^ never so great, never so seemingly
happy.

True; wicked men think the godly less merry, and more miserable tha^
themselves: yea some, that mirth and mischief are only sworn brothers, (...)
this is a foundationlesse opinion. For first, no man is miserable, because
(...) other so thinks him. Secondly, Gods word teaches, and a good conscie^^^
finds, that no man can be so joyful as the faithful, though they wa^^ many
things which others may have. St. Austin before his conversion could not tell
how he should want those delights, he then found so much contentment in: but
after, when his nature was changed, when he ha^ another spirit put into him;
then he says. O how sweet is it to be without those former sweet delights!
Indeed* carnal men laugh more, but th^^ laughter is only the hypocrisy of
mirth: they rejoice in the face only, and (...) in the heart, as the Apostle
witnesses 2 Cor. 5.12. or as another has it, Where O God there wants thy
grace,
Mirth is only in the face.
Yea, their own consciences bear me witness, as that Spanish Judge wel^
considered; who when a murder was committed in a tumultuous crowd o^ people,
beared all their bosoms, and feeling upon their breasts, discovered the guilty
Author by the panting of his heart. And Tully who makes it an argument of
Roscius Amerinus Innocence, that he killed not his Father, because he so
securely slept. Yea, as in profane joy, even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful; so in godly sorrow, even in weeping the heart is light and
cheerful. The tears of those that pray, are sweeter then the joys of the
Theater, says St. Augustine; for our cheeks may run down with tears, and yet
our mouths sing forth praises; the face may be pale, yet the heart may be quiet
and cheerful: so St. Paul, as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing. 2 Cor
6.10* Neither can it be solid comfort, except it has his issue from a good
conscience. Indeed we therefore are not merry enough, because we are not
Christians enough.

Now if all our sufferings are thus counterpoysed, and exceeded with blessings;
have we any cause to be angry and impatient? What says Job? Shall we receive
good at the ^^nd of God, and not evil? He was content to eat the crust with
the crumme. Indeed his wife (like the wicked,) would only have fair weather,
all peace and plenty* no touch of trouble: but it is not so with the godly, who
have learnt better things. Who will not suffer a few stripes from a Father, by
whom he receives so much good, even all that he has? Diogenes would have no
nay, but Antisthenes must entertain him his Scholar, insomuch that Antisthenes,
to have him gone, was forced to cudgel him: yet all would not do, he stirs
not, but takes the blows very patiently; saying, Use me how you will, so I may
be your Scholar and hear your daily discourses, I care not. Much more may a
Christian say unto God, Let me enjoy the sweet fruition of thy presence, speak
thou peace unto my conscience, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation, and
then afflict me how thou please, I am content, yea, very willing to bear it.
Yea, if we well consider the commodity it brings, we shall rather wish for
affliction, than be displeased when it comes, Col. 1.24. For, it even brings
with it the company of God himself: I will be with you in tribulation, says
God to the disconsolate soul, Psalm. 91.15. When Sidrack, Mishack, and Abednego,
were cast into the fiery furnace, there was presently a fourth came to bear
them company, and that was God himself, Dan. 3.23, to 17, And his presence
makes any condition comfortable, were a man even in hell it self. Yea, as when
St Paul was rapt up to the third Heaven, he was so ravished with the joy
thereof, that he knew not whether he had his body about him or not, 2 Cor.
12.2. Whether in the body, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows. So
Gods presence so ravisheth the soul, that while a man suffers the greatest
pain, he knows not whether he be in pain or no, Yea God is not only with them,
to comfort them in all their tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4, but in them: for at the
same time when the Disciples were persecuted, they are said to be filled with
joy, and with the holy Gh^st, Acts 13.^2. And as our sufferings in Christ do
abound, so our consolation also ab^undeth through Christ, ^ Cor. 1.^* And
lastly, he does comfort us acco^ding to the days we are afflicted, and
according to the years we have seen evil, Psalm. 90.15. So that a Christian
gains more by his losses and crosses, than the happiest worldling by all his
immunities: at it was said of Demosthenes, that he got more by holding his
peace, than other Lawyers di^ by their pleading.

And if so; our sufferings require patience with thankfulness: as it fared with
Job.

Object. But what ever others find, thy sufferings are not thus counterpoysed
and sweetened?

Answ. What Is the reason? get but the light of grace to shine in thy heart, thy
prison shall be an Heaven: thy Keepers Angels: thy chains thy glory: and thy
deliverance salvation: Grow but heavenly minded, and thou shall be able to
extract gain out of loss: peace out of trouble: strength out of infirmity: out
of tears joy: out of sin holiness: out of persecution profit: out of affliction
comfort: For godliness in every si^^ness, is a Physician: in every contention,
an Advocate: in every doubt, a Schoolman: in all heaviness, a Preacher; and a
comforter unto whatsoever estate it comes; making the whole life, as it were, a
perpetual hallelujah.

CHAP. V.
5. BEcause their adversaries are rather to be contemptuously pitied than
maligned or reckoned of; and that whether we regard their present, o^ future
estate. Concerning the present; If a man distracted (and so are wicked men
touching spiritual things) do rail on us, we are more sorry for him, than for
our selves: Yea, who will take in evil part the reproaches and revilings of a
man in his fever? or who will be angry with a Dog for barking? (and such an
one has but the mind of a beast, in the form of a man:) Let us then do the
like, in a case not unlike: and not resemble Ctesipho the wrastler, who would
not put up a blow at the heels of an Ass, but like an Ass kicked her again.
Socrates bidding good speed to a dogged fellow, who in requital of his kind
salutation, returned him a base answer; the rest of the Company railing on the
fellow, were reprehended by Socrates in this manner: If any one (quoth he)
should pass by us displeased in his body* or distracted in his mind, should we
therefore be angry? or had we not more cause to be filled with joy and
thank^fulness, that we our selves are in better case? What need we return
railing for railing? All the harm that a common slanderer can do us with his
foul mouth, is to shame himself. For his words are like dust, that men throw
against the wind, which flies back into the throwers face, and makes him
blind: for as the blaspheme^ wounds himself by wounding Christ: so the rayler
shames himself, when he thinks to shame another. Neither have they power to
hurt us; strong malice in a weak breast, is but like a heavy house built upon
slender crutches.

True, they conceit of their slanders as the Pope of his censures, who if he
put a Traitor into the Rubricke, he is presently a Saint in Heaven; if he
curse, or excommunicate a Christian, he must needs be enrolled in hell; but we
know their words, mere Idols, which as the Apostle witnesses* are nothing in
the world; and therefore trouble not thy self about them. What need had David
to load himself with an unnecessary weapon* one sword can serve both his enemy
and him; Goliahs own weapon shall serve to behead the Master: so this man's own
tongue shall serve to accuse himself, and acquit thee. Whence those Noble
Emperors, Theodosius and Honorius; would not have any punished that spoke evil
of them: for (said they;) if it comes from lightness of spirit, it is to be
contemned; if from madness, it is worthy of pity; if from intended injury, it
is to be pardoned; for wrongs are to be forgiven. And indeed, in things that
may have a double sense, it is good to think the better was intended; for so
shall we both keep our friends and quietness.

Again he well considers the ignorance of his enemies, who being carnal,
fleshly, unregenerate, cannot discern the spiritual Objects at which they are
offended. Father forgive them (says our Savior of his enemies,) for they know
not what they do, Luke 23.34. Alas poor ignorant souls, they did but imitate
Oedipus, who killed his Father Laius King of Thebes, and thought he had killed
his enemy. Socrates being persuaded to revenge himself of a fellow that kicked
him, answered, If an Ass had kicked me, should I have set my wit to his, and
kick him again? or if a Mastiff had bitten me, would you have me go to Law with
him? And when it was told him another time, that such an one spoke evil of
him, he replied, Alas the man has not as yet learned to speak well, but I have
learned to contemn what he speaks. Diogenes being told that many despised him,
answered; It is the wisemans portion to suffer of fools. Aristotle, being told
that ^ simple fellow railed on him, was not once moved, but said, Let him beat
me also being absent, I care not: we may well suffer their words, while God
does deliver us out of their hands: for if we go on in a silent constancy, say
our ears be beaten, yet our hearts shall be free. And this heroical resolution
had St. Paul, that chosen vessel; I pass very little to be judged of you
(meaning blind sensualists:) or of man's judgment, he that judges me is the
Lord, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. and indeed, an ounce of credit with God, is more worth
than a talent of men's praises. I regard not (quoth Plato) what every one says;
but what he says that sees all things: he knew well enough, that the fame
which is derived from fools and knaves is infamy, Cato was much ashamed if at
any time he had committed any thing dishonest; but else, what was reproved by
opinion only, never troubled him: Yea, when a fool struck him in the Bath; and
after being sorry for it, cried him mercy; he would not come so near revenge,
as to acknowledge he had been ^ronged. Light injuries are made none by a not
regarding. The ignorant multitude among the Jews said, that St. John had a
Devil; and that Christ was a Glutton, and a Wine-bibber: But what says he by
way of answer? Wisdom is justified of her children, Matthew. 11.18, 19.

Let none object the Scribes and Pharisees joining with them, who were great
Scholars; for no man knows so much, but it is through ignorance that he does so
ill. Neither does our Savior enquire, what the Pharisees or Priests reputed
him; but whom say men (meaning those who minded his Doctrine) that I the son
of man am? Matthew. 16.13. Wherefore in these cases it has been usual for Gods
people, to behave themselves liked dead Images, which though they be rayled on,
and reviled by their enemies, yet have ears, and hear not; mouths, and speak
not, hands, and revenge not; neither have they breath in their nostrils to make
reply: Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7. If you will see it in an example, look upon David, he
was as deaf and dumb at reproach, as any stock or stone. They that seek after
my life (says he) lay snares, and they that go about to do me evil, talk
wicked things all the day; (sure it was their vocation to backbite and slander)
but I was as deaf, and heard not; and as one dumb, which does not open his
mouth. I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs,
Psalm. 38.1^.13. This innocent Dove was also as wise as a Serpent, in stopping
his ears and refusing to hear the voice of these blasphemous Inchanters,
charmed they never so wisely, which being so, let us hear with patience, and
say with Tacitus, You are able to curse, and I to contemn: Tu linguae ego
aurium sum Dominus, you are Master of your tongue, and I of mine ears. What
says one advisedly? When we are provoked to fight with women, the best way is
to run away. And indeed, he that lets loose his anger upon every occasion, is
like him that lets go his Hawk upon every bayt. Indeed in Gods cause the case
may differ. When Julian in a mock asked Maurice Bishop of Chalcedon, why his
Galilean, God could not help him to his fight; he replied, I am contentedly
blind, that I may not see such a Tyrant as thou art.

And as their words are to be contemned by us, so are their challenges to
fight. When a young Gallant would needs pick a quarrel with an ancient tried
Soldier, whose valor had made him famous: it was generally held, that he
might with credit refuse to fight with him, until his worth should be known
equivalent to his: saying, Your ambition is to win honor upon me, whereas I
shall receive nothing but disgrace from you. The Goshawke scorns to fly at
Sparrows Those noble Dogs which the King of Albany presented to Alexander, out
of an overflowing of courage, contemned to encounter with any beasts, but Lions
and Elephants: as for Stagg^, wild Boars and Bears, they made so little account
of, that seeing them, they would not so much as remove out of their places. And
so the Regenerate man, which fights daily with their King, Satan, scorns to
encounter with his servant and slave, the carnal man. And this is so far from
detracting* that it adds to his honor, and shows his courage and fortitude, to
be right generous and noble.

Again secondly, The wager is unequal, to lay the life of a Christian against
the life of a Ruffian (and the blind sword makes no difference of persons) the
one surpassing the other, as much as Heaven, Earth; Angels, men; or men beasts:
even Aristippus (being derided by a fearless soldier, for drooping in danger
of shipwreck,) could answer, Thou and I have not the like cause to be afraid:
for thou shall only lose the life of an Ass, but I the life of a Philosopher.
The consideration whereof, made Alexander (when he was commanded by Philip his
Father to wrestle in the games of Olympia,) answer; he would, if there were any
Kings present to strive with him, else not; which is our very Case: and nothing
is more worthy our pride, than (that which will make us most humble if we have
it,) that we are Christians. When an Ambassador told Henry, the fourth that
Magnificent King of France, concerning the King of Spains ample Dominions:
First said he, He is King of Spain: is he so? says Henry, and I am King of
France: but said the other, He is King of Portugal, and I am King of France,
says Henry: He is King Naples and I am King of France: He is King of Sicily,
and I am King of France: He is King of Novae Hispaniola, and I am King of
France: He is King of the West Indies and I, said Henry, am King of France: He
thought the Kingdom of France only, equivalent to all those Kingdoms. The
application is easy, the practice usual with so many, as know themselves
heirs apparent, to an immortal Crown of glory. And as touching their future
estate, Fret not thy self (says David) because of the wicked men, neither be
envious for the evil doers; for they shall soon be cut down like grass, and
shall wither as the green herb, Psalm 37 1, 2* This does excellently appear in
that remarkable example of Samaria, besieged by Benhadad and his Host, 2 King.
7.6, 7. As also in Haeman who now begins to envy, where half an hour since he
had scorned: as what could so much vex that insulting Agagite, as to be made a
Lackie to a despised Jew? yea, not to mention that which followed, stay but one
hour more, the basest slave of Persia, will not change conditions with this
great favorite, though he might have his riches and former honor to boot. I
might instance the like of Pharaoh, Exodus 15.9, 10, 19. Senacherib, Isa. 37.36,
37, 38. Herod, Acts 12*22, 23. and many others; but experience shows, that no
man can sit upon so high a Cogue, but may with turning prove the lowest in the
wheel; and that pride cannot climb so high, but Justice will fit above her.

CHAP. VI.
6. BEcause they have respect unto Gods Commandments who says, By your
patience possess your souls, Luke 21, 19. Be patient toward all men, 1 These.
5, 14. And Let your patient mind be known unto all men, Phil. 4.5. More
especially; Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give plac^ to the
Devil, Ephesians* 4.26, 27. From whence observe this by the way, that he which
lies down in wrath has the Devil for his bedfellow.

See, says Paul, that none recompense evil unto any man, 1 These. ^.15. And
again, Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness Romans 12.21.
Yea, says our Savior, Love your enemies, do well to the^ that hate you, bless
them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6.27, 28: And in
case thine enemy hunger, instead of adding to his affliction, give him bread to
eat; if he thirst, give him water to drink; or else thou breakest Gods
Commandment touching patience, Prove. 25.21. Romans 1^. 20* and consequently art
in the sight of God a transgressour of the whole La^ and stand guilty of the
breach of every Commandment, James, 2.10, 11. We know the frantic man, though
he be sober eleven months of the year, yet if he rage one, he cannot avoid the
imputation of madness.

Now as Gods Children should do whatsoever he commands cheerfully, and take
whatsoever he does thankfully; so God suffers such wrongs to be, that he may
exercise thy patience, and he commands thee to forgive those wrongs, that thou
may exercise thy charity, and approve thy sincerity: Many say, Lord, Lord;
but if you love me, says Christ, keep my Commandments. It is an idle ceremony
to bow at the Name of Jesus, except we have him in our hearts, and honor him
with our lives. Phraates sent a Crown as ^ present to Caesar, against whom he
was up in Arms; but Caesar returned (...) back with this answer; Let him return
to his obedience first, and then I Will accept of the Crown, by way of
recog^i^ance. God admits none to Heaven (says justin Martyr) but such as can
persuade him by their works, that they have loved him. And indeed, take a man
that truly loves God, he will easily be friends, not easily be provoked.

True, take him unexpectedly, he may have his lesson to seek (even he that was
the meekest man upon earth, threw down that in a sudden indignation, which in
cold blood he would have held faster than his life, Exodus 32.19.) but when he
bethinks himself what God requires, it is enough. When T^ribaezus a noble
Persian was arrested, at first he drew his sword, and defended himself; but
when they charged him in the Kings Name, and informed him they came from his
Majesty, he yielded presently, and willingly.

If then we will approve our selves true obedienciaries, let our revenge be
like that of Elisha's to the Aramites, instead of smiting them, set bread and
water before them: Or like that of Pericles, who as Plutarch reports, when one
had spent the day in railing upon him at his own door, least he should go home
in the dark, caused his man to light him with a Torch. And to do otherwise is
Ammonite* like, to entreat those Ambassadors ill, which are sent in kindness
and love: for these afflictions are Gods Ambassadors, and to handle them
rufly, yea, to repine or grudge against them, is to entreat them evil. And
certainly, as David took it not well when the Ammonites ill entreated his
Ambassadors, so God will not take the like well from thee, 1 Chronicles. 19. But
secondly, as the Law of God binds us to this, so does the Law of Nature:
Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you even so do you unto them,
Matthew. 7.12. Our Savior does not say, Do unto others, as others do unto you,
but as you would have others do unto you. Now if we have wronged any man, we
desire that he should forgive us, and therefore we must forgive him. Nor would
we have any man traduce us behind our backs: therefore St. Austin writ over his
Table thus To speak ill of the absent forbear:
Or else sit not at table here.
Lex talionis was never a good Christian Law. If I forgive not, I shall not be
forgiven, Mar. 11.26 So to say of our Enemies, as Sampson once of the
Philistines: even as they did unto me, so I have done unto them, is but an ill
plea. For the Law of God, and the Law of Nature forbids it; and does not the
Law of Nations also? Yes, throughout the whole world: either they have no Law,
or else a Law to prohibit men from revenging themselves.

When we have suffered some evil, the flesh, our own wisdom, like the King of
Israel, 2 King. 6.21. will bid us return evil to the doer; but the Spirit or
wisdom of God, like Elisha, opposes and bids us return him good
notwithstanding his evil. But the flesh will reply, he is not worthy to be
forgiven: I, but says the Spirit, Christ is worthy to be obeyed, who has
commanded thee to forgive him. Now, whethers counsel will thou follow? It is
not always good to take our own counsel; our own wit often hunts us into the
snares, that above all we would shun. We often use means of preservation, and
they prove destroying ones. Again, we take courses to ruin us and they prove
means of safety. How many flying from danger, have met with death; and on the
other side, found protection even in the very jaws of mischief, that God alone
may have the glory. It fell out to be part of Mithridates misery, that he had
made himself unpoysonable, All humane wisdom is defective, nor does the Fools
bolt ever miss: whatsoever man thinks to do in contrariety, is by God turned
to be an help of hastening the end he has appointed him. We are governed by a
power that we cannot but obey, our minds are wrought against our minds to
alter us. In brief, man is often his own Traitor, and maddeth to undo himself.
Wherefore take the Spirits and the Words direction. Render good for evil, and
not like for like, though it be with an unwilling willingness; as the Merchant
casts his goods over board, and the Patient suffers his arm or leg to be cut
off: and say with thy Savior, Nevertheless; not my will but thy will be done.

But yet more to induce thee hereunto; consider in the last place, That to
avenge thy self, is both to lose Gods protection, and to incur his
condemnation. We may be said to be out of his protection, when we are out of
our way which he has set us: he has promised to give his Angels charge over
us, to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91.11. that is, in the way of obedience,
or the way of his commandments. But this is one of the Devils ways, a way of
sin and disobedience; and the refore has no promise or assurance of
protection: we may trust God, we may not tempt him: if we do, what seconds
soever we get, Christ will not be our second. Where is no commandment, there
is no promise; if we want his word, in vain we look for his (...). When we have
means to keep our selves, Gods omnipotency is for the present dscharged. If
Eutychus had fallen down out of a saucy malipertnes^* I doubt whether he had
been restored by St Paul, Acts 20.9. Wastes and stray^s, are properly due to the
Lord of the soil: and you know what the Devil said to our Savior, Luke 4.6.
which in a restrained sense is true. And therefore when one in Gods stead
rebuked Satan, touching a Virgin whom he possessed at a Theater, saying, How
durst thou be so bold, as to enter into my house? Satan answers, because I
found her in my house* as Chrysostom delivers it. I am sure Dinah fell into
foul hands, when her Fathers house could not hold her: and Sampson the like,
when he went to Dalilah: and Jonah, when he went to Tarshish: and the seduced
Prophet, when he went beyond his Commission, set him by God: and many the like,
who left the path of Gods protection, where the Angels guard and watch to walk
in the Devils by way of sin and disobedience. The Chickins are safe under the
wings of their mother, and we under the providence of our Father; so long as we
hold the tenure of obedience, we are the Lords Subjects, and if we serve him,
he will preserve us. A Priest might enter into a Leprous house without danger:
because he had a calling from God so to do, and we may follow God dry-shod
through the Red Sea. Neither need we vex our selves with cares, as if we lived
at our own cost, or trusted to our own strength: but when a man is fallen to
the state of an Outlaw or Rebel; the Law dispenses with them that kill him,
because the Prince has excluded him from his Protection. Now this being our
case, say there shall happen any thing amiss, through thy taking revenge, what
may thou not expect to suffer, and in thy suffering, what comfort can thou
have? Whereas, if God bring us into crosses, he will be with us in those
crosses, and at length bring us out of them more refined. You may observe,
there is no such coward, none so valiant as the believer: without Gods warrant
he dares do nothing; with it, any thing. Nothing without it. Those says Basil
(to a great man that persuaded him to yield) who are trained up in the
Scriptures, will rather die in an holy quarrel, than abate one syllable of
divine truth. Nor would any solicit them to do ill, did they rightly know
them: for what Cicero speaks of Cato (viz. O gentle Cato, how happy art thou to
have been such an one? that never man durst yet presume, to solicit thee in
any dishonest cause, or contrary to duty) may be applied to every Believer,
rightly so styled: When the Tormentors of Marcus Arethusius (who laid to his
charge the pulling down of an idolatrous Temple) offered him his pardon, in
case he would give so much as would build it up again, he refused it; and being
further urged to give but half, he refused it: at last, being told that if he
would give but a little toward it, they would release him; he refused to give
them so much as an half penny: saying, No not an half penny; for it is as great
wickedness, said he; to confer one half penny, in case of impiety, as if a man
should bestow the whole. A good conscience being in the greatest torture, will
not give one half penny to be released, with hurt to his conscience: he scans
not the weight of the thing, but the authority of the Commander: and such have
no good consciences, that dare gratify Satan, in committing the least sin,
or neglect God in the smallest precept. The conscionable Nazarite, Numb. 6. did
not only make scruple of guzling, and quaffing whole Flagons of wine, but of
eating only a husk, or an kernel of the grape: knowing the one was as well
forbidden as the other. Will any man eat poison because there is but a little
of it? A small bullet may kill a man as well as a great one. Goliath was as much
hurt by David's little stone, as Sampson by the weight of a whole house. And Ely
died as well by falling back in his chair, as Iezabel by being thrown down from
an high window. And what says our Savior to the unjust Steward? He that is
faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16.10. He that will corrupt
his conscience for a pound, what would he do for a thousand? If Judas will fell
his Master for thirty pence, what would he not have done for the Treasury?

Alas, there are no sins small but comparatively: These things (speaking of
Mint and Cummin) ought ye to have done, says our Savior, and not have left
the other undone, Luke 11.42. Wherefore it is with a good and tender
conscience, as it is with the apple of the eye, for as the least hair or dust
grieves and offends that which the skin of the eyelid could not once complain
of; so a good and tender conscience is disquieted, not only with beams, but
moats, even such as the world accounts trifles; it strains not only at Cammels,
but Gnats also. A sincere, heart is like ^ neat spruce man, that no sooner
spies the least speck or spot on his garment, but he gets it washed or scrap't
off: the common Christian, like a nasty sloven, who, though he be, all foul and
besmeared, can endure it well enough: yea, it offends him that another should
be more neat than himself. But such men should consider, that though they have
large consciences, that can swallow down any thing, yet the sincere and tender
conscience is not so wide. A strait shoe cannot endure the least pibble stone,
which will hardly be felt in a wider; neither will God allow those things in
his Children, which he permits in his enemies: no man but will permit that in
another man's Wife or Child, which he would abhor in his own. A box of precious
ointment, may not have the least fly in it; nor a delicate Garden, the least
weed, though the Wilderness be overgrown with them.

I know the blind world so blames the Religious, and their Religion also, for
this niceness, that they think them Hypocrites for it: but this was Jobs
comfort in the aspersion of Hypocrisy, My wi^ness is in Heaven, and my record
on high. And as touching others that are offended, their answer is, Take thou O
God (who need not ^ur sin to further thy work of Grace) the charge of thy
Glory, give us grace to take charge of thy Precepts. For sure we are, that what
is absolutely evil, can by no circumstance be made good; poys^n may be
qualified and become medicinal* there is use to be m^de of an enemy; sickness
may turn to our bette^ health; and death it self to the faithful, is but a door
to life, but sin, be it never so small, can never be made good. Thus you have
seen their fear, but look also upon their courage, for they more fear the least
sin, t^an the greatest torment.

All the fear of Satan and his instruments, arises from the want of the true
fear of God; but the more a man fears God, the less he fears everything else.
Fear God, honor the King 1 Pet. 2.14, 17. He that fears God, does but honor
the King, he need not fear him, Romans 13.3. the Law has not power to smite the
virtuous.

True, many have an opinion not wise. That Piety and Religion abates fortitude,
and makes valor Feminine: but it is a foundationlesse conceit. The true
believer fear^ nothing but the displeasure of the highest, and runs away from
nothing but sin.

Indeed he is not like our hot spurs, that will fight in no cause but a bad,
that fear where they should not fear, and fear not where they should fear, that
fear the blasts of men's breath, and not the fire of God^ wrath, that fear more
to have the world call them Cowards for refusing, then God to judge them rebels
for undertaking: that tremble at the thought of a Prison, and yet not fear Hell
fire: That can govern Towns and Cities, and let ^ silly woman overruled them at
home; it may be a servant or a Child, as Themistocle^ Son did in Greece: What
I will, said he, my Mother will have done, and wh^t my Mother will have, my
Father does. That will undertake a long journey by Sea in a W^erry, as the
desperate Mariner hoysteth sail in a storm, and says None of this Ancestors
were drowned: That will rush fearlesly into infected houses, and say, The
Plague never ceizeth on valiant blood, it kills none but Cowards: That
languishing of some sickness, will strive to drink it away, and so make have
to dispatch both body and soul at once: that will run on high battlements,
gallop down steep hills, ride over narrow bridges, walk on weak Ice, and never
think what if I fall? but what if I pass over and fall not?

No, he is not thus fearlesse, for this is presumption and desperate madness,
not that courage and fortitude which arises from faith, and the true fear of
God; but from blindness and invincible ignorance of their own estate: As what
think you? Would any man put his life to a venture, if he knew that when he
died he should presently drop into hell? I think not. But let the believing
Christian, (who knows he has a place reserved for him in Heaven) have a
warrant from Gods word; you cannot name the service, or danger that he will
stick at. Nor can he lightly fail of success. It is observed that Trajan was
never vanquished, because he never undertook war without just cause. In fine,
at he is most fearful to offend, so he is most courageous in a good cause; as
abundance of examples witness, whereof I Will but instance two: for the time
would be too short to ^ell of Abraham, and Moses, and Caleb, and David, and
Gideon, and Baruck and Sampson, and Ieptha, and many others; of whom the holy
Ghost gives this general testimony; that by faith of weak they are made
strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliants,
subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the fire,
etc. Heb. 11.22, to 35. Nor will I pitch upon Joshua, whom neither Caesar, nor
Pompey, nor Alexander the Great, nor William the Conqueror, nor any other ever
came near, either for valor or victories: but even Jonathan before, and the
Martyrs, after Christ, shall make it good. As what think you of Jonathan, whom
neither steepness of Rocks, nor multitude of enemies, could discourage, or
diswade from so unlikely an assault? Is it possible, if the divine power of
Faith, did not add spirit and courage, making men more then men; that two
should dare to think of encountering so many thousands? and yet behold Jonathan
and his Armor bearer put to flight, and ^^rified the hearts of all the
Philistines, being thirty thousand Chariots, six thousand Horsemen, and
Footmen like the sand of the Sea-sh^re, 1 Samuel 14.15. O divine power of faith!
that in all attemps and difficulties makes us more then men, and regards no
more Armies of adversaries, than swarms (...). A natural man in a project so
unlikely, would have had many thoughts of discouragment, and strong reasons to
diswade him: but his faith dissolves impediments, as the Sun does dews; yea,
he contemns all fears, over-looks all impossibilities, breaks through all
difficulties with a resolute courage, and flies over all carnal objections
with celestial wings; because the strength of his God, was the ground of his
strength in God.

But secondly* To show that their courage is no less passive, than active; look
upon that Noble Army of Martyrs, mentioned in Ecclesiastical History, who went
as willingly and cheerfully to the stake, as our Gallants to a Play; and leapt
into their beds of flames, as if they had been beds of down: yea, even weak
women, and young striplings, when with one dash of a pen, they might have been
released. If any shall yet doubt which of the two (the Religious or Profane)
are most valiant and courageous; let them look upon the demeanor of the twelve
Spies, Numb. the 13th and 14th Chapters; and observe the difference between the
two faithful and true hearted, and the other ten: then will they conclude,
that Piety and Religion does not make men Cowards; or if it do, that as there
is no feast to the Churles, so there is no fight to the Cowards. True, they are
not soon, not easily provoked; but all the better, the longer the could fit in
an Ague, the stronger the hot fit.

I know men of the Sword, will deem those the greatest Cowards that are least
apt to fight. But as when it was objected to a Martyr, that his Christ was but
a Carpenters son, he aswered, yea, but such a Carpenter as built Heaven and
Earth: so we grant, we are Cowards, as they term us, but such cowards as are
a^le to prevail with God, Genesis 32.26, 28. Exodus 32.10. And overcome the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, 1 Ioh. 5.4. Gal. 5.24 1 ^oh. 2.14. which is as much
valor and victory as we care for. Tru^^ is truth, as well when it is not
acknowledged, as when it is: and experience tell us, that he who fears not to
do evil, is always afraid to suffer evil. Yea the Word of God is express;
That none can be truly valarous, but such as are truly religious, The wicked
fly when none pursues, but the righeous are as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. The
reason whereof i^, If they live, they know by whom they stand; if they die,
they know for whose sake they fall.

But what speak I of their not fearing death, when they shall not fear even the
day of Judgment, 1 John 4.17. Have not thou O Savior bidde^ us, when the
Elements shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be flaming about our ears,
to lift up our heads with joy, because our redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.25,
to 29, Wherefore says the valiant Believer, come death, come fire, come
whirlewinde, they are worthy to be welcome that shall carry us to immortality.
Let Pagans and Infidels fear death, says St. Cyprian who never feared God in
their life, but let Christians go to it as travelers unto their native home;
as Children unto their loving Father; willingly, joyfully. Let such fear to
die, as have no hope to live a better life: well may the brute beasts fear
death, whose end of life is the conclusion of their being: well may the Epicure
tremble at it, who with his life looks to lose his felicity: well may
ignorant and unrepentant sinners quake at it, whose death begins their
damnation: well may all those make much of this life, who are not sure of a
better; because they are conscious to themselves, that this dying life, will
but bring them to a living death, they have all sown in sin, and what ^an
they look to reap, but misery and vanity? sin was their traffic, and grief
will be their gain; detestable was their life, and damnable will be their
decease.

But it is otherwise with the Godly, they may be killed, but cannot be hurt;
for even death (that fiend) is to them a friend, like the Read Sea to the
Israelites, which put them over to the Land of Promise, while it drowned their
enemies. It is to the faithful as the Angels were to Lot, who snatched him out
of Sodom, while the rest were consumed with fire and Brimstone. Every believer
is Christ's betrothed Spouse, and death is but a messenger to bring her ^ome to
her Husband: and what chaste or loving Spouse, will not earnestly desire the
presence of her Bridegroom (as St. Austin speaks?) Yea, the day of death to
them, is the day of their Coronation: and what Princely heir does not long for
the day of his inst^lm^^t, and rejoice when it comes? Certainly it was the
sweetest voit^ that ever the Thief heard in this life, when Christ said unto
him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. In a word, as
death to the wicked, puts an end to their short joys, and begins their
everlasting sorrows: so to the Elect, it is the end of all sorrow, and the
beginning of their everlasting joys.

The end of their sorrow; for whereas complaint of evils* past, sense of (...),
and fear of future, have shared our lives amongst them; death is

1. A Supersedeas for all diseases; the Resurrection knows no imper^^ction,

2, It is a Writ of ease, to free us from labor and servitude: like Moses
(...) delivered Gods people out of bondage, and from brick making i^ ^egypt.

3. Whereas our ingresse into the world, our progress in it, our egress^ ^ut
of it, is nothing but sorrow (for we are born crying, live grumbling, and die
sighing) death is a medicine, which drives away all these, for we shall rise
triumphing.

4. It shall revive our reputation^, and clear our Names from all ignomi*^y and
reproach; yea, the more contemptible here, the more glorious here(...). Now a
very Duellist will go into the field to seek death, and find honor.

5. Death to the godly is as a Goal*delivery, to let the Soul out of the ^rison
of the body, and set it free.

6. Death frees us from sin, an Inmate that (spite of our teeth) will ^^oust
with us, so long as life affords it horse room: for what is it to the
^^ithfull, but the funeral of their vices, and the resurrection of their
virtues.

CHAP. VII.
BEcause Patience in suffering brings a reward wi^h it. In reason a man would
forgive his enemy ev^n for his own ^ake, were there no ^ther motive ^o persuade
him: for to let pass many things of no smal^ moment, as that, if we forgive
not, we can do no part of ^ods worship that is pleasing to him; for we cannot
pray aright, 1 Timothy 2.8. We cannot communicate in the Sacrament, but we make
our selves guilty of Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11.27. Matthew. ^.24. We cannot be
good hearers ^f the Word, James 1.21. and that it makes a man captive to Satan*
Ephesians. 4.26, 27. and many the like: If ye forigve men their trespasses, (says
our Savior,) your heavenly Father also will forgive you; but if you for^ive
not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you ^our
trespasses, Mat. 6.14, 15. So he that will not be in Charity, shall never be in
Heaven: And why should I do my self a shrewd turn because another would? Yea,
we desire pardon, as we give pardon; and we would ^e loath to have our own lips
condemn us. When we pray to God to forgive us our trespasses, as we also
forgive them that trespass against us, and do not resolve to forgive our
brethren; we do ineffect say, Lord condemn us, for we will be condemned:
whereas he that does good to his enemy, even in that act, does better to
himself.

Again, Blessed is the man (says St. James) that endures temptation (viz.
with patience) for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, James
1.12. And this made Moses not only patient in his sufferings, but joyful,
esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than all the measures of Egypt:
For says the Text, he had respect unto the recompense of the reward, Heb.
11.26. And well it might; for whereas the highest degree of suffering, is not
worthy of he least and lowest degree of this glory, Romans 2.18. St. Paul
witnesses, that our light affliction which is but for a moment (if it be borne
with patience) causes unto us a far most excellent and eternal weight of
glory, while we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things which
are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Where note the incomparablenesse and infinite
difference between the work and the wages: light affliction receiving a weight
of glory, and momentary afflictions, eternal glory: answerable to the reward
of the wicked, whose empty delights live and die in a moment: but their
insufferable punishment is interminable and endless: As it fared with Pope
Sixtus the fifth (who sold his soul to the Devil, to enjoy the glory and
pleasure of the Popedom for seven years) their pleasure is short, their pain
everlasting: our pain is short, our joy eternal. What will not men undergo, so
their pay may be answerable? The old experienced Soldier fears not the rain
and storms above him, nor the numbers falling before him, nor the troops of
enemies against him, nor the shot of thundering Ordinance about him; but looks
to the honorable reward promised him. When Philip asked Democritus, if he die,
not fear to lose his head, he answered, No: for (quoth he,) if I die, the
Athenians will give me a life immortal: meaning, he should be s^^^ued in the
treasury of eternal fame: if the immortality (as they thought) of their names,
was such a strong reason to persuade them to patience, and all kind of
worthiness; what should the immortality of the soul be to us? Alas, virtue
were a poor thing, if fam^ only should be all the Garland that did crown her:
but the Christian knows, that if every pain he suffers were a death, and very
cross an hell; he shall have amends enough. Which made the Martyrs such Lambs
in suffering, that their persecutors were more weary with striking, than they
with suffering; and many of them as willing to die as dine. When Modestus the
Emperors Lieutenant, told Basil what he should suffer; as confiscation of
goods, cruel tortures, death, etc. He answered, If this be all, I fear not:
yea had I as many lives, as I have hairs on my head, I would lay them all down
for Christ, nor can your master more benefit me than in sending me to my
Heavenly Father, to whom I now live, and to whom I desire to hasten. And
another time, being threatened in like manner by the Emperor* he bad him fright
Babies with such Bugbares. His life might be taken away, but not his comfort,
his head; but not his crown. Yea, persecutors, are but our Fathers Goldsmiths,
(says Bernard) working to add Pearls, to the Crowns of the Saints. Whence
Gordius could say to his tormentors, it is to my great loss, if you bate me any
part of my sufferings. I could abound with ^^amples of this nature. No matter
(quoth one of them) what I suffer on earth, so I may be crowned in Heaven. I
care not, quoth another, what becomes of this frail Bark my flesh; so I have
the passenger, my soul, safely conducted. And another,

If (Lord) at night thou grant'st me Lazarus boon,
Let Dives dogs lick all my sores at noon,
And a valiant Soldier going about a Christian achievement; My comfort is,
though I lose my life for Christ's sake, yet I shall not lose my labor; yea, I
cannot endure enough to come to Heaven. Lastly, Ignatius going to his
Martyrdom, was so strongly ravished with the joys of Heaven, that he burst out
into these words; Nay, come fire, come beasts, come breaking my bones, racking
of my body, come all the torments of the Devil together upon me, come what can
come in the whole earth, or in hell, so I may enjoy Jesus Christ in the end.

I might show the like, touching temptations on the right hand, which have
commonly more strength in them, and are therefore more dangerous, because more
plausible and glorious. When Valence sent to offer Basil great preferments, and
to tell him what a great man he might be: Basil answers, Offer these things to
Children not to Christians. When some bad, stop Luthers mouth with preferment:
one of his adversaries answered, it was in vain, he cares neither for Gold, nor
Honor. And when they offered to make him a Cardinal, if he would be quiet; he
answered, No. I will not betray the truth by my silence, if you would make me
Pope. When Valence the Emperor offered Basil great sums of money, and high
preferment to tempt him: he answered, can you give me money that shall last for
ever, and glory that will eternally flourish? When Pyrrhus tempted Fabritius,
the first day with an Elephant, so huge and monstrous a beast as before he had
not seen, the next day with Money and promises of Honor, he answered, I fear
not thy force, and I am too wise for thy fraud. But I shall be censured for
exceeding.

Thus hope refreshes a Christian, as much as misery depresseth him; it makes
him defy all that men or Devils can do, saying, Take away my goods, my good
name, my friends, my liberty, my life, and what else thou can imagine; yet I
am well enough, so long as thou can not take away the reward of all, which is
an hundred sold more even in this world, and in the world to come, life
everlasting. Mark. 10.29, 30. I confess many are such Milksops, for want of
Faith, and experience: that they are dishartned with Scoffs alone, but no need.
For, if they should turn their words into blows, and (instead of using their
tongues) take up their swords and kill us, they shall rather pleasure than hurt
us. When John Baptists was delivered from a double prison, of his own, of
Herod's, and placed in the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, what did he
lose by it? His head was taken off, that it might be crowned with glory; he had
no ill bargain of it, they did but hasten him to immortality: and the Churches
daily prayer is, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Yea, what said blessed
Bradford* In Christ's cause to suffer death, is the way to Heaven on Horsback;
which has made some even slight the sentence of death, and make nothing of it.
It is recorded of one Martyr, that hearing the sentence of his condemnation
read, wherein was expressed many several tortures, of starving, killing,
boiling, burning, and the like, which he should suffer; he turns to the People,
and with a smiling countenance says; And all this is but one death, and each
Christian may say (of what kind soever his sufferings be) The sooner I get
home, the sooner I shall be at ease. Yea, whatever threatens to befall him he
may answer it as once that noble Spartan, who being told of the death of his
Children, answered, I knew well they were all begot mortal. Secondly, that his
goods were confiscate, I knew what was but for my use, was not mine. Thirdly,
that his honor was gone, I knew no glory could be everlasting on this
miserable Earth. Fourthly, that his sentence was to dye. That Is nothing, Nature
has given like sentence both of my condemners and me. Wicked men have the
advantage of the way, but godly men of the end; Who fear not death because they
feared God in their life.

I know carnal men will either not believe this, or should they see it acted,
(as in Queen Macies days) they would be amazed at it. And no wonder for to
speak truth, Faith and Patience are two mi^acles in a Christian. A Protestant
Martyr being at the stake, in the midst of furious and outrageous flames, cried
out, Behold ye Papists, whom nothing will convince but Miracles; here see one
indeed, for in this fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a bed of Down,
yea it is to me like a bed of Roses: and Cassianus reports, that when a
Martyr was tormented by the Infidels, and asked by way of reproach, What
Miracle his CHRIST had done; he answered, He has done what you now he hold;
enabled me so to bear your contumelies, and undergo all these tortures so
patiently, that I am not once moved; and is not this a miracle worthy yout
taking notice of? And indeed, what have we by our second birth, which is not
miraculous in comparison of our natural condition? It was no less then a
miracle for Zacheus, a man both rich and covetous, to give half his goods to
the poor, and make restitution with the residue, and, all this in his health.
It was a great miracle, that Joseph in the arms of his Mistress, should not
burn with lust. It is a great miracle for a man to forsake Houses, and Lands,
and all that he has; yea, to hate Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and his own life to be Christ's Disciple. It is a great miracle, to rejoice in
tribulation, and smile death in the face. It is a great miracle that of fierce
and cruel Wolves, Bears, Lions, we should be transformed into meek Lambs, and
harmless Doves and all this, by the foolishness of Preaching Christ crucified.
Indeed, they were no miracles, if nature could produce the like effect: But he
must not look to s^and in competion with grace, for which consult, Phil. 3, 4.
^^m. 5.5. Phil. 4.13. Alas, grace and faith transcend nature and reason: (...)
much as reason does sense, for patience (rightly so called) is a Preroga^^ve
royal, peculiar to the Saints. It is well if Philosophy have so much ^isdome,
as to stand amazed at it. Neither is it true Christian patience, ^^cept 1. It
flow from a pious and good heart, sanctified by the holy Ghost. ^ Be done in
knowledge of, and obedience to Gods c^mmand. 3. That we (...) it in humility,
and sincere love to God. 4. That it be done in faith. ^ That we aim at Gods
glory (not at our own,) and the Churches good (...) our sufferings. 6. That we
forgive, as well as forbear; yea, love, ^^ay for, and return good to our
enemies for their evil.

And thus you see how patient suffering is rewarded, both here and ^^reafter;
that we lose whatever we do lose by our enemies, no otherwise ^^an the
husbandman loses his seed: for whatever we part withal, is but (...) seed
cast into the ground, which shall even in this life, according to our ^^^viours
promise, return unto us the increase of an hundred fold, and in (...) world to
come, life everlasting. Mark. 10.19, 30, But admit patience ^ould neither be
rewarded here, nor hereafter; yet it is a sufficient ^^ward to it self: for,
hope and patience are two sovereign and universal ^^medies for all diseases.
Patience is a counterpoyson or antipoyson for all (...). It is like the Tree
which Moses cast into the waters, Exodus 15.25. ^r as that Tree made the waters
sweet, so Patience sweetens afflicti^n* (...) is as Larde to the lean meat of
adversity. It makes the poor beggar (...) teaches the bondman in a narrow
prison to enjoy all liberty and ^^^iety for, the patient believer, though he be
alone, yet he never wants ^^mpany: though his diet be penury, his saewce is
content: all his miseries ^^nnot make him sick, because they are digested by
patience. And indeed, is not so much the greatness of their pain, as the
smalnesse of their pa(...), that makes many miserable; whence some have (and
not unfitly) ^^embled our fancies, to those multiplying glasses made at Venice,
which (...) put to the eye, make twenty men in Arms show like a terrible ^rmy.
And every man is truly calamitous, that supposes himself so: ^ oftentimes we
die in conceit, before we be truly sick: we give the bat(...) for lost, when as
yet we see not the enemy. Now crosses are either ^nderous or light, as the
Disciples or Scholars esteem them: every man ^ so wretched, as he believes
himself to be. The taste of goods or evils ^oth greatly depend on the opinion
we have of them; and contentation, ^ke an old man spectacles, make those
characters easy and familiar that ^therwise would puzzle him shrewdly.
Afflictions are as we use them; ^^eir is nothing grievous, if the thought make
it not so: even pain it self ^aith the Philosopher) is in our power, if not to
be disanulled, yet at (...) to be diminshed through patience: very Gally
slaves, setting (...) by their captivity, find freedom in bondage. Patience is
like a golden ^eld in the hand, to break the stroke of every cross, and save
the heart ^^ough the body suffer. A sound spirit, says Solomon, will bear his
infirmity, Prove. 18.14. Patience to the soul, is as the lid to the eye^ as the
lid being shut, when occasion requires, saves it exceedingly^ Patience
intervening between the soul and that which it suffers, (...) the heart whole,
and cheers the body again. And therefore, if you (...) it, when you can pass
by an offense, and take it patiently and quie^ you have a kind of peace and joy
in your heart, as if you had gott^^ victory, and the more your patience is,
still the less your pain is: for (...) light burden at the arms end weighs
heavier by much, than a (...) of treble weight, if it be born on the shoulders
which are made to (...) so if a man set patience to bear his cross, the weight
is nothing to (...) it would be if that were wanting: In a word, Patience is so
soveraig^ medicine, that it cures and overcomes all; it keeps the heart from
(...) the hand from revenge, the tongue from contumely, the whole body (...)
smart, it overcomes our enemies without weapons: finally, it is such a (...)
tue that it makes calamities no calamities. So you have seven Reaso^^ patience
there are nine more in the Original that should follow, (...) hasten to the
uses etc. An end of the second part: the Third and (...) follows.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOr the Readers good, and that the Vendor may not want sorts,(...) serve his
two penny customers: (for he meets with few that will (...) him more, be the
Book of what bulk it will.) I have stooped so (...) as to cut these small
shreds out of a whole piece of rich Scarlet. And (...) doce out so much
Ambergreece in these little papers, as may accomm^*date both the poor, and
penurious. Though I foresee the disinge^*ousness of not a few; who not
considering the worth, nor quantity (...) matter crowded in, but the number of
leaves: will offer him for eac^ two sh^ets, the price of a Ballad.
Notwithstanding in case any sha^^ repent their bargain, they shall be entreated
by some or other I presum^ to take their money again, after they have read it.

So many as would have the Original, out of which these seven Ch^pters, and
the foregoing eleaven are taken; (a Book containing as good (...) fourscore the
li^e Chapters) need but repair to the Stationers, Or (...) case the Fire has
prevented; they may be had where these pieces ar^ sold.

Then that hundreds may be undeceived, who having bought so man^ of my small
pieces, as are contained in my Christian Library: suppos^^ they have all my
Lucubrations, when they have not one half: for wha^ I have published, cannot
well be bound up in less then four Vollumes* And that the several Stationers,
that have the Coppies; may not where I am gone so serve me, in Printing them
together with Tables, (without which they are nothing so useful for Scholars.)
I think it not amis^^ to give them thereof a hint, that so they may better
inform themselves, if occasion shall happen.

As for prevailing with some one against the time I shall leave the World which
is near at hand, (should I make it my humble and universal request.) to take up
my Trade, In giving a few lines of good counsel, to those poor ignorant and
impotent wretches, that do not so much as know they have precious and immortal
souls that must live everlastingly in Bliss or Woe: that is when he shall hear
them swear, Curse, Scoff, etc. As he sees an opportunity of doing good, or some
likelywhood of stopping them in their way to destruction, whether they are
posting b^indfold, and headlong I have very small hope. Though I will forbid
the best pate alive to devise a better way for a private Christian, to express
his love and thankfulness to Christ, who has done and suffered for, given and
forgiven so much to him: or how he shall better discharge his duty to his
Neighbor, or Country, or do so much good at so cheap a rate: For hereby he
shall endeavor, and not without some hope, ( God blessing the means) the
saving of Ten thousand souls; with the expense of five times ten shillings.
Which project that ever it was put into my mind, I account the second
incomparable favor, that ever I received Insomuch that I can never enough
admire! The coldness of men's charity and love; and yet the strength (as they
pretend) of their faith, and servency in prayer. Yea, how should it other then
cut the hearts of those that have felt the love of Christ, or that have any
Christian blood in their veins; to hear him so wounded at home with oaths and
blasphemies abroad with reproaches, who is the life of their lives, and the
soul of their souls: To see multitudes go blindfold to Hell, and no man offer
to stop or check them, before they arive there from whence there is no
redemption. Yea, how should it not make all that are themselves got out of
Satan's clutches; to plot, studdy and contrive all they can, to draw others of
their brethren after them.

True some fools think me a little cracked in brain, for putting a paper into
men's hands when I hear them blaspheme the name of God, and ^ound their own
souls: But when I consider how our carnal Friends will curse us, when they
come in Hell: that we did not our utmost endeavor to stop them, I can hardly
forbear to lay hands upon a Drunkard, Blasphemer, Adulterer, Murderer, etc. to
stop him from the evil, he ^s about to execute, and to kneel down upon my
knees and beg of him, that he would not so desperately damn his own soul. As
let me ask ^ur discreet ones but this question? Had we stood by when Adam was
between the persuasion of his Wife, and the precept of his God, when the one
said Adam eat, and the other said Adam eat not, for if thou do ^hou shall dye
the death, and all thy posterity. Had it been an ill office ^o have cried out
and said? O Adam take heed what thou do? Or ^ould he have had cause to
complain of being prevented: I trow not Yea, I think it had been a seasonable
piece of high friendship; and (...) can deny it. And indeed could a man save
his brothers soul, by so doin^ (as probably and for ought he knows he may, Jude
23. James 5.10, 20 1 Timothy 4.16.) he needed not much to care, though the World
reputed hi^ a madman* and spent a thousand of their simple verdicts on him, see
(...) 12.3.

And yet as if God and Christ (as well as those graceless and pittif^^ ones)
were altogether friendless, where is the man to be found, in (...) the three
Kingdoms? That like Paul at Athens, (who was so stirred in (...) spirit, when
he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry, that he not onl^ blamed them for
their ignorance, and superstition, but he daily disp^^^ with them in the
market, and with any that he met: though he was grie^vously mocked, both by the
Epicurian and Stoic Philosophers, togethe^ with the rude multitude as a
Babbler, and a setter forth of strange Gods, Acts 17.16. to the end of the
Chapter) will so much disparage, or disquie^ himself in the open streets, as to
speak a syllable, to save a soul that (...) invaluable; and to vindicate the
honor of God, which we are boun^ to redeem with our own lives. And why
forsooth? but this, they sha^^ be sensured by the thronge as indiscreet, and
reviled for so doing.

But let men look to it, for what our Savior has plainly forewarne^ us of
Mark 8.38. will prove a dreadful Text, to a great many of (...) discreet, and
white livered Nicodemases. What I speak is not at (...) dome, I know well what
has been the product of a little good counse^^ given to me, when I was a
youth: It proved not only the saving of (...) soul, and the occasion of
composing, my many well approved of peice^ of practical Divinity, (in which
God has made my pen, an instrumen^ to serve him, and me a president without a
president: for never did (...) insufficient a dunce put pen to paper, upon such
an account, without becoming a fool in print. (But the same also has
occasioned me, (...) give a thousand pound in such Books as are most likely to
prevail wit^ sinners, and with such success, that I would not have them
ungiven for a thousand worlds. Yea, poss^ble it is, that there are hundreds
(...) in Heaven praising God, that ever I presented them with a few line^ Nor
do I slightly overlook what I have gained (though its well know^ I hate and
scorn gifts) by giving and that in a threefold respect. Nor (...) providence
of God, in having preserved me alive in a dying condition almost these forty
years. And withal, made me (the most bashful (...) other cases) as bold as a
Lion: in not fearing to discharge my duty an^ conscience in this particular to
any, be they what they will: thoug^ to the hazard of all that can be taken from
me. Though these unreaso^^able men, (as the Apostle styles all that have not
faith: 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. make me many times wish that I had the Wings of a Dove,
that I mig^^ fly away, and be at rest. Psalm. 55.1. to 9. Ier. 9.1. to 10.

Bare with me, when the Apostle himself was driven, to speak (...) more to this
purpose, 2 Cor. 10, 11, and 12. Chapters that he might indicate himself to
those, that had prejudice against his person least they should slight whatever
he spoke, or wrote unto them. 2 Cor. 10.10. What (...) speak is to the glory of
God, and for others good were I not compelled by them so to do. O that some or
other would have the wit, generosity, and Magnanimity, to lay what I have
foolishly spoken, sufficiently to ^eart.

I know how I am censured for my passion, (or rather compassion and
commiseration) and indignation, for my indiscretion in answering Scoffers, when
^hey spurn against the means to be saved, and make themselves merry with their
own damnation. Nor can I excuse my self, though I use the best wits ^ have, in
observing circumstances. For, I am (full sore against my will) too much like
Jonah for passion. Jonah 4.4, 8, 9. And like Job, ^n handling a good cause ill,
most unlike him in patience, and yet in purpose desire and endeavor perhaps
really, and practically in some other cases, and I hope in Gods acceptance as
patient as he. Nor can (...) be denied, but he that has faith or any one grace
in truth, has all other graces in the same measure with it, though not alike
conspicuous ap^arent and manifest. For which read Mr. Downams Christian Warfare
First (...) 46. Chapter 3. Section to 9. p. 614. and Printed Anno 1612. And who
^o reads the same will give me thanks for pointing him to it. But that if God
finds it meet? to deny me the gift of talking, and that Christian prudence
which were to be wished, both to humble me and to ^^^rden his implacable
enemies, that deny and refuse Christ's offer, and their own mercy. (As much
worse were it for me if I had not more to ^vercome and to humble me, then
ordinarily other men have.) who can ^avell? or if any be so minded, let them
mind well, what the Apostle ^peaks. Philip. 1.28, 29, 30. and lay their hand
upon their mouth. Job. ^0. 4, 5.

Men may think as they please, but thirty years experience (for so long ^ave I
been pudling in a Wasps nest) has taught me, that mild and gentle ^ordes, to
such Mad-dogs as fly in their Makers face, and wound their ^wn souls, as often as
they speak: may cause them to fleer and scoff, but no ^ore stir or move them,
then a soft, knock, or call, will awaken one ^ut of a dream, or dead sleep.
Yea, a mild reproof, does but encourage ^ickedness, and make it think it self
so slight, as that rebuke imports. ^o say to hardened sinners, as Ely to his
sons why did you so, is no other ^^en to shave that head, which deserves
cutting off. Nothing will cut a Diamond, but a Diamond, nothing will ease the
Plurisy, but letting of blood, Such as are sick of a dead Appoplex, must have
both stronger, and (...) the quantity of Physic that others have. But that
beef brained fellow (...) Scalleger, had his ears bored with thunder, when
nothing else would (...) it. Yea, the enchanted Ass in Lucian, returned to his
proper shape again, when he saw himself in a looking glass. And the frant^^^
returned to his wits, reputes him his best friend, that has bound beat him
most, as I have found by not a few of them, but se^ Prove. ^*

In Page 14 Line 29. For displeased in his body, read diseased in his (...)

FINIS.

