A LEAF From the TREE of LIFE, Wherewith to heal the NATION of all Strife and
Controversy, and to settle therein PEACE and UNITY

By R. Young a Roxwell Be, whose sting is as Sovereign as its Honey is sweet,
and whose Enemies have no less cause to love him then his Friends.

Sold by James Crump in Little Bartholmews, Well-Yard, and Henry Crisps in
Popes-Head-Alley, 1661.

CHAP. I.
Reverend Sir,
SOme time since I heard you upon Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, but
she would not be healed, etc. What change it has wrought in me, I forbear to
mention: But certainly Satan and the World fear they have lost, the one a
subject or prisoner, the other a ^imbe or member ever since: for whereas they
never molested me formerly; now as if I were rescued out of Satan's clutches,
that Lion foams and roars, and bestirs himself to recover his loss.

And as for my old acquaintance, they so envy to see themselves cashe^^ed, and
so mortally hate me, for that I will no longer continue miserable, nor run with
them (as I have done) to the same excess of riot, 1 Per. 4. 4. that they make
me weary of my life, as the daughters of Heth did Rebechah, Genesis 27. 46.

Yea I am so scoft at and scorned, both by Parents, Friends, and Enemies, that
it not only hinders me from doing the good I would, or appearing the ^ame I am;
but it almost beats me off from being religious back to the world.

And certainly he must be more spirit then flesh, that can contentedly make
himself contemptible to follow Christ; be pointed at for singularity, endure so
many base and vile nicknames; have his Religion judged hypocrisy, his godly
simplicity, silliness; his zeal, madness; his contempt of the world, ignorance;
his godly sorrow, dumpishness; and the like malicious and mischievous
constructions made of whatsoever he speaks or does. For my part I could better
abide a stake (God assisting me) then the mocks, scoffs and scorns, which every
where I meet withal. It is death to me to be mocked; as it fared with Zedekiah,
Jer. 38. 19. Nor is there above Hell, a greater punishment in my judgment,
then to become a Sa^^io, a subject of scorn, as Sampson (I doubt not) found.
Alcibiades professed, that neither the proscription of his goods, nor his
banishment, nor the wounds he received in his b^ly, were so grievous to him, as
one scornful word from his enemy Ctesiphon.

Yea doubtless our Saviors ear was more painfully pierced, then either his
^rows, or hands, or feet. It could not but go deep into his soul, to hear those
bitter and girding reproaches from them whom he came to save: A generous nature
is more wounded with the tongue then with the hand.

CHAP. II.
Minister. I Grant there is no such rub in the way to Heaven as this; Satan
has not such a tried shaft in all his quiver: he gets more now by such
discouragements, and the ^eproaches that are cast upon Religion, then he did
formerly by fire and faggot; for then the blood of the Martyrs, was found to be
the seed of the Church: Others (Phaenix like) springing out of their ashes:
Whereas now, multitudes of souls are scoft out of their Religion by wicked men;
many being apt with Peter to deny their Religion, when they come in company
with Christ's enemies; and with David to dissemble their faith when they are
amongst Philistines, lest they should be mocked, have so many frowns, and
frumps, and censures, and scoffs; be branded with that ^dious and stigmatical
name of an hypocrite, etc. Yea S. Austin confesses, that he often ^elied
himself with sins which he never committed, lest he should be unacceptable to
his sinful companions; which makes our Savior pronounce that man blessed that
is not offended in him, Matthew. 11. 6.

But for all that, a wise man will not be scoft out of his Money, nor a just
man flowred out of his Faith. The taunts of an Ishmael shall never make an
Isaac out of love with his inheritance. Yea for a man to be scoft out of his
goodness by those which are lewd, is all one, as if a man that sees should
blind^old himself, or put out his eyes, because some blind wretches revile and
scoff at him for seeing. Or as if one that is ^ound of limbs, should limp or
mai^ himself to please the criple, and avoid his taunts; And know this, That if
the barking of these currs, shall hinder us from walking on our way to Heaven,
it is a sign we are most impotent cowards: Ye^ if our love be so cold to
Christ, that we are ashamed for his sake, to bear a few scoffs and reproaches
from the world, it is evident we are but counterfeits, such as Christ will be
ashamed of before his Father and his holy Angels at the latter day, Mark. 8 38.
For, for the comfort of all that are single and honest-hearted, notwithstanding
all the scoffs and scorns of Atheists and careless worldlings, all their
persuasions and persecutions, they shall both lose their labors, and
themselves too in the end. Well may they intend, and also do their utmost to
flout us out of our Faith, that so they may slay us with death eternal, and
speed thereafter; (As God that regards not so much what is performed, as what
was intended, and measures what we do by what we meant to do; as in the case of
Abraham's offering up his son, and those Jews who only thought they had killed
Paul, Acts 14* 19.) but they shall be no more able to hinder the salvation of
any one whom God has chosen to his Kingdom of grace and glory, then Saul with
his Courtiers could hinder David from attaining the promised Kingdom of Israel,
Psalm. 129. 1. Rev. 13. 8. The winds may well ^osse the ship wherein Christ is,
but never overturn it. If Christ have but once* possessed the affections, there
is no dispossessing him again. The League that Heaven has made, Hell wants
power to break. Who can separate the conjunctions of the Deity? Whom God did
predestinate, says Paul, them he also called; and whom he called, them be also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30. They
shall sooner blow up hell with trains of powder, then break the chain of this
dependent truth. No power of men or devils is able to withstand the will of
God, it shall stand firmer then the firmament.

A fire in the heart overcomes all other fires without; as we see in the
Martyrs, which when the sweet doctrine of Christ had once got into their
hearts, it could not be got out again by all the torments that wit and cruelty
could devise.

CHAP. III.
Convert. BUt how should I a novice, a punio, a white-liver, shake off this
slavish yoke of bondage and fear in which Satan for the present holds me?

Minister. By well observing what the Scriptures in this case hold forth for
the encouragement of all that thus suffer. I will commend to your serious
consideration only six things, and I pray mind them well; for Virgil most
excellently and profundly, couples the knowledge of cause, and the conquest of
^ll fears together.

First observe, that grievous temptations and persecutions, do always accompany
the remission of sins. That all men, as Austin speaks, are necessitated to
miseries, who bend their course toward the Kingdom of Heaven: neither can Gods
love be enjoyed without Satan's disturbance. Yea the world and the devil
therefore hate us, because God has chosen us. If a conver^ comes home, the
Angels welcome him with songs, the devils follow him wit^ uprore and fury, his
old acquaintance with scorns and obloquie, as you sufficiently find. Godly men
are thorns in wicked men's eyes, as Job was in the devils, because they are
good, or for that they are dearly beloved of God. If a man's person and ways
please God, the world will be displeased with both: whence we are so often
foretold and forewarned of it, that we may be the better forearmed and prepared
to entertain it: All that will live godly i^ Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Ye shall be hated of all me^ and nations for my
Names sake, Matthew. 10. 22. and ^4. 9. Behold I send yo^ ^^^th, as sheep in the
midst of wolves, Matthew. 10. 16. and many the like. Whence also those many and
strong encouragements in the word, which may serve as so many flaggons of wine,
to comfort and strengthen us against whatsoever we meet withal in the world:
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 10. Blessed are y^ when men shall revile you
and persec^ute you, and say all manner of evil against you fals^y for my sake.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, ver. 11, 12* Rejoice,
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall
be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. For if ye ^e reproach^d
for the Name of Christ, happy are ye. For the spirit of glory and of God
restet^ upon you, which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is
glorified, (...) Pet. (...) (...)* 13, 14. ^o here is reward enough, for all
that men or devils can do (...) against us; which has made thousands even
ambitious to embrace the fla^^^. Your cruelty is our glory, said the Martyrs in
Tertullians time to their persecutors, for the harder we are put to it, the
greater shall our reward be in Heaven. It is to my loss (said Gordius the
Martyr) if you bate me any thing of my sufferings: See more Phil. 1. 28, 29.
Rev. 2. 13.

And so much to show, that he refuses to be an Abel, whom the malice of Cain
does not exercise, as Gregory speaks: For it is an everlasting rule of the
Apostle, He that is born after the flesh, will persecute him that is born after
the spirit (Gal. 4. 29.) not because he is evil, but because he is so much
better then himself, 1 John 3. 12. Because his life is not like other men's, his
ways are of another fashion, Wisd. 2. 15.

CHAP. IV.
SEcondly consider, That as we are every where in the word forewarned of it, so
it is not our case alone; for search the whole Bible over, and you shall not
find one holy man mentioned, without mention of something lie suffered from
ungodly men; as it were easy to instance, how Abel, Lot, Noah, righteous men;
Abraham the father of the faithful; Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Patriarchs and
Fathers of the Church; meek Moses, upright Samuel, Job that nonesuch, all the
Lords Priests, Prophets, Apostles, yea the harmless Babes, and our Savior
Christ himself did severally suffer from wicked and ungodly men: Yea never man
came to Heaven, but first he past through this Purgatory. God had one Son
without sin, but never any one without suffering. Which makes our Savior say,
^o be to you when all men speak well of you, that is, when evil men speak well
of you; for so did the Jews of the false Prophets, Luke 6 26. Wherefore marvel
not though the world hate you, as St. John speaks, 1 John 3. 13. Neither count
it strange, as St. Peter has it, concerning the fiery trial, which is amongst
you to try you, as though some strange thing were come unto you, 1 Pet. 4. 12.
For Christ and his Cross are inseparable, Luke 14. 27. Whence that distinction
of Luther, that a Christian is a Crosse-bearer. He that will be my disciple,
let him take up his cross daily and follow me, Luke 9. 23. and 14. 26, 27.

CHAP. V.
THirdly, No hope it should be otherwise, since God from the beginning of the
Creation, has preclaimed a War, enmity and strife, between the wicked and the
godly: Did you never read that Scripture, Genesis 3. 15. where God himself says
to the Serpent, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; he, or it, shall bruise thine head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. Where by the serpentts seed are meant the whole generation of wicked
men; and by the woman's seed, Christ and all his members, as all Interpreters
conclude, and other Scriptures make clear, where wicked men are called
serpents, a generation of vipers, and children of the Devil, Matthew. 23. 33.
John 8. 44. 1 John 3. 10. And as this war was proclaimed in Paradise, even in
the beginning of time, (original sin, being the original of this discord) so it
shall continue to the end of all time: When time, faith One, began, this malice
first began, nor will it end but with the latest man. It is an everlasting Act
of Parliament, like a Statute in Magna Charta. Which is the next thing I would
commend to your serious consideration: And that you may be the better confirmed
therein, see how according to the Lords prediction or proclamation, there has
been a perpetual war, enmity and strife in all ages past, is now and ever shall
be, between Satan and Christ, and their Regiments the wicked and the godly.

For proof whereof I could produce testimonies and examples innumerable there
being scarce a page in the Bible, which does not express or imply somewhat
touching this enmity. But that I may be brief, and because examples give a
quicker impression then arguments, I will only give you an instance in every
Age. As

First, to begin with the first Age, viz. the old World before the flood. We
read of this mortal enmity and strife between Cain and Abel, 1 John 3. 12.
Secondlyl, after the Flood, before the Law between Esau and Jacob, first in the
womb, the more plainly to shadow out this enmity, Genesis 25. 22, 23. and after
they were born, Genesis 27. 41. Thirdly, After the Law, before Christ, between
Doeg and the 85. Priests which he slew with the edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 22.
18, 19. Fourthly, Since the Gospel, in the time of Christ, and his Apostles;
this enmity so manifested it self not only in the Gentiles, but in the Jews,
Gods own people, who first raised those persecutions against Christ and his
members; that having beheaded John Baptist his harbinger, and crucified himself
the Lord of life: We read that of all the twelve, none died a natural death
save only S. John, and he also was banished by Domitian to Patmos, and at
another time thrust into a Tun of seething oil at Rome, as Tertullian and S.
Hierome do report: See Acts 7. 51, to 60. and 12. 1. to 5. Romans 8. 36. John 21.
18, 19. Fifthly, After the Apostles, if we consider the residue of the ten
Persecutions raised by the Romans against the Christians, which was for three
hundred years till the coming of godly Constantine, we find that under
Dioclesian, seventeen thousand Christians, were slain in one month, amongst
whom was Serena the Empress also. Yea, under him and nine other Emperers, there
was such an innumerable company of innocent Christians put to death and
tormented, that S. Hierom in his Epistle to Chromatius and Heliodorus says,
There is no one day in the year, unto which the number of five thousand Martyrs
might not be ascribed, except only the first day of January. Yea there was two
thousand suffered in the same place and at the same time with Nicanor, Acts and
Monuments, page 32. who were put to the most exquisite deaths and torments,
that ever the wit or malice of men or devils could invent to inflict upon them,
and all for professing the faith of Christ, and being holy: which makes S. Paul
cry out, I think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed
to death! 1 Cor. 4. 9.

CHAP. VI.
SIxthly, From the Primitive times and infancy of the Church hitherto; the Turk
and the Pope have acted their parts in shedding the blood of the Saints, as
well as the Jews and Roman Emperors; touching which I will refer you to the
Book of Acts and Monuments; and R^vel. 17. The whore of Babylon was drunk with
the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, ver. 6.
Which in part was fulfilled in England under the reign of Queen Mary; and in
France, where before many late bloody Massacres, there were more then two
hundred thousand who suffered Martyrdom about Transubstantiation: See
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 6. cap. 4, 5, 16. But

Seventhly, To come to these present times wherein we live: Is it possible for
a man to live a conscionable and unreproveable life? abstain from drunkenness,
swearing, profaning the Lords day, separate himself from evil company, be
zealous for the glory of God, admonish others that do amiss etc. without being
traduced, calumniated, hated, slandered and persecuted for the same? no it is
not possible: for if our righteousness do but exceed the righteousness of a
swearer, or a drunkard, we are sure to be persecuted for our righteousness, as
Abel was persecuted of Cain, because his Sacrifice was better then his. If a
man walk according to the rule of Gods Word, he is too precise; if he will be
more then almost a Christian, he is curious, fantastical, factious, and shall
be mocked with the Spirit, as if the Spirit of God were a Spirit of dishonor
and shame. Yea, in these times not to be an Atheist, or Papist, is to be a
Fanatic: as how common a thing is it to wound all holiness under the name of
Fanatic, a name so full of the Serpents enmity, as the egg of a Cockatrice is
full of poison? What should I say? the World is grown so much knave, that it is
now a vice to be honest. O the deplorable condition of these times! Even the
Devil himself durst not have been so impudent, as to have scoft at holiness in
those ancient and purer times: but now I could even sink down with shame, to
see Christianity every where so discountenanced: Our very names come into few
mouths, out of which they return but with reproaches. Amongst the rest of our
sins, O God, be merciciful to the contempt of thy Servants.

Eighthly, For the time to come: It is like not only to continue, but the last
remnants of time are sure to have the most of it; because as in them love shall
wax cold, Matthew. 24. 12. so as love grows cold, contention grows hot.

More expressly the Holy Ghost foretells, that in the last days the times shall
be perilous, and that toward the end of the world, there shall be scoffers,
false accusers, cursed speakers, fierce, despisers of them that are good; and
being fleshly, not having the spirit, they shall speak evil of the things
which they understand not: and that many shall follow their damnable ways,
whereby the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And that as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, so these also shall resist the truth, being men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, being before of old ordained to
condemnation, 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 13. 2 Pet. 2. 2. and 3. 3. Jude 4. 10. 16, 18,
19. And so much of the third particular.

CHAP. VII.
FOurthly, It would be considered, that what you suffer is far short of what
others have suffered before you; for whereas you suffer a little
tongue-persecution, your betters and such as the world was not worthy of, have
suffered cruel mockings, and scourgings, bonds, and imprisonments; were stoned,
sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword: endured the violence of fire; were
rackt, wandered about in deserts and mountains, in dens and caves of the earth,
in sheepskins, and goat skins, destitute, afflicted, and tormented: Not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection, Hebr. 11.
35, to 39. Yea, turn ^stical History, and you shall find that some of the
Martyrs were stoned, some crucified, some beheaded, some thrust through with
spears, some burnt with fire, some broiled, some brained; with many the like,
and worse kinds of death: for we read of no less then twenty nine several
deaths they were put unto. But to clear your sight, I Will give you some
particular instances of the several ways that the best of Gods people have
suffered before you.

First, You shall find, that it has been the manner of wicked men, out of
this enmity, to envy the virtuous and good estate of the godly: as Cain envied
Abel, Genesis 4. 5. Secondly, To contemn their supposed mean estate, as Sanballat,
Tobia^, and Gershom, with the rest of that crew contemned Nehemiah and the
Jews, Nehem. 4. 1, 2, 3. Thirdly, To rejoice at their supposed evil estate,
as the Princes of the Philistines did at Sampsons blindness and bondage, Judge.
16. 25. Fourthly, To hate them, as all carnal men hate the members of Christ,
Matthew. 10. 22. Fifthly, To murmr against them, as the Israelites murmured
against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 11. 1. and 14. 2, 3. Sixthly, To censure their
actions, and misconster their intentions, as Eliah did David's zeal for Gods
glory, in fighting with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 18. and those wicked ones, his
fasting and mourning, Psalm. 35. 13, to 17. Seventhly, By carrying tales of them
unto others, as Doeg did to Saul of David and Ahimeleck, 1 Samuel 22. 9, 10. and
the Ziphims, 1 Samuel 23. 19, 20. and 26. 1. Eighthly, To persuade and give
divelish counsel to others like themselves to persecute them; as the Princes
and Rulers did to Zedekiah the King against Jeremiah, Jer. 38. 4. Ninthly, To
scoff at them, as Ishmael scoft at Isaac, Genesis 21. 9. Tenthly, To nickname
them, as the Jews did Paul, Acts 24. 14. and all the Disciples, 1 Cor. 4. 9,
10. Eleventhly, To revile and rail on them, as the Jews did upon Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 13. 45. Twelfthly, To raise slanders of them, as those wicked
men slandered Naboth, confirming the same with an Oath, 1 Kings 21.
Thirteenthly, To curse them, as Goliath cursed David, 1 Samuel 17. 43. and also
Shemei, 2 Samuel 16. 7, to 15. Fourteenthly, To threaten them, as all the men of
Sodom did Lot, Genesis 19. 9. Fifteenthly, By subtilty to undermine them in talk,
that they might betray them; as the false Prophets and other enemies of the
truth undermined Jeremiah, seeking every way to destroy him, Jer. 18. 18, etc.
Sixteenthly, By using scornful and disdainful gestures to despigh^ them; as
Goliath against David, 1 Samuel 17. 42. and also those wicked ones, Psalm. 22. 7.
13. and 35. 16. and 109. 25. Seventeenthly, To withstand and contrary the
doctrine which they are commanded by God to deliver: As Elymas the Socerer
withstood Paul and Barnabas in their preaching, Acts 13. 8. Eighteenthly, To
combine themselves together and lay divellish plots to destroy them; as
Demetrius with the rest of the Craftsmen conspired the death of Paul's
companions, Acts 19. and likewise more then forty of the Jews which bound
themselves by a curse, not to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, in which
conspiracy the chief Priests were likewise assistants, Acts 23. 12, 13, 14.
Nineteenthly, To imprison them, as the malicious Priests did Jeremiah, Jer. 36.
5. Twentieth, To strike them as Zedekiah the false Prophet struck Micaiah 1
Kings 22. 24. Twenty one, To hurt and maim them, as the Jews of Antiochia and
Iconium did Paul, Acts 14. 19. Twenty two and lastly, To slay them, as Jezabel
did all the Prophets of the Lord she could find, 1 Kings 18. 4.

CHAP. VIII.
NOw to speak nothing in this place of the diversity of deaths and torture^
that millions of Martyrs have suffered for prosessing of Christ's Nam^ and
keeping of a good Conscience, though their sufferings were nothing, either to
what their sins had deserved, or to what their Savior had done and suffered
for them; for he endured many a little death all his life for our sakes, and at
length that painful, shameful and cursed death of the Cross; ye^ he suffered
every one of these two and twenty ways beforementioned, and that from his own
countrymen and kinsfolks, ye^ of the Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who
were teachers and expounders of the Law, and which sat in Moses chair. For he
was Envied, Matthew. 26. 15. Contemned, Mat. 12. 24. and 13. 55. Rejoiced at in
his misery and distress, Matthew. 27. 29. Hated, Joh. 7. 7* Murmured against,
Luke 15. 2. Had his actions and intentions mis-construed, Matthew. 11. 19. Had
tales carried of him, Matthew. 12. 14. and divelish counsel given against him,
Matthew. 27. 20. was scoffed at, Matthew. 27. 42. Nicknamed, Matthew. 13. 55. Railed
on, Luke 23. 39. Slandered, Matthew. 28. 13* Cursed, Gal. 3. 13. Threatened, John
11. 53. Undermined in talk that they might accuse him, Matthew. 22. 15. They used
disdainful ge^^ures before him, Matthew. 27. 29, 39. withstood him in his
preaching, and contraried his doctrine, Luke 5. 21. Matthew. 9. 34. Combined
together and laid divelish plots to destroy him. Mat. 12. 14. Took him
prisoner, Matthew. 26. 57. Smote him, Luke 22. 64. Hurt and wounded him, Matthew.
27. 29. John 19. 34. And lastly, they put him to death, Mat. 27. 35. And why
all this? not for any evil they found in him, for their own words are, He has
done all things well, Mark 7. 37. He has done, such was his power: all things,
such was his wisdom: well, such was his goodness: and yet crucified, and every
way abused he must b^. But it was for his zeal, purity and holiness, and
because his life and practice was clean contrary to theirs; his doctrine too
powerful and pure for such carnal hearts to embrace or endure. Now cast up thy
Receipts, and compare them with thy deservings; look upon thy deliverance from
the fire of ^^ll: Yea, look but upon thy sufferings single, and thou shall
find them nothing, to what thy fellow Saints, and Christ thy Elder brother
has suffered before thee. At a Lions Den, or a fiery furnace, not to turn
tail, were something worthy a Christian. Yea compare thine own estate with
thine enemies, and thou shall see yet greater cause to be not only patient, but
thankful. For if these scoffs and flou^s of men like thy self are so grievous
to thee, how will thine and Gods enemies endure those mocks and flouts of the
devils in hell? how will they i^dure that devouring fire, that everlasting
burning, Isa. 33: 14. Psalm. 68. 21. And the way not to repine at those above
us, is to look at those below us. But leaving the application until the
conclusion;

CHAP. IX.
F^s^hly, Consider but seriously, who they are, that have, scoff and j^^r you,
and that have persecuted the Saints before you, and mocked at heliness; and this
may serve exceedingly to support you against whatever you shall hear or feel
from them. As first, What is their Character in Scripture? are they not such as
these? A company of hypocrites, Psalm. 35. Hypocritical mock^rs, v. 16. a crew
of Drunka^ds, Psalm. 69. I am (...) song of the Drunkards, verse. 12. a sort of
vicious persons, following their lusts, 2 Pet. 3. 3. There shall come ^^ckers,
walking after their own lusts. A company of abj^ct persons, Psalm. 35. 15. like
those e^^mies, Acts 17. L^wd fellows of the baser sort, ver. 5. A rout if
profane, godless, irreligious Ath^ists and ignorant fools, that do no more
know the power, then Tu^ks and Heathens know the truth of godliness, Psalm. 14.
1. to 6. And it is a ^hrewd suspicion, that he who is a ^^^ker is an Atheist:
It well becomes him to mock at Relig^on, that denies a God: And it is evident
enough that he denies a Goa, that mo^ks a^ godliness. But secondly, Experience
sufficiently acquaint^ us what they are, and the examples before rehearsed; for
such as Cain, and the Sodo^^^^s, and Ishma^l, and E^a^, and Ha^an, and Eliab,
and Goliath, and Michal, and Do^g, and Sh^m^i, and R^bsheke^, and Abab, and
J^zabel, and Tobia^, and Sanballat, and P^s^ur, and Zedekiah, and Herod, and
Judas, and S. Paul before his conversion, and A^^nias the High Priest, and
Demetrius the silver-smith, and Alexander the Copper-smith, and Elimas the
Sorcerer: such as these I say are the men, who amongst us do the like things
that they did. And will any wise man stumble at Religion for such men's ^c^ffs
and reproaches? what better can be expected from them? What said the Orator to
Salust? It cannot be, but he that lives thy life should speak thy language;
yea, a man would choose his Religion by such men's enmity, and it is a great
honor to Religion that it has such adversaries. For as the Primitive
Christians used to say when N^ro persecuted them; they that know him must needs
think it some great good which Nero so ha^ed and condemned; so every wise man
will love Religion the better, and take it for a great honor to the Saints,
that ^ypocrites, drunkards, vicious followers of their lusts, ^^se and lewd
fellows, godless Atheists, and blind Sensualis^s are her s^^ffing adversaries:
And scarce do I know a better argument to persuade to love and embrace it, then
that such men hate and deride it: neither can it be the true Religion, which is
not every where thus spoken against, Act. 28. 22. But

CHAP. X.
SIxthly and lastly, Observe but the reasons why they do it; and this will
notably confirm and strengthen you against their (...) and s^^^ns.

Convert. Have they any reason for their so doing?

Minist. Not properly: For as the Prophet very often complains, they are mine
enemies without a cause, and they hate me without a cause, etc. Psalm. 35. 7.
and 69. 4. though they pretended many causes. So they have no just cause no^
reason to hate, censure and slander us as they do; for not vill deed can have a
good reason: yet they do it not without many by reasons and self ends. As

First, The main and most material cause why wicked men so mortally hate the
godly, and which breeds so many quarrels* is the contrariety of their natures;
being as contrary one to the other as are God and the devil, the one being the
children of God, and partaking of the divine nature, as being one with the
Father and the Son, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Gal. 3. 26. Joh. 1. 12. and 17. 14, 21, 22. 2
Pet. 1. 4. being like God i^ holiness, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Brethren of, and (...)
annexed with Christ, Romans 8. 17. 29. Members of his b^ay, 1 Cor. 12. 27. B^n^
of his ^^ne, and flesh of his flesh, Ep^. 5* 30. having his spirit dwelling in
them, Romans 8 9, 16. and being Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Jam. 1.
18. Joh. 1. 13. and 3. 5. 8. 1 John 3 9.

And the other being the seed of the serpent and children of the devil; and so
partake of his nature, as is plain by 1 John 3. 8, 10, 12, 14. and 6. 70. and
8. 44. Matthew. 13. 38, 39. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Genesis 3. 15. and 5. 3. Ephesians.
2. 2, etc. Which being so, how is it possible they should ever agree; although
God had not proclaimed an enmity between them? For there can be no amity where
there is no sympathy; no reconciling of the wolf and the lam^, the winds and
the sea; no neighborhood, no alliance, no conjunction, is able to make the
cursed seed of the serpent, and the blessed seed of the woman ever agree. For
fire and water, light and darkness, heaven and hell are not more contrary.

One blood, one belly, one house, one education, could never make Cain and Ab^^
accord, Jacob and Esa^, Isaac and Ishmael at one. Yea though they be man and
wife, parent and child, yet if they be not like, they will not like. 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15. As how many a wife is so much the more hated, because a zealous wife?
how many a child less beloved, because a religious child? how many a servant
less respected, because a godly servant? And no marvel, for though they dwell
in the same house, yet they belong to two several Kingdoms: and albeit they
both remain upon earth, yet they are governed by two several Laws, the ones
Burguship being in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. and the other being a Denizen belonging
to hell; as Irish men are dwellers in Ireland, but denize^s of England, and
governed by the Statutes of this Kingdom.

And indeed what is the corporal sympathy, to the spiritual antipathy? Can
there be such a parity between the parent and the child, the husband and the
wife, as there is a disparity between God and Satan? no certainly.

A wicked man can agree with all that are wicked, be they Papists, or Turks or
Atheists; Profane or Civil men: for all these agree with him in blindness and
darkness, and are all seed of the same Serpent: but with sincere Christians and
practisers of piety he can never agree, the religious shall be sure of
opposition, because their light is contrary to his darkness, grace in the one
is a secret disgrace to the other.

Yea let wicked men be at never so much odds one with another, yet they will
concur and join against the godly, Acts 6. 9. The Sadduces, Pharise^^ and
Herodians, were Sectaries of diverse and adverse Factions, all differing one
from another; yet all join together against our Savior, Matthew. 22. Herod
neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews Herod, yet both are agreed to ^ex the
Church. Yea Herod and Pilate, two enemies will agree so it be against Christ;
they will fall in one with another, to fall out with God.

CHAP. XI.
NOr is this of theirs an ordinary hatred, but the most bitter, exorbitant,
unlimitted and implacable of all others. No such concord, no such discord,
says one of the Learned, as that which proceeds from Religion. He that is
upright in his ways, says Solomon, is an abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29
27. My name, says Luther, is more odious to them, then any thief or murderer;
as Christ was more detestable to the Jews, then Barabas. And it was evident
enough; for the Pope was so busy and hot against Luther, that he neglected to
look to all Christendom against the Turk: which declared that he would easier
digest Mahometisme then Lutheranisme. The case of two many in our days, in
opposing the Reformation. Behold, says David, mine enemies, for they are many;
and they hate me with a cruel hatred, Psalm. 25. 19. Yea, so cruel, that it
makes their teeth gnash, and their hearts burst again, as it fared with those
that stoned Stephen, Acts 7. 54. This made the truths adversaries, give St.
Paul stripes above measure, 2 Cor. 11. 23. And the Heathen Emperors to devise
such cruel tortures for all those that but professed themselves Christians. This
made Ahab so hate Eliah, that there was not one Kingdom or Nation where he had
not sent to take away his life, 1 King. 18. 10. And this made the Papists dig
many of our choice Ministers out of their graves, that they might the b^tter
curse them, with Bell, Book and Candle. Yea, ask from East to West, from one
Pole to the other, search all records under Heaven, if ever there was the like
of the intended Powder Plot.

Neither does this hatred extend it self to this or that person alone, but to
the whole generation of the godly; as is well expressed, Psalm. 83. Come let us
cut them off from being a Nation, and let the Name of Israel be no more in
remembrance, ver. 4. 12. And the like we see in Haman, whose hatred to Mordecai
was so deadly, that he thought it too little to lay hands on him only, except
he destroyed all the Jews his people, that were throughout the whole Kingdom
of Ahashuerosh, Esth. 3. 5, 6. For the effecting whereof he offered ten
thousand talents of silver into the Kings treasury, ver. 9. 13. And of his mind
was Herodias, who preferred the head of John Baptist before the half of Herod's
Kingdom. And such another was cruel Arundale Archbishop of Canterbury, who
swore he would not leave a slip of professors in this Land.

And the world is no changling, for this age has but two many such Hamans and
Arundales, who so hate the children of God, that they wish as Caligula once did
of the Romans, that they had all but one neck, that so they might cut it off at
a blow, were it in their power. As why are not our Sanctuaries turned into
Shambles? and our Beds made to swim with our Bloods? but that the God of Israel
has crossed the confederacy of Balack, and their wickedness does not prosper.
For their studies are the plots of our ruin; and the best they intend, is the
destruction and overthrow of Religion, or the religious, or both, Mat. 24. 9.
John 16. 2. Yea, their enmity and hatred is so virulent and bitter, that were
their power answerable to their wills and malice, the brother would betray the
brother to death, the father the son, and the children would rise up against
their parents, and cause them to die; the kinsman against the kinsman, and the
friend against the friend; only for professing Christ's Name and being
religious, as himself affirms, Matthew. 10. 34, 35, 36. Luke 21. 16, 17. Neither
is it strange, for this was one of the ends of Christ's coming into the world,
as appears Matthew. 10. 34, 35. where himself says, Think not that I am come to
send peace but the sword: meaning between the seed of the serpent, and the seed
of the woman: for I am come to set a man at variance against his father, the
daughter in law against the mother in law, and a man's enemies shall be they of
his own household, Luke 12. 51, 52, 53.

Neither want we Presidents of this: For by whom was upright Abel persecuted
and slain, but by his own brother Cain? who scoft at righteous Noah, but his
own son Cham? by whom was that virtuous and religious Lady Barbara put to
death, for embracing the Christian faith, but by her own Father Dioscorus? who
made Serena the Empress a Martyr, for her faith in Christ, but her own husband
Dioclesian? who helped to burn Bradford but Bourn, whose life he had formerly
saved? And lastly, By whom was our Savior Christ b^trayed, but by his own
Disciple Judas?

CHAP. XII
Convert. WHerein consists their unlikeness and contrariety?

Minister. There be more differences between the children of God and the
children of the Devil, then there are between men and beasts: But principally
they differ in their judgments, affections and actions. How they differ in
their judgments and affections, I have shown upon another occasion. How in
their actions and practice (which occasions the greatest strife and discord) I
will acquaint you as briefly as I can.

There is nothing more common then for all sorts and kinds of men to hate,
scorn, persecute, reproach, revile, accuse, slander and condemn the religious,
because their own works are evil and wicked, and the others good, holy and
righteous. As wherefore slew Cain his brother, says S. John, but because his
own works were evil, and his brothers good, 1 John 3. 12. Why was Joseph
accused of his Mistress for an adulterer, and thereupon committed to prison,
but because he would not be an adulterer like her, Genesis 39? yea it was his
party colored coat, composed of all kinds of graces and blessings, that
formerly procured his brothrens hate. Wherefore was holy David, as himself
complains almost in every Psalm, had in derision, hated, slandered, reviled,
contemned, and made a proves and song of the drunkards, and other wicked men
which sat in the gate: but because he followed the things that were good and
pleasing unto God, and in him put his trust, Psalm. 11. 2. and 22. 6, 7, 8. and
37 14. and 69. 10, 11, 12. And lastly (for I might be endless in the
prosecution of this,) Why were all the just in Solomon's time, had in
abomination, and mocked of the wicked? but because they were upright in their
way, and holy in their conversation, Pro. 29. 27. Or those numberless Martyrs,
whose souls S. John saw under the Altar, Rev. 6. 9. killed? but for the Word of
God, and for the testimony which they maintained? And the Master himself? not
for any evil as themselves are forced to confess, Mar. 7. 37. Which examples
sufficiently prove, that that great Dragon the Devil, and these his Subjects,
are wroth with none but the woman and the remnant of her seed, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12. 17. All was
quiet at Ephesus before S. Paul came thither; but then ^^ere arose no small
strife about that way. Acts 19. 23. etc. A wolf flies not upon a painted sheep:
we can with delight look upon the picture of a Toad: It is your active
Christian that is most spighted and persecuted. As how many with us may
complain with Jeremy, that because they live a godly life themselves, and call
upon others to do the same, they are cursed of every one, and counted
contentious, Jer. 15. 10. It faring with many as it did with Caius Selius, of
whom the heathen were wont to say, that he was a good man, but he was a
Christian. Yea let but a spark of servent devotion break out in a family, all
the rest are up in clamours; as when bells ring disorderly, every one is ready
with his bucket to quench the fire: disgraced he must be for a Puritan,
Roundbead, or P^anatick, but only by Luodic^ans. Indifferency strives to dash
zeal out of countenance. And the reason is, wheresoever Christ, comes, there
will be opposition. when Christ was born, all Jerusalem was troubled, and Herod
cut the throats of all the children in Bethlem: so when Christ is born in any
man, the soul is in an uprore, and Satan with his instruments are ready to kill
in him every good motion, though it be never so little a babe. You cannot anger
a wicked man worse, then to do well: yea, he hates you more bitterly for this,
and the credit you gain thereby, then if you had cheated him of hiis patrimony
with your own discredit. Whereas, if a man will but bear them company in their
sins, drink, swea, temporize, contemn holiness, mis-spend his time, haunt
Taverns, play the good fellow, and do as the rest do; he shall have the
approbation and good word of the greatest number. Yea if none would be precise
in their actions, nor reprove others for their evil courses; if they would but
be profane and wicked, and make no bones of sin; their malice would cease, and
we should not have a Roundhead or a Pha^^tick in all the world.

Neither is Christ a sign to be spoken against of many in Babylon or Assyria,
but of many in Israel, Luke 2. 34. where Religion is professed publicly: Yea*
when sincerity is wanting, the nearer the line with any opposition, the greater
eclipse. The Gadarens but besought Christ to depart; his own countrymen drove
him out, and cast him down headlong, Luke 4. 29. And who was his greatest
enemy, but his greatest friend, even one of his household Chaplains* and who but
Jeremics familiars watched for his halting.

Yea commonly, virtue fares hardest from such as should and seem ^o uphold her;
for the chief Persecutors of Christ and his followers, are not prefest
Atheists, or Turks, or Jews, but such as hold some great place in the Church.
And intruders upon other men's right, can endure any man how bad soever rather
to live by them, then the servants of him whom they intrude upon; as you may
see, Matthew. 21. 33, to 39. where those farmers of the vineyard did not kill the
thieves, robbers and spoilers of the vineyard; but the servants, yea and the
son too; and the end of all was, that they might take the inheritance. And
indeed it has been the complaint almost of all that have written that they
have suffered most from such as professed the same Faith and Religion with them.

And so much touching the main difference between the seed of the serpent, and
the seed of the woman.

CHAP. XIII.
I Might go on, and show you that as they hate and persecute the godly because
they do w^ll, so likewise because they fare well, and are accepted before them.
As why was Cain wroth with his brother Abel, and after ^lew him, as affirms
the holy Ghost, but because the Lord had respect unto Abe^ and to his offering,
but unto Cain and his offering he had no respect, Genesis 4. 4, 5. Why did Esau
hate Jacob, and purpose to kill him, but because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him? Genesis 27. 41. Isaac's blessing bred Esau's hate. Again,
wherefore did the Phil^^^ines and Abim^lech envy Isaac? stop up his wells, and
banish him from them, but because the Lord so abundantly blessed Isaac, as
appears Genesis 26. 12. to 18. Wherefore did Joseph's Brethren hate him, not being
able to speak peaceably unto him, and after sell him into Egypt? but because
his father more favored him, and they feared he should reign over them, Genesis
37. 4, to 9. If Joseph be his fathers darling, he is his brethrens eyesore.
Wherefore did Saul persecute David, and pursue after him from place to place to
take away his life, but because he was so praised and preferred of the people
before himself? and the Lord was with David, and prospered him in every thing
he took in hand, 1 Samuel 18. 12, 13, 28, 29. David's success is Saul's vexation;
yea, he finds not so much pleasure in his Kingdom, as vexation in the
prosperity of David? And lastly (for I pass by the Elder Brothers envy in the
Parable against his younger Brother, when his Father so royally entertained him
at his return, Luke 15. 28. which is meant of the Jews envying the Gentiles
conversion, and many the like instances.) Why was Eliah wroth with his younger
brother? 1 Samuel 17. 28. but because he should be more exalted. And I doubt
whether David's brethren were more glad that Goliath was slain, or angry that he
was slain by their brother: For envy is sick if her neighbor be well, and the
good man's honor is the envious man's torment, as it fared between Haman and
Mordecai; as hereafter the glory of Christ shall add to these Reprobates
confusion, when they are driven to confess this is he whom we once had in
de^ision, Luke 13. 28. I might also apply all this to many in our times. As why
do many men's hearts rise against every holy man they meet? as some stomachs
rise at the sight of sweet meats: Why do all drunkards and vicious livers hate
the religious? and so belch out their enmity and spleen against them, in
raising and spreading of slanders as they do: but although partly to rescue
themselves from contempt, and to procure a contrary esteem by p^tting a foul,
and ugly vizard upon virtue, and decking up vice in a gorgeous and comely
attire; yet chiefly because they partake of the divine nature, and are one with
the Father and the Son, John 17. 14. 21, 22. 2 Cor. 6. 18. I might, I say, be
large upon this, and many the like, but I must only mention them.

CHAP. XIV.
SEcondly, Another cause is, their Ignorance: They shall hate and persecute
you, yea, they shall excommunicate and kill you for my Names sake, says our
Savior to his Disciples, because they have not known the Father nor me, John
16. 2, 3. and 15. 21. And again, they are an offense unto us, because they
understand not the things which are of God, but the things which are of men,
Matthew. 16. 23. And are deceived, because they know not the Scriptures, neither
the power of God, Matthew. 22. 29. Luke 19. 42. This the Apostle confesses to
have been the cause of his persecuting the Church, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who so soon as
he was enlightened with the saving knowledge of the truth, changed his note,
with his name, and preached that says, which before he persecuted. Yea, the
most ugly and monstrous wickedness, that ever was hatched or brought forth into
the world, calls ignorance mother: Had they known (says the Apostle) they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. Acts 3. 15, 17.
Father, forgive them, says he of his murderers, for they know not what they
do. And why have the Kings of the earth, in all ages ^nded themselves together
against the Lord, and against his Christ, Psalm. 2. 2. ^ut because they knew him
not? Joh. 15. 21. they see no more then the bark or outside of spiritual
things, 2 Samuel 6. 16. And the flesh (Satan's ready instrument) will be ever
sugesting to them strange surmises touching what the Reli^^ous either say or
do; as is evident by what is recorded of Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 16. of Nicodemus,
Joh. 3. 4. of Festus, Act. 26. 24. and lastly, of Paul, before his conversion,
1 Timothy 1. 13.

It is the nature of ignorant and carnal men (that walk after the flesh in the
^^sts of uncleanness, whom Saint Peter calls brute beasts, led with sensuality)
to ^^ak evil of the things which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 12. especially
in judging acts of zeal and piety, their opinion still lights upon the worst
sense, like them in Act. 2. who mocked the Apostles when they were filled with
the Holy Ghost, and hearing them speak languages which they understood not,
cried out, These men are drunk with new wine.

Until we be born again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it was (...)
be born again, Joh. 3. 4. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like
Festus, who thought zeal madness, Act. 26. 24. Until we be humble our selves,
we are like Michal, who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool,
for dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 16. Yea, to such as shall perish, or are
for the present in a perishing condition, all Religion seems foolishness, 1
Cor. 1. 18.

CHAP. XV.
THirdly, They therefore speak evil of us, and do all the evil they dare to us:
Because we will no longer run with them to the same excess of riot, as the
Apostle acquaints us, 1 Pet. 4. 4. When our affections like wild and mad
horses, are violently galloping to Hell; if the Spirit of God by repentance, as
with a bridle, suddenly gives a jerk and turns them another way, yea, sets them
going as fast in the narrow path toward Heaven: presently those our companions
in the broad way, stand marvelling at us that we break off company, and envy to
see themselves cashiered.

The Israelites, were never set upon by Pharaoh and all his Forces, until they
were got out of his land, So long as S. Paul joined with the High Priests and
Elders, to make havoc of the Church; he was no whit molested by them: but when
he became a convert, and preached in the name of Jesus, none so hated and
persecuted as he. That great Dragon, the Devil, and his subjects wicked men,
make war and are wroth with none, but the Woman (that is the Church) and the
remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ. Revel. 11. 17.

The Accuser of the Brethren makes choice of wicked men to traduce those whom
he cannot seduce as he desires; as we may plainly see in our Saviors example;
who notwithstanding he fulfilled all righteousness, and did all things well,
for in his mouth was found no guile, nor fault in his manners, nor error in
his doctrine, Which of you (said he) can rebuke me of sin? Yet the world
traduced him for a Samaritan, a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a wine-bibber, an enemy
to Caesar, and what not?

Thus they deal with the godly, as sometimes a lustful person will do by a
chaste wom^n, when he cannot take away her honesty, he will take away he
credit; brag of effecting his will with her, when yet he could never have
admittance into her company. Besides how should those enemies of holiness work
their will upon us? if they did not thus cast aspersions upon, and accus^us.
How should Naboth be cleanly put to death, if he be not first accused of
blas^phemy? 1 Kings 21. 13. and the like of Joseph, Eliah, Jeremiah, Susann,
Paul, Stevon, and our Savior Christ himself: Alas, they well know, and their
Consciences spare not to tell them that the men whom they nickname, and
asperse, are honester men, and more righteous then themselves, as Pharaah was
forced to confess touching Moses, Exodus 10. 16, 27. And Saul touching David? 1 Samuel 26. 21. yea, I know they are persuaded well of them, even when they speak
most to the contrary, we know Pilate judged Christ guiltless, but yet he put
him to death. And Festus acknowledged that Paul was without crime, yet he left
him in prison. I dare say Tertullus knew that he lied, when he called Paul a
pestilent fellow, etc. his conscience could not choose but answer him, thou
lie in thy throat Tertullus, Paul is an honester man then thy self; and the
like of our accusors at this day; but malice regards not how true any
accusation is, but how spightful. I grant that in many cases they think as ill
of us, as they speak; and the reason is, when they want evidence, their manner
is to judge of us by themselves; as it fared with Nero, who verily believed
that all men were Libidinists, because himself was such an one; and indeed
their own guiltiness is a main and usual cause of their censuring and
slandring us, for most commonly suspicion proceeds from a self defect, and a
bad construction from a bad mind.

Deceitful, ever will mistrustfull be:
But no distrust is found in honesty.
And it is a rule which seldom fails: That as Chara was worse then Noa^ whom
he derided: and Ishmael worse then Isaac whom he mocked: and Saul worse then
David whom he persecuted: and Jezabel worse then Naboth whom she defamed and
murdered: and Herod worse then John Baptist whom he beheaded: So they that are
wont to slander, jeer and persecute others, have themselves more cause to be
jeered and judged by others. Experience sufficiently acquaints us what they
are, and the examples before rehearsed; And will any wise man stumble at
Religion for such men's scoffs and reproaches?

CHAP. XVI.
FOurthly, Another Reason is, They know their glory and credit with the world,
is greatly eclipsed by such as excel in virtue: Their vicious lives are
plainly reproved, and their persons most grievously shamed by the holy
conversation of good men. And this makes them smut the face that is fairer:
blemish honest men's fame by their censuring and ^spersions; that they may
mittigate their own shame with others discredit like Potiphars wife they
pretend we are guilty, that themselves may be taken for innocent. And have they
not reason so to do? Yes, for the ^hiter the Swan is, the more black is the
Crow that is by her; and how is a vicious person discredited and made
contemptible, by the virtuous life of an holy man? We know straight lines help
to show the crooked. And it is easy to guess, that Pharaohs fa^ Kin^ made the
lean ones more ill favored. A swarthy and hard featured visage, loves not the
company of clear beauties. Its a plain case, if the Gospel should rise, sin and
error must go down; Herod thought he could not be King, if Christ should reign;
And the Pharisees knew that they should be despised, if Christ were regarded.
And this makes them watch for our halting, and withal as sharp sighted as
Eagles to spy faults in us: Briefly, They put their own faults in that part of
the Wallet which is behind them; but ours, in the other part or end which is
before them. Indeed self-examination would make their judgments more
charitable.

Fifthly, They delight in censuring and slandering us: because Satan (who is
their God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and their Prince, Joh. 14 30. and works in them his
pleasure, Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 26.) is ever prompting them thereunto, Acts 5.
3. Rev. 12. 10. For it is Satan that speaks in and by them, as once he did by
the Serpent: It is his mind in their mouth, his heart in their lips, Mat. 16.
23.

And they being his Sons, Servants and Subjects, thirst to do him what honor
and service they can. Nor can they pleasure him more, it being the hopefullest
way to discourage men in the way to heaven, quench the good motions of Gods
spirit, kill the buds and beginnings of grace, draw them back to the world, and
so by consequence damn their souls, that can be, to see that whatsoever they do
or speak; base constructions are made thereof. Hereupon that subtle Serpent
does like Maximinus who set on work certain vile persons to accuse the
Christians of heinous crimes, that so he might persecute them with the more
show of reason. True, they poor souls do not know that Satan speaks in and by
them: As those four hundred of Ababs Prophets, in whom this evil spirit spoke,
did not know that Satan spoke by them, 1 King. 22. 22. Neither did Judas know
when he eat the sop that Satan entered into him, and put it into his heart to
betray Christ, John 13. 2^ Neither do Magistrates (when they cast the servants
of God into prison) once imagine that the devil makes them his jaylors, but he
does so; whence that Phrase of the Holy Ghost, The Devil shall cast some of you
into prison, Rev. 2. 10. They are his instruments, but he is the principal
Author. Neither did Ananias and Saphira once think that Satan had filled their
heart, or put that lie into their mouths which they were struck dead for, Acts
5. yet the Holy Ghost ^ells us plainly that he did so, ver. 3. No, Eve* in
Paradise had not the least suspicion that it was Satan that spoke to her by the
Serpent; nor Adam that it was the Devils mind in her mouth, when tempted to
eat the forbidden fruit. Nor did David once dream that it was Satan which moved
him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Much less did Peter, who so dearly
loved Christ, imagine that he was set on by Satan to tempt his own Lord and
Master with those affectionate words, Master, pity thy self for if Christ had
pitied himself, Peter and all the world had perish d^ yet he was so, which
occasioned Christ to answer him, Get th^e, behind me Satan, Matthew. 16. 22, 23.
Whence we may argue, That if Satan can make the best and wisest of Gods
servants, do him* such service unwittingly, and besides their intention; how
much more can he make use of his own children and servants who are kept by him
in a s^are, and taken captive of him, at his will? 2 Timothy 2. 26. and whom he
altogether rules and works his pleasure in, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. as I might give
you instances of all sorts. Our Savior tells us, that they shall think they do
God service, in persecuting his servants, as the Jews formerly did in putting
his Prophets to death, John 16. 2. and experience shows that thousands in these
days do so; and why did Saul make havoc of the Church? but in zeal to the
traditions of his Fathers, Gal. 1. 14. There was a Monk poisoned H^my the
seventh, Emperor of Germany with the Sacramental Bread, and thought he did God
good service in so doing: So did the Powder Traitors, when they intended to
blow up the whole State. Maximinian thought the blood of Christians would be an
acceptable sacrifice to his gods. So Francis the second of France, and Philip
the second of Spain, thought of the Lutherans blood in their Dominions. In the
sixth Council of Toledo, It was enacted, That the King of Spain should suffer
none to live in his Dominions, that professed not the Roman Catholic Religion:
Whereupon King Philip having hardly escaped shipwreck, as he returned from the
Low Countries, said, he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root
out Lutheranism, which he presently began to do: professing that he had rather
have no Subjects then such. And how could this be? if Satan did not hold the
Stern.

One that formerly held it not enough to be bad himself, except he railed at
and persecuted the good; has now given ten thousand of these Books, to clear
the sight of others, who look upon Religion and holiness with Satan's
Spectacles. Wherefore such as will, need but call at James Crumps in Little
Bartholomews, in Well-yard, and have them gratis so long as they last; and
afterward (at Mr. Cripps his Shop in Popes Head Alley, also) for pence a pe^ce.
It is the usual lot of the godly to suffer for speaking of truth; but the
Devils servants prevail most by telling of lies; as when the Jews accused Paul
to Agrippa; they charged him* with many things, but proved nothing; neither
could they well undo us, if first they did not falsely accuse us; as it fared
with Jezabel touching Naboth, and the wife of Potiphar touching Joseph. We read
that the Chief Priests, Elders, and all the counsel sought false Witnesses to
accuse Christ of h^inous evils, that so they might crucify him by a Law,
Matthew. 26. 59. for innocence is no shelter against persecution.

Again, Why do all the Serpents seed censure, and in censuring ^la^der us? but
that they may incite and stir up others to do the like: Resembling those
ancient enemies of the Gospel, who clad the Martyrs in the skins of wild
Beasts; to animate the Dogs to tear them: Nor will the giddy*headed multitude
be wanting what lies in them, for they like so many fools, have not heads
sufficient to direct them; and therefore do only, as they see others do: They
are a generation that (for matter of Religigion) can sca^cely discern betw^
their right hand and their left: as it fared with these sixscore thousand
Nin^vites, Jonah 4. 11. I might hea^ up Instances to prove how* strongly and
strangely example prevails, to the committing of evil with ignorant persons,
who are Cisterns to sin, Sieves to grace: As in the Sodomites, Genesis 19. 4. 10
12. In Korah and his 150 followers: In Demetrius and his fellows, Acts 19. etc.
And the like in our times, as how many thousands do censure and blaspheme the
godly; because they hear others do so? for other reason they can give none.
Thus I might go on in giving you other reasons of their censuring and
slandering us; as one in regard of Satan, who loses so many of his Subjects or
Captives as turn believers: for every repentant sinner is as a prisoner broke
loose from his chains of darkness.

And another in regard of the World, which loses a limb or member: when a
convert will no longer accompany them in their wicked customs.

I might also make it appear, that Atheism or Unbelief is another cause, Psalm.
2. 1. to 4. and 10. 4. and 94. 5, 6, 7. John 8. 37. 2 Kings 18. 35. Dan. 3. 15.
Exodus 5. 2. Acts 17. 2. to 11. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Speaking of truth another, 1 Kings
22. 8, 17, 23, 24, 26, 27. Jer. 26. 8, 9, 11. and 38. 4, 5, 6. Amos 5. 10. Acts
17. 5, 6, 7, 13. and 22. 22, 23. and 23. 12, 13, 14. Gal. 4. 16. Misprision
another, Acts 24. 14. and 26, 9, 10, 11, 24. Jer. 44. 17, 18, 19. Wisdom 5. 4.
Matthew. 13. 55, 56, 57. John 2. 19, 20, 21. and 3. 3, 4. and 7. 24. and 8. 15.
and 16. 2. 2 These. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8, 14, 15, 16. Revel. 3. 17. Breaking
off society with them another, Genesis 39. 12. to 21. Psalm. 26. 4, 5. and 119.
115. Prove. 23. 20. 2 These. 3. 6, 14. 1 Pet. 4. 4. The serpentine preaching of
some Ministers another, Jer. 5. 31. and 8. 11. and 23. 13, 14, to 33. Ezekiel. 22.
28. Matthew. 9. 34. Mark 13. 22. John 5. 43. Acts 20. 29, 30. 2 Cor. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. second chapter. The scandalous lives of some Professors
another, Genesis 9. 21, 22. and 34. 13. to 31. 1 Samuel 2. 12. to 18. 2 Samuel 12. 14.
Matthew. 18. 7. and 23. 3. 14, 23, 24, 25, 27. Flocking after sermons another,
John 11. 48. and 12. 19. Acts 13. 45. See more Psalm. 56. 6. and 59. 2, 3.
Matthew. 23. 13, 15. Luke 11. 52. John 11. 18. and 12. 10, 11. Revel. 12. 17. as
they make them: but I hope I have said enough: Only a Word more by way of
caution; set not your wit to theirs, if they revile you, revile not you again;
but pray for them, as the Prophet for the Syrian Army, 2 Kings 6. 20. Lord
open the eyes of these men that they may see. Or as Stephen for his enemies,
Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7. 60. Or as Christ for his
murderers, Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Yea, let you and I and all that suffer from them send down water from our
compassionate eyes, and weep for them by whom we bleed: And well we may, for
their case has been ours; we were by nature the seed of the serpent; if we are
now changed to be of the woman's seed, whom may we thank for it? not our selves:
God found nothing in us but enmity, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Romans 7. 18, 25. And whereas
he might have left us in that perishing condition (being bound to none) and
have chosen them; he has of his free grace adopted us, and (for the ^resent)
left them: What Is the reason? surely no reason can be given, but O the depth!
Only this is sure, It is a mercy beyond all expression! O my soul, thou have
not room enough for thankfulness!

FINIS.

