Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THE Work we here undertake is that of promoting profitable Truths in the
World, beginning with the least Essays, and persisting until we conclude in
that, wherein the Happiness of this Nation's Inhabitants chiefly consists, sc.
Health, Riches, and Long Life; for be assured, That he who intends to come to
the Top of the Ladder must not begin where he should end; but first take the
lowermost Range, and so proceed gradually until he has raised himself to the
Pinnacle of Fame, which is only set up for those, that were Laborers in
erecting the Temple of Truth, and not for such, who never laid a Foundation
Stone, nor indeed know any Ground to set their Building or Ladder on; therefore
from such we cannot expect any thing more than what their Airy Notions will
lead them to, of which there be as many different ones as there are
Constitutions, nay I had almost said Faces: So that at this rate we might
justly question how we should know Truth; seeing that most Men have their
different Opinions concerning the same, and so accordingly state their
Doctrines; so that from the great multiplicity of Notions, it is very difficult
to find the center thereof.

But seeing Demonstration is that, which undeniably solves the Question; we
shall therefore recommend it as a sure Basis, for all the Judicious Inquirers
to erect on; and in and among many profitable Arts, we shall give our
Experience and Observation according to the same, concerning that of Brewing.
For the right ordering of those things, which we take into our Bodies, whether
Meats, Drinks or others, is that wherein the Health of Man in great part
consists; for if these are so prepared, as to remain in their nauseous, austere
Qualityies, they soon Corrupt, Putrify and Mould, and being taken in, must by
consequence leave in the Bodies some Stains of the same, for being constantly
taken as Nourishment, they will soon demonstrate their evil effects, by making
a Crasy and Diseasy Body; but on the contrary these being so prepared, as to be
in themselves Durable, Brisk, and internally Healthful, must contribute of the
Sane to those that are thereby nourished: Now Experience shows us, that
Decoction and Fermentation is that which brings Maturity and Ripeness unto
Beings; for Example, take any of the most Crude and Raw Fruits, yet are they so
macerated by Decoction, as to be soon brought to a nourishing Quality; for the
Wild and Crude Gass is by Decoction sent off, and the generous Sulphurs the
nearer Concatinated; so is it here in the Art of Brewing, for was not the Grain
first moistened, heated and fermented, it would not admit of its Generous,
Internal and Friendly Nature to come into the Liquors, neither could it be so
fully obtained, but by the right Preparation, sc. Decoction of the Liquor or
Menstruum, which must extract the same, that being the first degree to
exaltation; in which Action the true Internal Tinctures are obtained: Now
Tincture demonstrates Maturity and Health, being endued with the most lively
Virtues, as may be seen by that of the Blood; and it is from this, that the
Oak, Cedar and Gold receive their Durability, as may be demonstrated by their
Sulphurs separated; but seeing this is largly shown in our Spagyrick Philosophy
asserted, we shall omit it here, and proceed to these following Considerations,
whereby the Drift of our Intention may be the better conceived, and the Truth
of our Doctrines confirmed.

The first is the Action of the General Spirit, which is in perpetual Motion
and Circulation, in order to convey Life unto Being: Now according to the
Nature of the Matrix, and the Internal Decoction of the Form, the multiplicity
of Natures do proceed, and by the various Inbibitions, which is a Decoction and
Evaporation of the same, comes the various Degrees of Exaltation, without which
there could be no Durability: Now that things may be so prepared, as to be made
more apt to produce the greater increase, is plain by the Cuntry Man's Dunging
and Manuring his Land, and the burning up of Stubble and Gause, by which the
Crude Sulphurs are destroyed, and the Internal Saline Virtues manifested, which
greedily attract the Universal Spirit, being opened for Nature the freelier to
work therein; therefore is the Dunging the Land with Calx and Ashes wonderfully
Philosophical, and we know such a way thereby, as to better the Land 10 per
Cent.

And again we see, That Nature makes various Degrees of Concoction, by each of
which the Nourishing Virtues are bettered: You have an Example of this in Man;
for by the first Concoction the Food is made Chylc, by a higher one, Blood, and
as it is inspired with the Vital Flame so does the pure and truly Sublime
Spirits rarify themselves for the Vital Nourishment, which indeed is the
highest degree of Separation and Concoction, whereby the seed is spiritualized
and made the Quintessence of all, to remain in its proper Vessels for another
Generation: Therefore we will state the Action of Concoction, as it naturally
stands, to be threefold: By the First things are made Pure; by the Second more
Pure; and by the Third the Purest of all; therefore do we lay down Decoction
and Fermentation, as the only Door to Perfection, both in Nature and Art,
whatever unadvised Men may say to the contrary.

Again, another principal one is the Excellency, Fragrancy and Durability of
these Liquors, which Nature so bountifully furnishes us withal in those
Climates, where the Sun has sufficiency of Heat to exhilerate and warm the
Fruits, and fully to extract from thence their superfluous Moisture; their
Durable, Saline and Homogeneous Parts being radically united by Decoction, as
is evident in that of Spanish Wine, seeing it admits of no Argel; and it is by
these Degrees of Warmth in Decoction, that its generous and balsamic Nature
proceeds, so as to make glad the Heart of Man. And furthermore we see, That few
Vegetables or Minerals, without Decoction or Fusion will give forth their
prestant Vigor or Form, by which their divided Parts are collected.

So then this only remains at this Time, That gentle Decoction no way destroys
nor evaporates the Internal and Friendly Virtues, but rather exalts the same,
even in the ripest Fruits, as is plainly to be demonstrated by New Wine or
Beer, being concentrated by Evaporation of its Moisture, which by a due
quantity of Liquor may be made into Beer or Wine again, as the famous Radolphus
Glauber shows, which is confirmed by our daily Experience; and that Decoction
adds Substantial Virtues to Beings, both in the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral
Kingdoms, as by a multitude of Examples we can at any Time demonstrate,
therefore now omitted, Brevity being here designed.

We therefore from hence recommend this True Art of Brewing, and the excellency
of Liquors thereby prepared, really proceeding from Decoction and Fermentation,
by which they are rendered capable of Warming, Strengthening and Nourishing our
Bodies, and also of its durability too; for Experience shows us, That Beer ill
brewed will not admit of Transportation, for it soon takes a Ferment by the
Sea, and so sours and ropes: When on the contrary well brewed Beer may be
transported to the East Indies; for having a Body and Ripeness withal, the
Ferment of the Sea exalts it so, that it becomes in the end like Mum in
comparison to the former, and will remain in its full Goodness many Years; and
being Distilled, will give the most friendly Spirit, that can be by the Art of
Man prepared; for its Essential Sulphur is radically united and exalted:
Therefore (ye noble English Hearts) accept of Truth, though by the most
despiseable Instrument delivered, for this is that which shall stand us all
most in stead in the Day of Trial; for though the Winds beat and the Storms
ascend, yet shall its Foundation remain firm, as being built upon a sure Rock;
when as those founded upon the Sands shall not be able to bear the Storm or
Tempest; therefore that our Foundation may be rightly established is the Desire
of him who recommends his Labors to your candid Acceptance, and himself to the
Protection of Almighty God, who has hitherto preserved him in a Perverse
Generation from falling into the Pit of Error; which that you may all be
preserved from, is the Desire of him, who is,

Your sincere Friend, in all Christian Love, W. Y. Worth.
From the Accademia Spagyrica Nova.
The General Contents of the Chapters of this Book.
CHAP. I. IN which we treat of the Art in general, as also of the right way of
Manuring Land, and the Sowing and Planting thereof, for the greatest Advantage,
even 10. per cent. CHAP. II. In which we treat of the right way of Brewing Beer
and Alt in general, so as to make them the most Durable and Virtuous. CHAP.
III. In which we treat concerning the way used in Brewing, in order for
Distillation. CHAP. IV. In which we treat of Fermentation, the ordering of the
Vessels, the manner of Tunning, ^ and some necessary Rules, whereby the Beer
may be long preserved. CHAP. V. Wherein we treat of Clearing of Beer, and
Restoring such as is Sour and Decayed, so as to render it Drinkable. CHAP. VI.
In which we treat of Making several Physical Drinks, together with their
Virtues and Use; showing the right way of Bottling Beer. POSTSCRIPT. Containing
several Useful Considerations concerning Thames-Water, etc.
The particular Contents or Chief Heads of the Matter contained in this Book.
OF the Original of Brewing 1 From whence the Making of Malt had its Original 2
The way of Dressing and Manuring Land for the greatest increase 4 How Cider,
Wine and other Liquors might become very plenty in England 10 Beer being not
well boiled soon Putrisies and Ropes 13 and 20 The Office of Water as the
Menstruum of the World 15 The crackling or sighing of the Water is nothing else
but the separating the Wild Gass, which must be separated before the Medicinal
Virtues can be obtained 16 and 45 The Right and Natural way of Preparing the
Liquor or Menstruum, so as to extract the full Virtue of the Grain 18 How
Water, being Cold and Moist is altered into a more Hot and moist Nature, by the
Addition of Vegetables in Decoction 19 The Air rarifies and gives Spiritual
Life to Beings 21 How Water is purged by Sand 22 How Water assumes to it self
the diverse Mineral Tastes 23 What those Qualities are by which Waters are made
more Salutiferous 24 How that Diversities of Water will cause Diversity in
Beer, made from one and the same Grain 26 Rules to know how far your Water will
bear Decoction, so as to make good Beer 27 The properest Time to take Water in
for Brewing 28 The wild Gass in Water being not separated, is that which not
only causes Beer to Corrupt, Rope and Sour, but also causes most Diseases in
the Body, even Sourvy, Gout and Stone, etc. 29 Diseases have their first
Original in the Spirit 33 That the Gass remains in Beer undecosted 34 Tincture
manifests Health, and cures many Diseases 35 That no Disease proceeds from
well-boyl'd Beer 36 Decoction and Fermentation is the Foundation of Nature and
Art 39 The Concentration of Beer for Transportation 43 The Extract of Malt is
the Mummial Balsam thereof 44 That the Gass is the Egyptian Dragon 47 How Salt
Waters are made Fresh 49 How Nauceous Waters are made Good 51 The Author's way
of Brewing 52 How to brew Double Beer and Ale, and their Excellency 54 The way
of Brewing for Distillation 56 What Quantities may be extracted from a Quarter
of Malt 61 A good Drink made from Molasses 62 The best Mum from malted Wheat 63
A good Drink made from Oats, Beans, Buck-wheat, or Liquor of Peech ibid. That
Wormwood may well supply the place of Hops 66 The Signature of Herbs must be
minded 68 The Author's Recommendation of Spagyrical Medicines for the Use of
the Diseased 72 The various Uses of Signatures 73 The Preparation of the
Quintessence of Malt, and its Use, for the bettering of Beer 79 The Office of
Fermentation 82 The Season of the Year must be minded for setting of Tuns in
Fermentation 86 Glauber's Sal Mirabilis, or our Sal Panaristos makes an
Artificial Fermentation without Yeast 89 The way to cleanse the Vessels, and
sweeten those that are Fusty 90 The old Error concerning the Sap in Trees,
corrected, by sherring that it does not return to the Root, nor congeal in the
Tree as Sap, but is really converted into the more essential Parts of the Tree
93 The Use of an Hppocrate's Sleeve, or a Flannel Bag, in cleansing Beer and
Ale 105 The way to Clear and Refine Beer 107 The way to make Sour Beer
drinkable, and to give it durable Qualities 109 How to make several Physical
Drinks 111 A Physical Ale against the Scurvey, Dropsy and other Diseases 115
The best way of Bottling Beer and Ale ibid. Considerations on the Thame's-Water
117 Some convenient Additions to Wormwood Drink 128
Books Printed for John Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MEdicina Practica: Or, Practical Physic: Showing the Method of Curing the
most Usual Diseases happening to Human Bodies. As all Sorts of Aches, Pains,
Apoplexies, Agues, Bleeding, Fluxes, Gripings, Wind, Shortness of Breath,
Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, Abortion, want of Appetite, Loss of the Use of
Limbs, Cholick, or Belly-ach, Apostems, Thrushes, Quinsies, Deafness, Bubo's,
Cachexia, Stone in the Reins, and Stone in the Bladder: With the Preparation of
the Praecipiolum, or Universal Medicine of Paracelsus. To which is added, The
Philosophic Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Kalid Persicus, Geber Arabs,
Artefius Longaevus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Bachon, and George Ripley; all
translated out of the best Latin Editions, into English, and carefully Claused,
or divided into Chapters and Sections, for the more Pleasant Reading, and
Easier Understanding of those Authors. Together with a singular Comment upon
the first Book of Hermes, the most Ancient Philosophers: The whole completed
in three Books, by William Salmon, Professor of Physic, living at the Blue
Ball by the Ditchside, near Holborn-Bridg.

The French Gardener, instructing how to Cultivate all sorts of Herbs for the
Garden; an accomplished Piece: Translated into English by J. Evelin, Fellow of
the Royal Society.

An Exact Journal of the Victories obtained by their Majesty's Forces in
Ireland, under the Command of General Ginkle, to the Surrender of Limerick.

Mr. Boyle's Works, viz. 1. Of Nature. 2. Final Causes. 3. Martyrdom of
Theodora and Dydimus. 4. Christian Virtuoso. 5. Experimenta and Observationes
Physicae, being a Collection of Natural and Physical Experiments; with a
Collection of Strange Reports.

Mr. Boyle's Funernal Sermon; preached by the Bishop of Sarum: As also his
Elegy.

CHAP. I. In which we treat of the Art in General, as also of the right way of
Manuring Land, and the Sowing and Planting thereof for its greatest Improvement.
IN this Chapter we shall treat of Art in general, and principally of the
Office of Water, and Manuring of Land, together with the Definition of Brewing:
Brewing, according to the best Sense, may be understood to be The Art of making
Liquors or Drink; and that by Decoction, which is properly to be understood
Evaporation, not of the whole Substance, but only of the heterogeneous
Particles, and a Concatination or linking together of the more homogeneous
ones, so as to make them the more generous and friendly to Human Nature.

Now, as to the Invention of this Art, it is very Ancient, and has a Physical
Root, from the Word Coquo, to boil, or to Infuse or Digest Species in Water,
thereby to extract their Virtues, and make them Medicinal; such are the
Decoctions generally prescribed: And we make no doubt, but that of making Beer
was a Physical Invention, though not prescribed, nor perhaps known to the
Ancients, although one of late says, It Is not the smallest part of Chemistry,
when indeed it has not the least adherance to the Word [Chymistry] which had
its Original from Alchymidus, a Jew, who had the Art of Transmutation, thence
called Alchymy or Chemistry; what the Word signifies is plainly shown in the
Authority of Language, sc, to be a dissolving of Metals, and an extracting of
their Quintessence: When as that of making Malt is only an artificial
Fermentation, in order to manifest the Calidum innatum: And why any should say,
That it had its first Invention in Egypt, I cannnot conceive, seeing the Art of
making Beer has not been of so long continuance, and that Basilius, that
famous Philosopher, quotes it not from Egypt or Greece, but cites and describes
the making of Malt from England, as may be seen in his Triumphant Chariot of
Antimony; and therefore England may doubtless have the Honor of being the
first Authors of making Beer and Ale, and therefore let her continue the same,
in making the best, seeing Europe affords not better Grain, nor better Water to
Brew, Decoct or Extract the Virtue withal. Now although the Art of Decoction is
ancient, whence the Art of Brewing had its Original, yet do we not say that
this is so too; but it is no matter whence it did proceed, or how old the
Invention is, seeing it is so useful an one, that thereby Drinks are made more
generous, than they would by Nature be; the better the Grain is, and the more
kindly the Malt is made, so as to be Malt indeed, the better will the Beer and
Ale spend; and seeing all these are necessary to be touched at, we shall begin
first with the Foundation thereof, sc. the Manuring of Land, seeing it must be
from Good Land that Good Grain must proceed, and consequently the most
Plentiful Crop.

The way of Dressing and Manuring Land, which hitherto has been used in
England, is that of burning up the Stuble and Gause, breaking and mixing the
Ashes thereof with the Earth; as also a Fatting and Supplying of Land with
Horse or Cowdung, Fat Marle, Chalk, and more principally Lime; and of later
Years, for Cold and Moist Ground, Soot is highly esteemed and much used, and
not without good Reason, seeing it contains a Nourishing Fatness: Now from
these we shall make our Observations, what that is in all or any of these, that
Warms, Supplies and Nourishes the Earth with Food, answerable to that, which is
daily wasted in Multiplication and Vegetation; and though the Earth it self, as
it is a Passive Domicil or Matrix of Generation does not deminish one Grain
either in Ponderosity or Corpora^ity, as Helmont has demonstrated by calcined
Earth, in which a young Tree was set, and after its being grown to a
considerable height and Stature, the Earth still remained the same in pondus as
before; yet in all this it contains an Invisible Spirit, which is exhausted;
and without a daily Supply, as well from Celestials as Terrestrials, the
Archeius, the red Man, the Servant of Nature, could not have any Matter to work
on; neither could the Sperm be mixed or sublimed to the Superficies of the
Earth for the nourishing of Vegetable Growths; and therefore is not the Earth
improperly called Magnesia, seeing it so greedily attracts the invisible oily
Life from Rains and Dews, and that joining to the Fatness of the Earth, makes a
great quantity of Salt Nitre by the Heat of the Sun, and the greater Quantity
of Salt Niter there is in the Earth, by consequence the greater quantity of
Corn grows and increases, this, as Sandivogius says, is done daily: So that
it is the fatter Saline and Sulphurous Qualities in the Earth that nourish all
things; and, as we have said in our Britannean Magazine of Wines, Lime by the
Acid Juice of Vegetables, made as Glauber prescribes, will produce great
Quantityes of Niter; and therefore of wonderful and principal Service for
manuring of Barren Lands; and dung of Cows and Horses, by the several
Retrogradations of Nature, produces the same effect, for great quantityes of
Niter are found where such Fatness abounds; and therefore, I say, That Land may
by Art be yet more enriched ten per Cent. for seeing Nature makes use of these,
Art may in great sufficiency supply her, by adding such things as will increase
the Central Sal Niter; which the Lime made from Muscles, Cockles or other
Sea-Shels abundantly does; as also the Sulphurous Spirit of Stone-Cole, but
more principally the Sulphurous Spirit of the General Magnesia, which in plain
Terms is Sand Drift distilled and burned to Ashes, and those imbibed and
moistened with the Mummial Life, which being mixed with the Ground will
abundantly fertiliate the same, not only to increase its Goodness ten per Cent.
but also to cause decaying Growths to Renew and vegetate afresh; and this may
be had in great Quantity, sufficient to supply, seeing the Subject in England
does so plentifully abound: And that to the present bettering thereof, seeing
Art prepares it ready for Nature to work in, whenas things of a more inferior
Order, as Lime, Dung, etc. must be waited on, till Nature has prepared the
nourishing Virtues that must proceed therefrom; for Calx is too dry, and by
its great Heat will burn up many tender Growths, as may be seen, where it is
used in Gardens, for it immediately burns up the very Root of the Flowers; but
after it has layn to mellow, and is fatted with the Sulphurons Quality, then
does it wonderfully cause increase, and better in the second or third Year than
the first; and why then may not Art prepare and imbibe these Calxes with a
Sulphur, fit for Nature to work in, seeing this is all that she does by length
of Time? Again, in Dung, that Rich and Profitable Soil, in that it abounds with
such great Quantityes of Sulphurous and Excrementous Fatness, yet the Urinous
Spirits therein contained must be exhaled or drained away, or else 'twill prove
as destructive to Young Growths as fresh Calx; for Experience in my own Garden
has taught me, that Dung new made has destroyed and caused several famous
Flowers to die, perish and decay, whenas that of Age has caused them to
increase in Largness and Beauty; therefore do they in Holland let their Dung
rot, putrify and corrupt, and thoroughly die, as being put in such Places where
the Urinous Spirits may freely run therefrom: And therefore seeing that it is
the Sulphurous Saline and Balsamic Qualities, which only nourish; I advise,
That such may be searched after and used more generally, and especially by such
as will be curious in the Improvement of their Lands; and if the Inhabitants
will come to the Use of the Shells, then let them also use the Acid Juice of
Vegetables therewith, or in place thereof Soot, gently dried on a Kill, and
they shall not fail of having that Increase, which will abundantly outpay their
Cost and Labor, for by the Variation of the Grain you may yearly expect a
Crop. Also it is observable, That Orchards and Vinyards so ordered, as well as
Fields, will not only bring forth the Kernel into a Shrub, but also yield the
best Soil for raising of Nurseries, as also for dunging Orchards and Gardens;
for though Earth, and Dung, and Fat Sandy Mold mixed together is good, yet not
comparable to the Calx, prepared as prescribed; and feeing that Land which is
proper for Corn, Rye, Barley, Oats and Beans, is also most proper for Orchards.
Why may we not improve that Wast Land of Divisions which are in Fields, wherein
the Landmark is set, and make the same of different Fruits, that so those
excellent Liquors of Cider and Perry may as plentifully abound in England as
Wines in many Foreign Parts, or Orange Trees in Italy. But here the Landlord
may object and say, This will not only encourage Thieves, but also cause our
Land to be trod and marred: But in answer to this we say, That the universality
of Consent in the general Use thereof, would make Fruit so common, as not to be
coveted with a thievish Eye. And again, a Law might be provided, as a
Punishment for any Offense or Breach of this kind: Seeing it is so useful, that
this may serve well as a Fence for the Corn against many a bitter Storm: And if
the Trees are kept well pruned, and not to spread, their Dropings can be no
ways detrimental to the Grain, seeing we have seen Examples of the like Nature
in Foreign Parts: This may not seem unpracticable, though strange to many, but
seeing Orchards, Vineyards, and their Improvements, are treated of in their
proper Place, I shall omit it here, and at present leave every Man with that
Opinion, which best pleases himself; seeing our whole Drift and Degsin is only
and alone to promote that which the great and noble Hearts might so encourage,
as to make Britain become the Glory of all the European Parts: Nay, I might
have said the Garden of the World for Plenty and Riches, being in it self so
healthful and well-tempered a Climate; but of this more at large in the other
Volumes of our Historia nova de Britanniae Gloria interna and Thesauro Celato;
now the Grains and Fruit being sown and ripened, we shall come to touch at
that, whereby Art advances the same to a more prestant Vigor: It Is said in our
Britannean Magazine of Wines, That all Fruits must be gathered in dry Weather,
otherwise they will soon grow musty and rot. And again, all Fruits being taken
from their Stems, are to lie on Heaps to sweatand dry again, and so they become
more ripe and fit for the Press, and will yield abundantly the more generous
Liquors. And again, all Grain must receive an Internal Ferment by being malted
or melted by a kindly wetting or yoting thereof, and then lying in Heaps to
heat, and then flowered and constantly turned; and it is observable, that the
Fermentation must not be too violent, lest it run to Beard and Husk, and after
all it must be Killed and Dried; in which Preparation all the superfluous
Moisture is evaporated, and its Substance rendered durable; for otherwise
'twould be subject to corrupt and change: And seeing we have proceeded thus
far, in preparing and fitting the Grain, by a fermentative Motion, and the
Action of Heat, why may not the same be as really necessary in Decocting and
Brewing of Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, seeing, that, as we have said in the
Preface, is so really necessary, in order to make them more generous and
agreeable to Human Bodies.

But now, seeing by the aforesaid Preparation, that the Grain is not only
fitted and prepared for the giving forth its nourishing Virtues, but also in
great measure exalted, being separated from those crude, raw and Phlegmatic
Spirits, which naturally adhere thereunto: Therefore is there is a Defect in
Beer, Ale, or other Liquors, so that they putrify, rope, sour and stink, this
proceeds not as a Defect from that of the Grain, so much as of the Menstruum or
Liquor, sc. Water, by which the Virtues of the Grain or Malt are extracted,
that being the Menstruum of the World: But as it is an Element, and the
Inferior Waters, it is liable and subject to the Curse, as all other things be;
and therefore has Parts interwoven therewith, which have not affinity with the
essential Purity thereof: For as the Philosophers say, every thing carries its
Life and Death about its own Neck: And if so, consequently its Corruptions,
which we can plainly demonstrate in and by Universal Principles, that this
Element is not Destitute tute of, and much more in those Places where the
Central Archeius or Fire of Nature does not warm and stir it up into Activity,
by that living Spirit which rarifies and purifies the same, for by Motion
things attract what is homogeneous to them, and are separated from their
heterogeneityes; wherefore Waters standing still soon stink and putrify: Why
then should some of late fallaciously pretend to the contrary, by endeavoring
to make the World believe, That Decoction or Rarification is that which
destroys and evaporates the living Spirituality of the Waters: No, that is not
so volatile, but is that which gives Virtue, and must by consequence be united
with the Center thereof, seeing Life always subsists in the Center of every
Body, which cannot be touched any other way, so as to be exhausted, but by
Fermentation and a violent Separation, which is an Exhalation of the Saline and
Sulphurous Qualities thereof, which is that Earth, by which the said Element is
Elementated, which does remain even in Rainwater, after all the Moisture is
evaporated; and this is that in this Element, together with the Spiritual Life,
which nourishes Beings, seeing the Element it selt is only as a Menstruum or
Vehicle, for conveying of the same to the Center of the Earth, where the Sperm
is mixed and sublimed for Vegetation; and therefore if the volatile Aquacity is
in part evaporated, then by consequence must the Menstruum become more sharp
and powerful to act on Bodies; and as it is more satisfied by the radical Union
of the Grain, so is that Liquor, so produced, more durable, virtuous. and
agreeable to Constitutions either temperately hot or cold, as will be shown
more at large in that Chapter that treats of Brewing: And although some, as I
before cited, ignorant in the Law of Nature, do affirm, That Decoction
separates the volatile brisk and airy Life, drawing their Argument from the
groaning, cracking or sighing of the Water in Decoction; when alas this is
nothing else but the crackling Serpent or wild Blass, which is separated by the
first Action of Decoction, and then cease, and the Water concentrates into
Parts more agreeable: As for Example, take Water, and put it on the Fire, and
make it immediately to boil, and violently to evaporate in such a way, that
all the parts may be radically opened; and then immediately damp or put the
Fire quite out, and this wild Gass shall only evaporate, and the Water become
free and quiet in its Decoction, and is more powerful for the extracting
Tinctures, as also for the making Essential Oils, or indeed any use
whatsoever; let others say what they will to the contrary; and the more
especially where the Sulphurs, that are to be extracted, are of an hot and
generous Nature, as is plain in that of making Tea and Coffee, or the Infusion
of Sage and Sassafrass, and many others; in that it is a general Custom to boy
I their Waters twenty four hours, and only open the Pipe to let forth the wild
Gass, which is purely Philosophical. Observe, that this Experiment is best made
in such Vessels, as have a blind Head, and proper beck only for Evaporation.
And thus having in general run through what was promised in this Chapter, we
shall conclude the same with this positive Affirmation, sc. That Decoction and
Fermentation are the two Pillars, on which depends Exaltation and Perfection.

CHAP. II. In which we treat of the right way of Brewing Beer and Ale in
general, so as to make them the most Durable and Virtuous to Drink.
THE right way of Brewing is by a true and natural Preparation of the Menstruum
or Liquor, by which the Virtue is extracted from the Grain; which can be no
other way but by Decoction; which must be so artificial, as to separate the
wild Gass; as was touched at in the last Chapter, That being the Grand and
Fatal Enemy to Human Life, and there is no Element in Nature so much abounding
with the same, as Water, as is plainly manifest in this, That Rainwater takes
into its Womb all and every Gass, that proceeds from other Elements; which is
the reason that those Places where Bogs abound, and the Air has not Power to
penetrate the Body thereof, so as to rarifie and enliven the same, are so
unhealthful, and so often cause contagious Diseases; for you must know the
Motion, Decoction and Rarification is the Life and Exaltation of Beings, as
has been said, as also the Purification thereof, in that they separate
heterogeneities, and concatinate and ripen the homogeneous Qualities; and
seeing these are of such Universal Tendency in Nature, why may not they be the
same in Art.

For Decoction is here really necessary, for without the same it is impossible
to prepare our Food, so as to make it generous, agreeable and healthful for our
Bodies: For as that Learned and profound Philosopher Bernard Trevisan says, in
his Answer to Thomas of Bononia, That Water, which is Cold and Moist, if it be
well mixed with Vegetables, assumes another Quality, and in Decoction takes to
it, and puts on the Quality of the Thing, wherewith it is thoroughly mixed: And
there can be no true Mixture of things of Different Textures, but by Decoction
and Fermentation; but you are to observe, That when I speak of Decoction, I
mean not one so violent as to evaporate the Compound, but to ripen the same.

So then, I shall come to explain what that Decoction is, which best agrees
with our Mind, and is that, upon which the whole End and Scope of our Intention
is built, sc. a Separation of the Wild and Unruly Gass, which is the grand
Enemy and fatal Destroyer of the Life of Man, for reasons before rendered; the
manner how this is done, has been also already touches at; therefore in
preparing your Liquor, in the Art of Brewing, let the same be carefully
observed: For otherwise instead of having a wholesome and generous Liquor, you
have that, which is destructive to the fermentative juices in us, by its
Stagnatizing quality; and tho this has been prevented by many in the Art of
Brewing; yet it has been by accident, the true Philosophy thereof being
unconsidered: For when the Wise and Prudent of this Nation have by experience
found their Beer ill Brewed, by making of them ill-disposed, or by its soon
souring or roping, they have ordered that the same should be well boiled, and
then they have found a better effect, by which boiling a separation of the Gass
predicted has been made, and this might have been much more easily done, and
without a considerable diminution of the Liquor, had but the true reason been
understood; sc. by an immediate, sudden, quick and violent boiling, and then an
immediate damping of the Fire, so that the Gass may evaporate; which will be
more in one half hour, than by gentle simering in five or six hours; for the
Body of the Water is radically opened, so as to let that freely pass out; and
then the Water attracts and receives in its place a vital and spiritual Life
from the Air; for there is no such thing as a Vacuum in Nature; for if Nature
should admit of this, Beings would soon be annihilated. But we se the contrary,
for Nature tends to the bettering of things, and aims at her End, rejoicing in
the same, as the Pismire does; and threfore is she not one moment Idle, as
Sandivogius truly says; but many times she comes short of her end, by meeting
with obstructions in the way; and therefore must it be the great business of
Art, to help her where she is deficient, sc. by taking out of the way, that
which is offensive to her; And that you may yet the better conceive, why there
should be such a Gass in Waters, we shall give you the reason. You may
remember, that I said before 'twas the Menstruum of the World, making one Globe
together with the Earth, and having its center in the heart of the Sea, and (as
Sandivogius says) has one Axle-tree and Pole with the Earth, by which all
Courses and Fountains of Water issue forth, and disperse themselves through the
pores of the Earth, so according to more or less do Springs arise, and
afterward meeting together, increase and come to be Rivers, and those return
to the place, whence they originally came: Now as the Waters pass through the
pores of the Earth, and through narrow and strait places, where Sand is, they
leave their saltness there, and become fresh; so that it is a certain and
Infallible Maxim in Philosophy, That Water is purged by Sand; now afterward, as
they pass on further, they take into their Bodies more or less of the Nature of
those things which they passed through; and if they come through a place, which
is hot and Sulphurous, and continually burning, they are thereby made hot, and
thence Baths arise, for (as Sandivogius says) there are in the bowels of the
Earth places, in which Nature Delights and separates a sulphurous Mine, where
by the Central Fire it is Kindled; the Waters running through these burning
places, according to the nearness or remoteness, are more or less hot, and so
break forth into the superficies of the Earth, and retain the taste of Sulphur,
as all Broth does of the Flesh boiled in it: After the same manner it is, when
Water passing through places, where are Minerals, as Copper, Alum, does
acquire the savor of them: as also through all the other diversity of Vapors,
that the Earth abounds withal; so there is no wonder why this Element should
be impregnated with a wild Gass as before-said, seeing it passes through such
diversities thereof, in the Bowels of the Earth, and as it comes to the
superficies thereof in a more immediate degree, or as it passes further through
such places, where it is again purged, so does it retain more or less of the
aforesaid Gass; and this is that which causes the great diversity of Waters; so
that some are harsh and rough, others more mild, others more slippery and
friendly to Nature, as such which passed through Alkalisated places, or where
abundance of Chalk abounds: And it is observable that some Waters shall wash
with half the quantity of Soap, as others will, which proceeds from the
richness of their Abstersive virtue and Salutiferous qualities in Nature; and
from a Spirituous, Oleous, and Saline Vapor, that they are impregnated withal
in the Bowels of the Earth, and where is that Philosopher now born, that can
demonstrate to us, how much with this or the other quality Nature has
impregnated the same, seeing she works invisibly, any otherwise than by the
effect produced in the use thereof; or who dare presume to assert that he will
show us the exact number of times, that Nature has decocted or impregnated the
said Waters with different moist vapors; or how often it has since its
issuing forth received its purgation; or how much it must be now decocted and
purged, to make them equally generous; seeing there is such great diversities of
Waters, as is plainly manifest, some more friendly, others more austere, some
more agreeable to one Texture, some to another; and tho it is still but Water,
yet does it as much differ in some Cases, as if compounded of different
Textures, being so unlike to one another; for some waters are so prepared to
our hands, that little or no boiling will make excellent Beer; others must have
a considerable time of Decoction to ripen them, or else they will not be fit to
make Beer of; we have an example of this by the Waters of Roterdam, of which
indifferent Beer is made, as those that have traveled can testify: But a
certain English Brewer, upon the well-boyling of his Liquor in the first place
before Mashing, even to a considerable consumption, made excellent Beer and Ale
thereof; which I, by my own experience, can testify was little inferior to
that of England, which is highly esteemed there. Here the Virtue of Decoction
was manifested even by that Water which proceeds from one of the finest Rivers
in Europe, for that it comes from the Rhine. The manifest Difference of Waters
may also be discerned in most Counties of England: For, for Example, let six
Sacks of Hartfordshire Malt, which was made from one Grain, at one and the same
Time, from the Cestern to the Kill, be brewed in six different Places, or with
six different Waters, and every one of these Beers shall be discernably
different in Taste, although the Grain was one, yet does this Difference issue
forth by the diversity of Menstruums or Liquors: Therefore I would have all our
English Gentry, Brewers, and other Housekeepers, that brew their own Beer, if
they desire their Health, not to hearken to Notional Theory, or to such as are
swelled up with the Poison thereof, like a Toad touched by a Spider, ready to
burst without the Antidote of Plantine, but apply themselves to Experience, the
only sole Mistress of true Wisdom; and in the first place let them, by many
Trials, prove the Nature of their Water, first by a more short, and afterward
by a longer Decoction: But in all be sure that you separate the Wild Gass, the
Sword of Mankind; and when they obtain a Liquor most Generous and agreeable to
their Constitutions, let them keep to the same; for in this Case every Man is
properly his own Judge, and there is an Ancient Proverb in England, That every
Man at Thirty Years of Age is either a Fool or a Physician; that is, he must
then know what best agrees with him: Now for these alleged Reasons, it is
impossible for any Man to prescribe an infallible Rule in Brewing, any more
than those general ones here by me performed; therefore I apply my self to the
Judicious, as my proper Judges, to determinate the Cause depending, and to
Encourage and Receive Truth, according as it is delivered; God knows my Heart,
I write not for Notions sake, nor for Vain Glory, but for the sake of truth and
the Health and Prosperity of those, the inhabitants of Britain, whom I so
highly esteem, as my daily Labors may easily demonstrate, in that I cannot
choose but cast my Mite into her great Treasuries of Wisdom, etc. But from the
Digression to the Matter in Hand; I say then, That all Waters are more generous
that are most endued with a salutiferous, Saline, oleous Life, and do daily
receive a Rarification from the friendly Archeius of Nature; as also a fresh
Influence from the Starry Powers: But here, by the way, it must be observed,
That Waters are best to be taken, when the Sun has exhaled the damp and cold
Fog therefrom; and their Bowels are warmed with the benevolent Rays warmed with
the benevolent Rays thereof, for to be sure what Nature does not in this Case
Art must; for this before-described Gass is not only evident in Water, but also
in most other concreted Beings: You have an Example hereof in Wheat-Corn, which
is the wholsomest Grain in Europe, and the Staff of Man's Life, in that it has
received a permanent Maturation, both from the Celestial and Central Sun, for
if it be eaten raw, or the Flower thereof, it causes Diseases, but being
fermented and baked the Heat sends forth this said Gass, as is evident, in that
it becomes so Virtuous; the like is to be seen in Syder, yea, even in Wines,
which are not to be ripened but by a Fermentation, which is even a Sparkling,
foaming, or (as I may truly call it, Nature's) violent Decoction, even to an
Exorbitancy; and all this is in order to separate that, which does not
centrally agree therewith, sc. the wild Gass, which is evident in this, That if
a Barrel be then closed up, it will burst in Pieces, for it will make its way
out: But as soon as this is exhaled, then the Action of Fermentation ceases;
but where it ceases before the said Gass is fully sent forth, there it causes
the Liquors soon to Fret, Corrupt, Rope and Sour, as being diseased in itself,
wants an internal Sanity, and the best Cure in this Case is Racking it off.
Now, it is observable, That what Decoction is wanting in the Separation of this
Gass, Fermentation does complete: And I wonder why this late Writer should
allow a Window in the Kill, to let the gross Steams, sullen Damps, and
stupifying Vapors (as he calls them) to pass freely away, and to let in the
Air, when he does not at the same time allow the same Benefit to Water, which
is the Element and Vehicle, which conveys the same to other compounded Beings,
in the Act of Generation: And though Nature has been never so bounteous in
ripening the same, yet is it not fully separated therefrom: And Fire, which is
in the highest degree Hot and Dry, that, even that, contains in it this wild
moist Gass, as we can easily demonstrate before Men of all Qualities; now if
what is here said is not sufficient to demonstrate the Nature and Effect of the
said Gass, then let such as desire to be better satisfied, apply themselves to
other Volumes, as our Spagyrick Philosophy Asserted, as also our Trifertes
Saladini: But however, we shall add thus much, seeing this new Moddler
attributes all the unhealthful Qualities to proceed from well-boyl'd Beer, and
principally those of the Scurvy, Stone and Gout; yet, we say on the contrary,
That these rather proceed from Beer not well boiled, especially where this Gass
is not fully evaporated, for it is from this, and only this, that they proceed:
For this Gass is Mineral and Excrementitious, and has in it such wrathful
Qualities, as stagmatise the vital Functions, for it is endued with a
Coagulative and Forming Quality, and will make Stones or Excrements, and
sometimes takes on the Bodily Form of Arsnick or Poison, it must be doing,
although Evil. We read in Aventius Annel. Bavar. lib. 7. Anno 1343. That above
fifty Men, with many Cows, were turned into Stone. Ortelius tells the same
Story, of whole Herds in Russia. And Camerarius reports, That in the Province
of Chilo, in Armenia, at the blast of a South Wind (which happens four Times in
the Year) whole Troops of Horse have been turned into Statues of Stone,
standing in the Warlike Posture as they were before: And Ovid describes the
Thracian Waters, which make all things Marble, and turn their Guts into Stones
that take them inwardly. Which in plain Terms are no other than this Gass,
which is plainly to be demonstrated in the Vrinous Classes, though not so
evidently in the Vinor one, because the Calidum Innatum, or warmth of the
enriching, drying Sulphur does so dilate it, that it is easily spent in
Decoction and Fermentation: But the Urinous and Mercurial Qualities do rather
Increase and give Strength, because the Vinor and Sulphurous Qualities, which
are there, are so small as not to be able to put into Motion, so as to work its
way forth; now as the Vinor and Vrinous are the two general Classes of Nature,
in that the very Spirit of the World, which nourishes all things is Vrinous;
so does the Vinor contain the Vrinous, though invisibly, as the Vrinous does
the Vinor in the same Nature, according as the hot and moist, or cold and moist
Qualities get predominancy; and from hence it is very evident, That this Spirit
is the Original Cause of many Diseases, and principally by its Volatility, for
that Diseases have their first Original in the Spirits; and that this does
remain in Beer unboyl'd is evident in this Example-Take Wash, prepared by the
Distillers, where neither Liquor nor Wort is boiled, but hastened into a
Fermentation, and being put into the Still, and suddenly made to boil, as they
do, the Beck of the Still being not immediately put into the Worm; till this
Gass is invisibly off; for if it should, it would cause it violently to boil
over, and so foul the Worm, or else force off the Head of the Still, when as
Beer well Boiled and Fermented, having Age to boot, may be stilled without this
Observation, and will yield by abundance the far more wholesome Spirit. The same
is done in Syder, Wines and other Liquors, so ordered; and this is one Reason
why French Brandy excels English Spirits.

Another Consideration. which is a plain Proof that this Gass remains in Beer
unboyled, is the Paleness of its Color, which shows it rather to have the
Moist Mercurial Quality predominant than the Sulphurous and Friendly one;
Friendly, I say, because Tincture shows. Sulphur and Sanity, because these are
the Houses of Light, and so chase away thousands and legions of the dark
diseasie Ideas; now Decoction only is that which manifests Tincture, and by
consequence the Health-making Virtue: And I can compare white Beer to no other
than Chyle or Posset, which is only made by the first Action of the Stomach,
which, should it remain so crude, by a debility in Nature, all Physicians would
allow, to be the Author of many Diseases; but when the Central Fire is strong,
to make a true Concoction, Digestion, Circulation, Fermentation and Separation,
then Tincture is brought unto it; which by the help of the Vital Flame is
exalted; and so from thence the Animal Spirits elaborated, then does this
Tincture manifest it self in the healthful Constitution, when Diseases and
Death are pale and wan. And what egregious Nonsense is this, even a
Contradiction to the Laws of Nature, to make, as if that, which is her first
Intention, should be That, from whence Sanity should proceed, and yet at the
same time not to allow the degrees of Exaltation thereunto. Our new Moddler
says, That to make Malt with Judgment is no small part of Chemistry: And if it
should be so as he says, he must by consequence allow me one Consideration
therein, which is purely Natural, and does infallibly demonstrate the Office of
Decoction; which is, That Silver is made by Nature of the same Seed, and in the
same Matrix as Gold is; but Nature has sooner done in Silver than in Gold, and
so has she left it plae and wan; and from thence will proceed a Medicine but
for very few Diseases: But when Nature has by a through and longer Decoction
brought it to the Maturity of Gold; then does it manifest a Tincture, even a
Rich and permanent Sulphur, from whence may be made an Aurum Potabile, curing
all Diseases, so that this still confirms, That Tincture produces Sanity, which
is the conjunct Property of Health: And this afore-cited Author's saying, sc.
That the first step to the generating the Stone in the Bladder, Gout and
Consumptions, and other Diseases, is the drinking of Strong, Hot, Sharp,
Intoxieating, Stale Liquors, and Fiery prepared Drinks, as Beer high boiled
with Hops, etc. is a grand Mistake, and really shows his Ignorance in true
Philosophy; for it is not the Use of these, that can cause one Diseasie Idea,
but the Abuse thereof; so as to cause Surfeits, or to overpower therewith the
Natural Heat, and suffocate the same: And thus Food also performs the fame, and
indeed so does the best of Medicines, when taken in so large a Dose as to
overpower the natural Strength; therefore let the Vertnes of things be observed
from the Temperate Use, not the Abuse thereof: For we see, this proceeds not
from the well-boyling of the Beer, so much as from the wild Gass, when not well
boiled; for we see no Men in England more healthy than the Country-Farmer, who
keeps a Cup of good brown Ale and a Toast, and temperately will drink a Glass
of Stout. For my part, no Man shall persuade me, that any Liquors can be more
wholesome to the English Constitutions than those of their own Climate, amongst
which good Beer is a principal one, especially if it be but well and truly
Brewed, Fermented, and kept in Age, according as it has Strength to hold its
Body, so that it is upon no Fret, but drinks Brisk, Sparkling with the Aireal
Life and Richness of Spirit; then and then only does it retain all the Virtues
belonging to good Beer, even the Balsamic and Nourishing ones. And though
those that are troubled with the Stone or Gout may receive some effects of its
Spiritual Action, in its being too Brisk and Active for their Weak, Crasy and
Diseasy Body; yet does not this manifest that it should be the Author of this
Disease any more than a good Medicine does, which being taken by the Diseased
makes them for a Season the worse, their Natures being too weak for its
healthful Qualities, for were it otherwise it would work the same effect on
all, for what is centrally destructive will certainly be always manifesting its
Power, for that which nourishes, and has Virtues so to do, cannot at the same
time poison any other way than by that of a great Fire putting out a little
one, and yet does Fire and Fire agree: It Is true we allow it may give Pain,
because it is Active, Brisk and Spiritual, and will be doing some good Office,
as all pure Tinctures will; but it being designed by the all-bounteous God for
Food, why should Men expect it generally to work the effect of a Medicine: But
however sometimes it may so fall out, that it will work a greater than many a
Medicine will, and especially where Nature languisheth after it, as she does
where the use thereof is withheld: For we have seen in violent Burning
Feavors, when all seeming Hopes of means have failed, that the Patient has
recovered by being admitted to drink moderately of Beer; therefore in our
Practice do we withold the Patient from nothing in Moderation.

It being clear to us, that this Author is mistaken in the Original of Diseases
as much as in the Grounds of those Arts, which he seems to kerp at, therefore
in compassion to him, for his better Information, I advise him to look to our
other Volumes, for the Original of Diseases: And leaving him there, to consider
his Mistakes, I shall come to lay down what remains to be treated of, for the
Readers Information, in this Chapter, sc. That Decoction is not only useful in
the ripening and maturating of things, but also that there are many degrees
thereof; for as that Learned Bernord Count Trevisan says, for example sake, in
the Art of Physic, pure simple Fountain Water, by boiling in the first
Decoction, is joined with the Flesh of a Chicken, and thence in the first
degree of Concoction we obtain a Broth, a good and perfect Decoction, the
Humid, Watery and Airy Parts of the Chicken being actually dissolved in the
aforesaid Water, though there be other Elements therein also actually: But that
it may be made a much more perfect Medicine, and more generous for restoring
Man's sick Body of the Chick is beat into a Mash, with the said Water already
altered into a Boiled Broth, or with part of it, and is distilled by a
stronger Decoction, whence a Broth and Decoction will be made much more Noble
and Generous, partaking of the whole Nature of the Chicken, because by this
second Decoction not only the moist Parts, but the hot Parts, that is its
Aireal and Fiery Parts, being melted into the Broth or Decoction, are
thoroughly mingled and dissolved, and therefore the whole Virtue of the Chick is
in such a Decoction extracted into the aforesaid Liquor.

So then Decoction does not only ripen and make generous but also exalt things
to their full Perfection; and does not in the least destroy their Balsamic
Virtue, as some ignorantly think, for that consists in the Sulphurous and
Saline Qualities, for the Mercurial is twofold, Volatile and more Fixed; The
Volatile consists only in a Moist Vapor, interwoven with the aforesaid Gass,
by which it is yet made abundantly more Volatile, but the fixed is not easily to
be touched by Menstruums or any other ways, seeing it is that of which the very
Substance of the Texture of Bodies does consist; and though the Sulphurs may be
extracted, yet will the Corporality remain abundantly more Gross than before.
This was pointed sorth by the Famous and ever Worthly George Starkey, when he
said, That the Central Body of Mercury is a Peerless Creature, stooping to
naught, naught indeed but the Grand Universal, Tinging Light, which has Power
to transmute from a State of Corruption to that which is more permanent and
lasting, or more especially to that Grand Tincture and Divine Essence, I mean
the Magisterial Blood of Christ, which is the Quintessence of Heaven and Earth,
and the Fullness of all the Glories thereof; for that in him, as the Apostle
says, dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in him does the fullness of
the Power of Transmutation consist, in that in him one Grain of Faith, though
no bigger than a Mustard Seed, is sufficient to Transmute and Change the vilest
of Sinners into the best of Saints; and by him shall all things be regenerated
and created anew, and redeemed to an Immortal State, old things shall be done
away, and all things shall become new, for do not the Scriptures say, That he
will create a new Heaven and a new Earth.

Now, as a Christian, I am bound in Duty to believe him to be the Imperial
Panacea and Fulnese of all; yet at the same Time, seeing by him that all things
were created, we do allow that some Essential Virtue does so remain in his
created Works, as if concatinated will produce a Panacea, which by Mortals is
not to be despised, seeing it emblematically tipifies the inexpressible Glory
of the Almighty Creator; but of this more at large in our Ignis Astralis
Adeptorum: Therefore being omitted here, we shall come yet farther to consider
the Excellency of Decoction in this, that if it is gentle after the first wild
Gass, nothing evaporates but the Cold and Phlegmatic Nature, so that the
Sulphurous and Saline is ripened; as is evident in this, if that you make a
strong Elixeration of Wort, you may by a very gentle Evaporation bring it to a
Sap, very gumous, wherein the chief Virtue of the Malt consists, for if it is
done gently, you may at any time convert it into good and wholesome Beer again;
which is evident not only by our own Experience, but also by that of the Famous
Radolphus Glauber, where he shows, The Concentration of Beer and Wine, for the
benefit of Transportation, and how the same, by the Addition of Liquor, may be
reduced to its first State again, and of equal Goodness: And I say, That this
Sulphurous Gummosity is so manifest in the Elixeration of Malt, and all other
things whatsoever, that even after a Fermentation, that is suddenly forced, and
after the Distillation of its Spirit it will remain in very large Quantity in
the Wash, as may easily be demonstrated in the Evaporation of the same, for
there will remain a Gumous Extract, very sweet and pleasant to Taste, of many
excellent Virtues, being the Mummial Balsom of the Barley or Grain. 'Twas
doubtless for this Reason that Glanber said, The best part of the Malt was
given to the Swine; for herein is contained the Saluteferous and Friendly
Virtue: This being as the Body of the Chicken unto the Broth, and is not
united with the Menstruum or Liquor but by Decoction. Neither is it
Volatilized, as is evident, but by a more long and secret Fermentation; and
this is the reason why the English Spirits, as now made, are so unwholesome to
the Body of Man, they wanting the most Friendly Virtues being filled up in
Place thereof with the destructive Gass, the Liquor or Wort being not boiled,
it must remain therein: For (as the thrice Noble Helmont says) This Gass is
not wanting even to common Water, all things being subject to the Curse; and so
cursed Liquors produce cursed Effects: But what cares the Distiller for that,
he himself drinks little thereof, for he will go to a Glass of Sack, or a Dish
of French Brandy, and he seeks for Quantityes and Profits from his
Distillation, to maintain the same; this is the reason why we in our Art of
waking Wines, Brandy, etc. have commended well-brewed Beer, as the true Basis
on which the great Business of Distillation depends: And we say, That if the
same be well fermented with our Sal Panaristos, or some other Artificial Way,
'twill yield Quantity of Spirit sufficient, considering the Qualityes that are
so highly advanced: it is not the great Quantity of Spirits proceeding from new
Beer, which we esteem so much as we do the Virtues of those proceeding from the
Old. Let the new Moddler instance what he pleases, for it is generally agreed on
by all the Ingenious, That Decoction and Fermentation ripen and exalt all
things; and I make no Doubt but the learned Colledgiates will allow the same,
why then should not our Nobles, Gentry, etc. be advertised in that, wherein not
only their own Health consists, but also that of the whole Inhabitants? For
since so many new and ungrounded Inventions have been, and more especially now
of late, how many thousands do there deplorably die away, yea even to the
Amazement of Physicians: And I have but two things to place this on, sc. The
immediate Hand of God's Judgment on the Nation for Sin, or the Inhabitants
neglecting the Means of their own Health, by eating so much raw Fruits, rare
Flesh (so called) but rather raw, and drinking new and unboyled Beer, and
poisonous Arsenical Spirits, the very Bear, Lion, Wolf, Tiger, Serpent, Dragon,
nay the Basilisk to Man's Health. We have an History, That S. George killed the
Dragon in Egypt, from whence came the Honors, Titles and Dignities to England
and English Men, and will you now let the like Egyptian Dragon inhabit your
Houses, and be harbored in your Bosom, when he designs nothing else but your
Lives? Remember the Valor of your Ancients, and let him be banished from your
Land; let your wise Magicians conjure him into the Black Sea, his own
Inhabitation; and let there be a Law made, upon Pain of Death, that none shall
harbor his Eggs for Fear of a Cockatrice: Remember, I say, the good old way,
and the Health and Innocence of your Fathers, who lived to a good old Age, who
perhaps never drank any thing else in their Lives but a Glass of well-brewed
Beer or Ale, which proved to them more profitable than any of these New and
Late Inventions, especially such as have no Ground in Truth; But what says
Solomon? There is nothing new under the Sun; what are, have been, and will be
again, so that New Truths are but the Reviving of the Old ones, or a Discovery
of that which has ever been, though not in general known; for those that have
known it have made a Secret thereof; and being Envious, and unwilling that
their Fellow Creature should stand in equal Knowledge with them, have reserved
the same, so that it has died with them, as is evident in that of Staining of
Glass, so as to bear the Fire, Tyron-Purple, and Transmutation of Metals, etc.
to the great Disadvantage of Mankind; for had it but been otherwise Gold might
have been as plentiful as Dross.

Having thus run through the Theory of the Usefulness of Decoction and
Fermentation, I shall now come to the Practice thereof in the mode of Brewing,
etc.

But, by the way, I think it needful to touch, how Waters may be in some
Measure exalted to a more salutiferous and friendly Nature, which may be of
great Use to the Inhabitants, especially where good Rivers and friendly Springs
are not. You may observe, that we before hinted at, the Nature of Waters, now
how they may be graduated and made alike, is thus; Seeing those are the best
that go through Sand and Chalky Places, which do imbibe the Contrarietyes, as
is plain in this of the late Invention of making Salt-Waters fresh; late I
cannot so properly call it, being touched at by Helmont and other Philosophers,
but however it was of late that a Patent was obtained for the same: Salt Water
therefore is thus made Fresh, by a Precipitation or Imbibing their Saline
Qualityes by some contrary Ferment, and then the Aquacity may be distilled off,
either in a Copper-Still, or such Instruments as the Patentees have ordered to
sea: Now the matter proper for precipitating the Saline Quality is Salt of
Tartar, Pot Ashes, Lime made from good Chalk, or rather that of Oyster, Muscle
or Cockle-Shels, or two or three of these mixed together, and made into Balls
and thrown into the Still, and the Water distilled therefrom shall be as
purely Fresh as the best River or Fountain Water. Now the Philosophy and
Mechanical Reason hereof is this, The Alkaly destroys the Sharp and Spiritual
Points of the Acid, and fixes it so that that which is yet more Spiritual may
ascend: And the same thing may be performed by any other Alkaly. This is the
Reason why Lime, Chalk, Beech-Ashes, Crab's-eyes and Alkalized Nitre, or that of
Coral, make sour Beer sweet, as the Spirit of Salt in few Drops immediately
makes New Beer drink Stale.

Why then may not our Springs be enriched, by causing them to run through such
things, as will make a Precipitation of the Saline, contrary Qualityes, whereby
they may be made wholesome, and agreeable to our Constitutions, seeing both
Nature and Art daily perform the same; and Experience shows us, That it may be
radically done: For Example, If you have a Spring, which is Saline, Vitriolick,
Muddy or Nauseous, then dig as near as you can to the Head of the said Spring,
and round about it make a Bed of Beech or Wood-Ashes, and then lay another of
Sand, and then let the Foundation thereof be made with Chalk, and the Waters by
passing through shall be made so Sweet and Pleasant as to answer the End
desired. This may be done in any Place where the Waters ascend, and where Chalk
and the rest may be had with little Cost and Labor, but with great Advantage
to the Drinkers thereof, seeing Diseases (as has been said) do often proceed
therefrom.

Now, your Waters being prepared, you may thus proceed to your Brewing: First,
make your Liquor or Water to boil very suddenly, and when it boyles with the
greatest Violence, immediately damp or pull out your Fire, (as has been said)
or immediately remove your Liquor into some proper Vessel, there to remain, and
cooll till the height of the Steam or Vapor is so gone as you can see your
Face in it, and then put it into your Mashing Tub to wet your Malt, as stiff as
you can well row it up, and let it remain so about a quarter of an Hour, and
then add another Fortion of Liquor, and row it as before; for if you ad your
Liquor by degrees you shall the better obtain the Virtue from the Malt, then
add your full Quantity of Liquor, according as y^^ purpose to make your Beer or
A^^ in Strength; then let the whole stand about two Hours, more or less,
according to the strength of your Wort or difference of Weather; then let it
run into the Receiver, and Mash again for a second Wort, but your Liquor must
be somewhat cooler than for the first? and let it stand but half the Time;
these two Worts being added together, you may put the Quantity of Hops you
design thereto, and put it into your Copper, and let there be a large blind
Head fitted to the same, lute all fast, that nothing may evaporate, and gently
boil the space of one or two Hours, and as the Goodness or Badness of your
Liquor or Menstruum is; remove then the Head, and let it out into the Receiver,
and strain the Hops therefrom into your Coolers: And so have you a Wort, in
which the full Virtue of the Grain and Hop is; which being cooled, fit for
Barm; let it work, and then be tunned up, according to the Experience of the
Brewer.

Now, if you design it for Distillation, of small Beer for Servants, then Mash
a third Time, with your Liquor almost cold, and let it stand not above three
quarters of an Hour; the which you may Hop and Boil according to Discretion,
there being no Curiosity to be observed, the full and essential Parts of the
Grain being before extracted, wherefore this is something austere and harsh,
but may be moderated by a little Honey or Molasses, and being boiled with Hops,
Wormwood, or any other preserving Herb, becomes excellent Drink.

Now Double Ale or Beer is the two first Worts, used in the place of Liquor, to
Mash again on Fresh Malt, and then does it only extract the Sweet, Friendly,
Balsamic Qualities therefrom, its Hunger being partly satisfied before,
whereby its Particles are rendered globical, so as to defend themselves from
Corruption, for being thus brewed it may be transported to the Indies,
remaining in its full Goodness, nay rather enrich it self; therefore must
double-brewed Beer contain three times the virtue of the single, because of its
durable Qualities and internal Sanity; whenas the single, if not well brewed
especially, soon Corrupts, Ropes and Sours. And thus you have in general my
Sentiments concerning Brewing of Beer to Drink, of which we cannot, as before
was said, be more particular, seeing the great Diversity of Waters, and
different manner of each particular Brewer, which make considerable Alteration;
and some are so practically expert that they need no Teacher, therefore our
Intention here is no other than only to delineate and point forth the exact
Method of separating that Gass, which is so destructive to Human Kinds. etc*

CHAP. III. In which we Treat concerning the Way used in Brewing, in order for
Distillation.
THE way used by Distillers is that whereby they may obtain the greatest
Quantity of Spirit; and although we do not approve of it, yet we think
convenient to give it, because they shall not think that we are ignorant
thereof: Which is thus.

First, heat the Water a little above Blood-warm, that is, between Blood-warm
and Scalding hot, and then the Malt being in a Mash Tub, add so much Liquor to
it as is sufficient just to wet it, and this is called Mashing, then row or
stir it up very well with two or three Pair of Hands, for half an Hour
together, stiffly, till it is all mixed in every part, then add in what
Quantity of Liquor you think fit, but the stiffer you mash, the better it is,
then strew it it all over with a little fresh Malt, and let it stand an Hour
and a Quarter, or thereabouts; then let it off into its Receivers, and mash
again with Fresh Liquor, and let it stand about an Hour, rowing it up as before
said; so a third Time: But some will mash a fourth Time, but then it must not
stand above half an Hour, but I say that three times is sufficient, the fourth
being fitter for Small-Beer for poor People than for Distillation, without you
use it in the stead of Liquor for other Mashings on Fresh Malt. Now some very
Ingenious Persons boil their Liquor and cool in, which I well approve of.

Now every Wort that comes is pumped up, out of the under Back into the Cooler,
there to Cool, and then from the Cooler into the Wash-Backs, and there let it
remain till all the three Worts come together: And by the way observe, that you
neither Hop nor Boil, as for Beer; now when they are down in the Backs, and in
a proper coolness, and fit to be set, then add good Yeast enough to work it
very well, as for Ale, and as the Yeast rises up, beat it down again, and keep
the same all in, and let it work three, four or five Days, according to the
Season of the Year, and according to the Temperament of your Back, when set,
and Judgment of the Distiller, for a Back of Wash, either too cold or hot set
may be easily helped, by adding in hot or cold Liquor; now if you exactly know
the Time of the Washes being come, then you may take off your thick Yeast, to
set other Backs with; but if not, then you must take with you these Signs, it
will work it self down flat, and then the thick Yeast will sink to the bottom,
and what lies on the Top will be a kind of an hoary or yeas^y Head: And you
must observe, That your Wash must neither be sour nor sweet, but in a Medium
between both, for then it will be most profitable for the Distiller.

The way to work it into Low Wines and Proof-Spirits is as follows: Pump it out
of your Wash Back into the Still, until it is filled as high as the upper
Nails, or thereabout; and as it is pumped up, be sure that another row all up
together, that so that in the Bottom may come into the Still, thick and thin
together; let down your Head on the Still, but put not the Nose thereof as yet
into the Worm, but first make a very good Fire, so as to cause it to boil, and
so a great part of the Gass will go off, as much as possibly can without
Decoction; then as the Beck begins to drop, the Nose must be put into the Worm,
and all luted fast with a Paste made of Whiting and Rie-Flower: Now your Still
being brought thus to work, if it should run too fast, with wet Coals or Ashes
immediately damp the Fire; and thus proceed to your first Extraction to draw
off your Low Wines: Now it is observable, That some Malt will in the beginning
run off a Cann, two or three of Proof Spirits, and then it generally runs long;
othersome runs not at the beginning so fully Proof, yet will yield
indifferently well: Thus your Low Wines being distilled, you let them lie ten
or fourteen Days, to enrich themselves, for Low Wines in that Time get by
lying, but some think that afterward they lose, but Proof Goods lose by lying,
except they lie warm: Having thus done you may proceed to a second Extraction
into Proof Goods, and then to a third called Rectification, which we shall omit
here, because (God willing) the next Impression of our Britannean Magazine of
Wines, I shall show the Art so far, as that most excellent Stuff may be made.

Rules to know what Quantity may be Extracted from every Quarter of Malt.
YOU must, in the first Place make about fifty Gallons, or something more than
three Barrels of Wash, and that in the first Extraction will make 32, 34 or 36
Gallons of Low Wines, and those, if you let them lie, will make in the second
Extraction 11 or 12 Gallons of Proof Spirits, nay some Malt will make 13,
especially if in the second Extraction you add some Water into the Still, and
such Malt will run two or three Cans, or seven or eight Gallons Proof Spirits,
in a Tun, more than other Malt, nay sometimes fifteen or twenty. We generally
count, That 20 or 22 Quarters of kindly Malt will give a Tun of good Proof
Goods.

The way of Brewing Good Drink from Molasses.
PRepare your Liquor, as before for Beer directed, and when about blood-warm,
add to every hundred of Molasses thirty six or forty Gallons of Liquor, and
stir them well together, until the whole is Dissolved; and then up with it into
your Copper, adding thereunto three Pounds of Lignum Vite, one Pound of dry
Balm, and four Ounces of Nutmegs, Cloves and Cinnamon together; clap on its
blind Head, and lute fast, and digest twenty four Hours, then let it run out
into its Receiver; and as it is fit to set to work, put your Yeast in, and let
it work sufficiently; then tun it up, and let it come by its Age Mellow and
Brisk to drink, and you shall have an excellent Drink, very wholesome to Man's
Body, and might be of great Service to those Islands, where Sugar and Molasses
so plentyfully abound: We have brewed Molasses our selves in Holland, and by
taking off the fulsom Taste, we have had excellent Ale, little inferior to that
of Barley: The manner how Molasses are brewed for Distillation is shown in our
second Part, sc. the Britannean Magazine of Liquors, our Intent and Purpose
here being only to treat of such Liquors as may be brewed and prepared with the
least Difficulty.

Now, it is observable, That Buckwheat makes also an excellent Drink, and is
very much used in Holland; but there is no Grain comparable to malted Wheat or
Barley, both for good Beer, Ale and Mum, although Beans truly prepared afford a
very good Beer and Mum, which in Germany is usually done. and Doubtless some of
the English Brewers know the Experiment of mixing the same with their Malt, a
small Proportion does not amiss, but too great a Quantity gives it a Smack.

It is very good to know the difference and nature of things; for though we may
at present have plenty of all sorts of Grain, yet a Time of Scarcity may come
too soon, and then a Man, if fore-armed with Knowledge may in some measure help
himself: It is good to fear the worst, and then the best can do us no harm; let
us not be therefore too much lifted up, for as there has been a Time of
Famine, and Distress, so there may be again, which I truly Fear, and then if it
should be so, those Beans and Oats, which now make the Horse to prance, the
Nation might be glad of for Bread and Beer; for as an Ingennious Person
observes, The distilled Water of Oats does so warm the Stomach, that it does
overcom the Senses: It Is well known, That many do brew a very strong and mighty
Drink, with Malted Oats, and how profitable the same might be to all English
Brewers (if there might be sufficient Store of them had) in a Dearth of Wheat
and Barley, the same being rightly matched, or rather mastered a little with
the Hop, to alter their Taste, they can best-tell, that have made their private
Experience and Profit of them, when others very inconsiderately have run on in
their common nnd chargeable way of Brewing.

The Liquor of Beech is likewise commended for the making an excellent and
wholesome Drink: There may also an excellent Drink be made from the Tops and
Flowers of Heath, seasonably gathered and dried, and brewed as you have
occasion for it. The Root Pottato being rightly ordered does also make an
excellent Bread and Beer; why then may not the English Hearts be as well
contented with these in Time of need, as they are in some of the Northern
Parts, in Time of Plenty, with Stock Fish for Bread, as they who have been at
Islands can tell you? Nay dried Fish is esteemed a very good Food in Holland.

Now we having recommended such Things to your Thoughts, as in the Scarcity of
Malt or Barley make good Drink; we shall likewise touch at that, which may also
help, when there is a Scarcity of Hops; the End of Hops being only to allay the
exceeding Insciousness of the Malt by their Bitterness, whereby both uniting
themselves together, becomes a Savory and wholesome Drink for Man's Body: Now
this may be in every respect as well performed with Wormwood, and in some Sense
more agreeable, for Wormwood is endued with many virtuous Qualities; It
Strengthens the Stomach, Resists Putrefaction, Prevents Surfeits, Strenghening
both the Retentive and Expulsive Faculty, and many more, as may be seen in
every Herbal; when as to Hops we do not attribute one half the Virtues; it is
true they purge the Belly of Choler: And thus appears the wholesomeness of Beer
above Ale, as Parkinson says; but however we are speaking of their scarcity,
when Wormwood is generally at all Times found in the Field or Highways. But
here some may object, and say, That Wormwood will make Drink too bitter: But in
answer to this I say, That we must learn to know the Qualities of Things; for
as we have said in the Britannean Magazine of Wines, one handful of Wormwood
goes farther than three of other Herbs, nay than five of some sort, especially
when it seeds, for therein consists the most oleous Parts; and as the End is
but only to mitigate the sweetness of the Malt, therefore you may take such a
Proportion as will only mitigate, and yet not let the bitter Quality be
predominant, beginning with small Quantities, and when, by several Trials, you
have hit the pondus, let that be your Guide in Brewing. It has also been
asserted in the Public Press, That Centaury, Artichoke Leaves, or Aloes
Hepatique, as having a Signature with the Hop, may, if rightly used, supply the
scarcity thereof; but you must learn by Experience to acquaint your self with
the Knowledge of the internal Quality of things, there being such a
considerable Difference in things of the same kind or species: You have an
Example of this in Arsmart, for the Male is twice as strong as that of the
Female; and yet they are both still Arsmart; therefore I say, That the
Signature must be learned, and known where the full Impression is stamped: It
is true this Defect cannot wholly be attributed to generous Nature; because she
is always ready to work is Sperm, as God does in the Free Will of Man, as
Sandivogius truly says, The Defect is in the Matrix or Place, as being either
over-burthened with the predicted Gass, or else with stinking sulphurous
Excrements: So that if Vegetation from thence proceeds of this, that or the
other kind, the Vegetable or Mineral so produced is not by half so Virtuous,
nay in some degree it is quite opposite to that, which is produced from a good
Soil: But how little do the Physicians or Inhabitants of this Land consider
this? for, say they, sure of Vegetables of this, or that, or the other Quality,
either Temperately Dry, Hot, Cold or Moist, did perform this, that, or the other
Cure, on this or that Constitution, with which it sympathized, it must do it
again; but yet for all this, when they have prescribed them, they have found
themselves much deceived, and not conceiving the Reason thereof, they have
ascribed it to some more hidden Cause, when alas the Reason is obvious. It is
also evident that one Field does not bring forth Grain in all things exactly
alike with the other; neither does one Soil continue to produce the same effect
for Years together, for the Crops in Time of Harvest will be considerably
different, one Good, Full and Pleasantly nourishing, the other Dwindling and
Hungry: Therefore is it requisite, as the Countryman yearly experiences, to
alter the Grain; but even in this Case there might be a considerable Remedy,
were but the Land equally manured yearly; for it is but a supplying of the
radical Moisture, Salt Nitral Virtue, or Oleous Milk, equal to the Strength of
the Grain sowed therein, which every distinct Concreate sucks forth in its
Vegetation: For it is observable in the whole Course of Nature, that every
thing requires a continual Supply; otherwise, that being thereof deprived,
would soon be exhausted, as we have elsewhere said. The Presidents we have of
this Nature are endless to be reckoned up; but seeing there is a Cloud of
Witnesses, we shall omit it, and only recommend to those, that are not
satisfied in this Point, the adjournal of their daily Desire to Food, without
which it would be impossible to subsist: And seeing things are so evidently
different, although they proceed from Land well manured, what must those then
be, that proceed from Land never manured at all; therefore it is not sufficient
that it is Arsmart, but its sufficiency lies in this, sc. in having the true
Signature thereon: Nay, more than this, even to the Superlative Degree, that
you gather it, when the Signature is in its full Reign and Dominion, siting (as
I may say) in the Throne of that Vegetable, and contributing Virtue to all its
Parts; for if you know not this, you may certainly miss of having the same in
its prestant Vigor, for we mind not so much the Planitary Hours, as we do the
Signature of Things, this being so really necessary to qualify a Physician;
therefore I wonder what the Apothecary thinks, when he employs Old Women to
gather his Simples, who do it at all Times, and in all Places, where they can
find most; they (poor Hearts) know no better, it is a Livelihood that they
want, and the Apothecary buys it cheap, to make up his Hodg-podge of all
together, which is a main Reason, That (as the worthy Robert Boil said) so
many Diseases are Cured in Books, and so few in Beds; we therefore cannot choose
but Recommend to the Inhabitants of this Nation Spagyrical Medicines; such we
mean as are prepared by separating the Good from the Bad, that is, the friendly
Balsamic Nature only from the Corruptions, which hinder its free Action, which
can never be obtained by any of the Violent Fires of the Chemists, the which we
do utterly detest; but by the Knowledge of the Dalilah of Nature in her
Fermentative Power, but of this more at large in our several Volumes of the New
History of Britain 's Internal Glory and Hidden Treasure: But here to the
matter in hand; and we say, That it is not only Arsmart, which has this
Difference, but also Wormwood, Mugwort, Clary, Scarlea, Vervine, nay even Opium
and Rhubarbe, Scammony, and almost all other Simples; therefore are the Rules
here predicted necessary to be considered, by every Ingenious Person, that so
they may in this Case help themselves. Now having touched at Signatures in
general, we think it convenient to give a Touch at those that are Homogeneous,
and stand nearest in Affinity each to other, as Wheat-Corn does to that of the
Vine in general; but the Vine has several Variations of Signatures, which
produce the different Sorts of Wines, both in Spain, Germany and France, etc.
as Sherry, Canary, Malago, Rhemish, White Wine, Claret, Rappadavia; also
Champaign, Burgundy, Frontineack, Greek or Florence Wines, etc. Now the Herb
Scarlea has a Signature agreeing with that of the Muscadine Grape; the Herb
Clary with the Rhenish; the White Current Tree with the White; and the Bramble
with the Red, therefore does its Fruit, being rightly mixed with good Pippen or
Pearmain-Cyder, make good Claret: We could cite more of the like nature, but we
design to treat more largly thereof in the next Impression of our Britannean
Magazine of Wines, and our Intent here is not to fill these Sheets with Theory,
but to point forth that, which may redound to considerable Advantage in
Practice, though indeed amongst others, the right Knowledge of Signatures, and
how they are superior in Quality or more agreeing is not the least: For, for
Example, although Clary has a Signature with the Rhenish-Grape, yet is its
Quality of a more superior degree, for its Essence is more concatinated than
that of the Vine, for a few Leaves thereof will relish other Juices with as
much Taste as a whole Hogshed of the Vine's own Juice, as is manifestly known
to all Wine-Brewers and Distillers; and therefore if you Design to make good
Beer, or Artificial Wines, pleasant to taste, like the Natural, you must not
over-dose the predominant Signature; for then you give it an unsavory one;
therefore where we have prescribed, in the Chapter of Artificial Wines, in the
Britannean Magazine, the Juice or Water of Clary, one part to half or equal
Parts of that of another Texture, there we mean the Juice or Water so
artificially prepared, as not to exceed the Taste of that, which naturally
proceeds from the Vine; this is to be observed in all Liquors whatever. And
again, Brandy, as it is generally distilled from small Wines, Lees, sometimes
pricked Wines, or those going to decay, variously mixed together, and so
fermented with Stum, or some other artificial way, being Distilled, the Spirits
come up friendly, and with a pleasant Hogo, and Balsamic Taste, for the various
Flavours are so mixed as to moderate each other, for the same Reason given for
Malt and Hops; for many of them are sourish before Distilled, and those
moderate the exceeding lusceousness of others.

Now our Distillers and Artificial Rectifiers have various Fantasies in the
Imitation of the Flavours of Brandy, by rectifying from Bay Salt, Bay Leaves;
others from Orrice, Ginger. Arsmart, Pepper-Wort, Pepper, Clary, and many
others, there being hardly a Distiller but has a different way to that of
another: yet the exact Flavors to Artificial Brandy are wanting in this Land:
there being three things absolutely necessary before you can in any degree come
near it; that is, To bereave it of Mr. Hogo or the ill Tangue, and then to
introduce the Tart and Rasberry Taste, intermixed; but here you must have a
Body, whose Textures is proper to work on, for though we are able to perform
much in this Case, nay more than what we have hitherto seen, and have mentioned
the same in our Britannean Magazine of Wines, yet let us be rightly understood;
For that those Spirits generally produced from Malt, have two Grand Defects,
the one is, it is filled with the Wild Gass, whence that Hogo or ill Tangue in
great Measure proceeds. The other is, it wants that Balsam or Extract, which is
in the Wash, and is given to the Swine, to be dilated by a due Decoction and
Fermentation into the Body thereof, and then has it something more substantial
to work on, and therefore have we mentioned, and laid our Ground upon
well-brewed Beer, and then that Distilled and Rectified, to as to be as free
from Taste as Water, only Fiery and Spirituous; and thou may you thereinto
introduce some Friendly Flavours, which may be as agreeable to English
Constitutions, nay more than that of France, because of its being produced from
the Native Soil and Climatory affinity: Now in this Case to make Artificial
Brandy, we lay a greater Stress upon Cider and Perry, for that, as we say
there, excellent Spirits may be thence produced for the making Artificial
Brandy; also from Artificial Wines, and especially those that are brought to
the Taste of the Natural ones: much may also be performed on fine Goods, sc. the
Spirit of Molasses, and especially if you know the Nature, Preparation and
Office of Glauber's Sal Mirabilis, Paracelsus's Sal Enixum or our Sal
Panaristos, which we have also there touched at, in the Chapter treating of
Artificial Brandy, the which we shall hereafter more fully explain.

Thus we have intimated to you, how you may fit your Signatures according to
the Predominancy of the Quality of that you join it unto, by adding smaller or
larger Proportions, and have not only touched at the Manuring of Land, showing
by what it is bettered, but also showing the Nature of Waters, and the
Separation of the Wild Gass, and how Salt Waters are made Fresh, together with
the making of Waters more commodious for the use of Families, as also the two
different ways of Brewing, so that you may choose which you will, as also having
touched at things commodious thereunto; we shall now come to speak of the
Quintessence of Malt, because therein consists many Mysteries, not only for the
Nourishment of Human Kinds, but also for the restoring of Sick, Ropy, Sour and
Decayed Beer to an Internal Sanity.

Now the Quintessence of Malt is the Virtue or purest Substance thereof,
extracted and separated from all Impurities; and therefore must it contain the
Virtue of the whole, and be very beneficial, as is said, for the use predicted;
therefore I wish the Preparation thereof were better known, for the which, that
we may in some measure contribute our Mite, we shall instance the same as
follows; there is one way which is the more excellent, which is, to dissolve
the whole Body by the Volatile Spirit of our Sal Panaristos, and then the
Menstruum wholly separated therefrom, and so have you the Quintessence or whole
Virtue of the Malt entire; which will at any Time contribute Sanity to its own
diseased Species, being rightly applied.

Another way is, The Extracting of a good Aqua Vitae from well-brewed Beer, and
then the Gumous and Balsamic Substance from Good Sound Malt, and these united
through the Medium of Nature, and so preserved for use; for as an Ingenious
Person observes, A small Dose of this preserves, and is far more excellent than
abundance of that, wherein the Phlegmatic Mercurial Vapor or Evil Sulphurous
Quality or Saline Astringent one is predominant, for here the pure Principles
are exalted, and brought to an homogenious Assinity, and so stand as a Medium
to oppose any contrary Quality that strives for Predominancy in the Liquors or
Juices that are prepared from that Subject, whose Essence this is; therefore
have we commended that of Wines, in our Britannean Magazinc of Liquors, for the
curing of such as are Sick, Ropy and Disseased, as we do this here for Beer. We
may also commend the Quintessence of Metals for the bettering of Metals; as
also the Quintessence of Man, for the preserving his Health, which is the
Spirit of the Blood and Bones united with the Mummial Balsam, the best whereof
is that from the Deserts of Arabia (which every Druggist perhaps will tell you
he has) but be sure you have the right, if you expect to make the true
Quintessence.

Now Quintessences are as much superior in Medicinal Virtues to the Subjects
whence extracted, as the Superior and Celestial Orbs are to the Inferior and
Terrestrial ones; but seeing we have more largely treated thereof in our Ignis
Astralis Adeptorum, we shall omit it here, and so conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. IV. In which we treat of Fermentation, the Ordering the Vessels, the
manner of Tunning, and some Necessary Rules, whereby the Beer may be long
preserved.
AS to the Doctrine of Fermentation, it is that which contains many High and
Wonderful Mysteries, although the Word only imports a Leavening or Working, and
puffing up, or more properly the Ripening or Resolving of a thing in order for
Maturation; however, under this Head is contained the principal Matter of the
great Business both of Art and Nature; for as Philalathes, that Noble English
Philosopher, says, it is the Wonder of the World; being that, by which
Animals, Vegetables and Minerals receive their Concretion, and without which it
is impossible that there should be any Radical Union though of homogeneous
Parts: For Nature first by Decoction prepares, and then by Fermentation ripens
and maturates the same. Now as in Nature, so in Art for this tends beyond the
Leavening, Heightening or Fermenting Bread and Beer, for no true Medicine can
be prepared without the Knowledge of this Doctrine, therefore do we truly say,
It is a Wonderful, High and Mysterious one: But having touched at it in our
Chymicus Rationalis, and more largly treated thereof in our Ignis Astralis
Adeptorum, we shall only treat of that part of it here which shall be pertinent
to our purpose, sc. the Fermentation of Liquors; but we cannot omit of
instancing this, That the Scriptures of Truth point forth the Verity of what we
have here said, witness Christ's Words, A little Leaven leavens the whole: And
it is the Nature of Leaven to Ferment so long, as till it has brought the
whole Lump into its own Kind: And seeing it is really thus, we shall a little
consider by what Power this acts.

The Power by which it acts and is acted upon is threefold; the first and most
principal is the Aireal Life, as it begins to find it self opposed by contrary
Particles, which does, as it were, expand it self for its own Defense, in
opposition to its contrary. The second is the Internal Warmth of Sulphur,
which, as we may truly say, is the Garment and Defense of the said Spirit,
whereof if there be Quantity enough to supply its Action, then does it never
leave operating until it has accomplished the desired End, which is a full
manifestation of the Light, Flowery, and Froathy Part of the Principles, the
majority whereof is Sulphur, which lay diffused in the Liquor and hindered the
Maturity thereof; yet being clivated and conjoined, the Acid Fire therein
contained has Power to perform the like Action, even ad Infinitum: Acid, we
say, because as it is evident, Leaven and Barm soon four, and it is from that,
as we well know, that the very Root of Fermentation proceeds; for it is that
which has a contrary Action to the Vinor Alkalizated Spirits, in which Action
it assembles together the Spiritous and Homogeneous Juices, making them yet
more Spiritual; also precipitates the more gross and corporal Parts thereof,
with the which if a Liquor be overcharged, the Spiritual and Homogeneous
Qualities thereof will soon be eat out, either by some fresh Action, or other
more invisible way; which is the reason that Wines and other Liquors are so
often wracked off from the Lees: And it is observable, That as Cider begins to
be upon the fret, the best way to preserve the same, is immediately to wrack it
off; but if you let the Fret get a height, it will be very difficult to
preserve the same. The third is the Moderate Warmth of the External Heat and
Air; for if that stands not in a Temperament something Sympathizing with the
Internal Action, the same is in great Measure obstructured, as is evident by
the different working of Drink in Summer and Winter; for the Nature of Heat is
to agitate and stir up, but that of Cold to Stagnatize and Coagulate; wherefore
Fire and Heat must be used where Warmth is naturally deficient.

Now from hence we may draw this Consideration, sc. That the Internal Heat is
of the greatest Importance, because that will work his way, except the external
Quality be upon the extreme, as is evident in the difference between Strong
Beer and Small; the one Working and Ripening it self, when the other will not;
therefore we said, That Sulphur was the Garment of the Spirit, whereby it is
preserved from the Extremes of Heat or Cold, by which its Activity is
maintained; and the External Extremes must be observed, in order to quicken the
same Action; wherefore we set our Backs or Tuns colder in the Summer than in
the Winter, and so vary accordingly, for the Heat of the Weather and Heat of
the Wort would be two to one Odds, and Nature would always be sullen, where she
is imposed on; you must wait her Motions, or else take her by the Hand, and
lead her gently, if you expect to have your Desire answered; and blessed be the
Lord our God, there is a Remnant acquainted with her mild and gentle Motion,
and daily make it their Business to be more acquainted therewith; seeing it is
she only, as centring in the Will of the Creator, that must reward us with
Health, Riches and long Life, etc.

These things being premised, we shall now come to touch at that, which may in
great Measure help us with some Artificial Fermentation, when that, by which
the Natural is performed, is through an imprudent Use and Negligence found
short and deficient.

Now, in this Case you must consider by what Qualities the Yeast acts, and so
prepare a Ferment agreeable thereunto: The Old Country Wife helps herself much
in this with Flower and Eggs; and some by that of Castle-soap; but we by a
Union and Spiritual Action of the three Principles, in such a way, that the
Sulphur may be predominant; therefore we say, That if you have the true
Essential Oil of Barley so prepared, as just now hinted, you need not at any
Time have any Deficiency or Shortness of Ferment, seeing it is durable, and a
small matter thereof will supply your Want: Also the true Quintessence of Malt
is not to be despised; nor the true Quintessence of Wine: For that by these
many excellent Secrets are performed, but more especially, and above all does
our Sal Panaristus supply this Deficiency, in all and every part thereof, if it
be but rightly used: For as the Famous Radolphus Glauber says concerning his
Sal Mirabilis or fixed Nitre, That if the same be with Flower thoroughly
moystened with Warm Water, and set in a Warm Place, then, by its own proper
Power and Virtue it begins to Ferment, especialty if some fresh Hops be put to
the Water, by which also other Things are promoted to Fermentation: This serves
not only for Yeast for Bakers, but Brewers may also thereby help themselves,
for by it Wort may be excited into Fermentation; and the more highly our Sal
Panaristos is exalted and purified, the better both it perform this Operation,
as being more endued with the Spiritual Action of Fermentation; therefore are
we now laboring to produce it in such Quantity, as may be sufficient to give
Demonstration of its wonderful Virtue, to the most Ingenious Enquirers of Art.
Many excellent and profitable Truths are in the Art of Fermentation, which
being more largly treated of in our Britannean Magazine, we omit it here; and
come to the other Heads as follows.

Now the Way, which Experience shows to be the best, to order your Vessels for
the Preservation of your Beer, is as follows; You must not at one Time scald
them, and at another Time wash them with cold Water, for that is the direct
course to make your Beer get a Tangue of the Vessel; for the Scalding of the
Vessel, as you call it, does not so much wash away the Smell of the Tilts and
Grounds, as it attracts and stirs up the Gummous, Rasomous and Oleous Part of
the Wood unto the External Pores? and as that finds something to operate with,
it must be doing, then does it give an hidden Ferment, and cause the Beer to
receive the Effects of that Tangue; for Nature is never one Moment idle, but
will be doing, even when deprived of its Original Form, and the Activity of the
vivifying Spirit therein, as is evident in the Wood of Dead and Corrupted
Trees, yea where the Life of its Vegetation is totally destroyed, for there by
Fermentation and Putrefaction Worms are generated; which evidently makes good
what we have said. We also see, That after the Death of Human Kinds, yea while
the Body is roting and Food for the Worms, that the Hair does yet grow, whilst
it has any Moisture to succor it, which although Excrementous, yet does it
vegetate; and so would every Form be doing something, although it destroys a
far more pleasant one, as Beer is destroyed by the Tangue of the Cask.

In Holland they seldom know the Effect of this evil Tangue, for that the Cask
has one Head taken out by the Brewers Servant or Cooper, and so brought to the
River, and there with a Broom well washed, and every Chink thereof rubbed with
a Brush, and then set an End, to let the Water run away; and some rub them with
Hop leaves, that come out of the Wort, and so Rince them again; then being
dried in the Air, and headed, they take a long Piece of Canvis, and diping it
in Brimstone they make Matches thereof, and with a few Coriander Seeds they set
Fire thereunto, and opening the Bung they let the Match burn in the Vessel,
keeping in as much as they can of the Sulphurous Fume by laying the Bung
lightly on, and when the Match is burned they stop all close for a little Time;
then being opened, and coming to the Air, you find your Cask as sweet as a
Violet, for the Acid and Sulphurous Spirits have carried off all the Corruptive
and Volatile Particles, and bound and constringed the more Solid and Sulphurous
ones; Sulphurous, I say, because the Wood burns like a Candle by reason of its
Oily Fatness, for Sulphur is the Fiery Fuel of Wood and Coals, as Oil is of a
Lamp, for the Wet Mercurial, Saline Properties extinguish Fire, as is evident
in the Difference between Extreme Wet Wood and Dry. This plain Position brings
me to consider, By what Power and Action Trees subsist, living in the Winter,
when they are deprived of their Flourishing Greenness. There be Various
Opinions concerning this Point: It is the general Vogue, That the Sap and
Essential Virtue of the Tree does, as the Cold Approaches, fall down and
retreat into the Root; and at the return of the Sun in the Spring, clivate
itself again, to replenish the Tree in all and every part thereof: But
Culpeper, being a Man of a sharp Wit, thought he had fully comprehended this
things, and so went about the Confutation of this Opinion, by his endeavoring
to show, That the Cold constringed and bound the Sap in every part of the Tree
alike in the Winter; saying, It returned not the the Root, but called them
Sap-mongers, who asserted the same. Now our Moddler, having received from him
this Notion, seems to impose a new Flourish thereon, and yet defines not the
same, so as to give Satisfaction to such as daily enquire into the great
Business and Action of Nature.

For Nature has a wonderful and most mysterious way of working, she performs
her Actions by Volatilizations and Fixations or by a rarifying Circulation and
Condensation, whence Maturation and Perfection; these being carried on and
aided both by the External and Internal Powers, as was before mentioned in that
of Fermentation: So then we must consider by what Power she externally
Rarifies, and by what Power she condenses, for as it is the Nature of the
External Mercurial Gass to Bind and Constringe the Pores of Trees, Plants, etc.
so is it of the External Heat, to mollify and open the same, that so the
Internal Heat may be admited in its rarifying Sublimation, which works opposite
Effects to that of the former; for as the Internal, Mild and Mercurial Spirit
does penetrate and open, so does the Internal Warmth of Sulphur congeal and
ripen. Now seeing these are necessary to be touched at in all and every part
thereof, in order to clear this Doctrine, we shall proceed as follows: First,
in touching at the Office of the Sun and Moon External, and then of those
Internal, which are the four principal Powers of Nature, whereby she
accomplishes her End.

As to the External Sun and Moon, the one by the benignant Rays and vital
Warmth of his Approach heats and illuminates that which the other by her Lunar
Beams has frigified and constringed: We shall first touch at the latter, and
so begin at the Winter. For as the Sun declines his Vigor in any Latitude, she
is the more empowered there to show her Activity; for in the Winter Cold and
Dismal, Hoary and Barren, Dumpish and Mournful are the Earth and Products
thereof to behold; for not only the Pores of its Superficies, but also of
Trees, Plants, etc. are bound up and constringed with Cold, which is yet more
and more, as that increases; then does not only the Central Sun and Archeius,
but also the Central and Vital Life of Beings contract their warming Sulphurs
and oleous Fuel, in order to preserve themselves against the terrifying Powers
of Cold; nay they set Centinals to keep them off from approaching their Tents,
that so none may pass but what know the Word, for all things seek
self-Preservation: By this means the Center of the Earth and Internal Powers of
other things are warmer in the Winter than in the Summer, as those Springs
manifest, even to a Vapor; and in this warmth an increase of Radical Moisture
is made, from whence Putrefaction and Condensation in order for Vegetation,
which is performed, as the Heat of the Sun approaches, so as to open the Pores
of the Earth, Trees and Vegetables, restoring their Barren and half-decayed
Natures to their pristine Activity: Then does the Central Fire again expand
itself, showing its Activity in Sublimation of Vapors, in which the Universal
Spirit is attracted, and again rarefied into that Oily and Vital Fuel, which
causes the increase of Trees, Grass and Flowers, being attracted in at the
Roots thereof, ascending to the Body, Branches, Buds, Flowers and Fruit, which
increases so long in Strength, as the external Heat has Power to Act, or till
the Form has given an end to its determinating Power, for one Fire attracts
another, so does the Celestial Sun the Vapor of the Central one in this Action;
so subtle is Nature as to attract and lay up Stores for her future
Preservation: Hence it is, that the sorming Sulphur congeals and maturates what
is sufficient for the producing of Fruits; for these, standing in a Medium
between the Central and Celestial, have the Benesit of both, we mean, the
specificating Power, given to Seed, in order for Concretion and Formation, for
the Celestial Sun only attracts the Spiritual Vapor, which is the Vehicle for
the conveying the nourishing Fuel to the different Forms; which Vapor does, as
it were, follow the Sun, as he passes through diversities of Climates, and has
his Active Power there, according to his pre-eminence in the Season and
Revolution of his Motion, which is the Reason why Vegetation is at one Time
here, another Time there, sometimes in the Northern, othertimes the Southern
part of the World; for the great God has universally dispensed his bounteous
Gifts to the whole Creation, it all being the Work of his Hands; and therefore
in describing the Nature of Particulars, we must have some Regard to the whole,
otherwise it may be performed but defectively: Therefore we say, That this
Vapor not improperly called the Mercury of Life, seeing that therein Centrals
and Celestials are united, without any Determination of Form, passes here and
there in Search of the same, sympathizing with the Heavenly Motion, even round
the whole Globe of the Earth, in order to cause Vegetation; the which is
performed in every Place, so long as the external Heat has Predominancy, but
as that declines, so comes on the Lunar Effects, in producing the Winter: And
this is the Office of the Celestial Sun and Moon, and the Reason of Winter and
Summer in all Places.

Now as to the Internal, we a little before said, That the Property of these
are something different to the former, by their seeming Opposite, yet
harmonious Effects; for as the External Heat increases and dilates the Pores of
Trees, Plants, etc. so at the same Time does the Internal Cold, Congealed,
Mercurial Spirits ascend, penetrating all Things, that have a Root in Nature,
in Order to cause their Vegetation, which is accomplished by the more
Sulphurous Warmth, following the same as Fire does Smoke, these being the Fuel
and nourishing Virtue of the Seminal Powers; yet is it but the light and
undeterminated Form, which as it nourishes the Seminal Virtue of the Tree or
Plant is converted into its Substance, and then receives the Determination of
Form, from the forming Power Originally given by the great Creator unto the
Seminal Virtue therein contained; for that every thing was to increase and
multiply by means of a Seed therein enclosed; and at the very same Time, that
the External Heat is busy to dilate, the internal Warmth is ready to contract,
and as a Male, acts in the Congelation of that Moisture, in order that it may
get a more Substantial Nature for Increase; also for Strength and future
Nourishment to the real Substance thereof; that so it may defend it self
against the extreme of Cold.

Hence we conceive, That while the internal Spirits are ascending by
Sublimation, which continues so long as the External Heat assists the same, all
this while is Nature building herself a Nest, and Antlike, providing her Food
against Winter; one Part she converts into Bark, another into Wood and
Substance, another into Fruit and Seed, by which means the subtilized Spirit
that ascends, is so exhausted in order to preserve the Specie, that it has
none to spare for a descention, and as little for a Congelation into Sap; for
the Sublimation of the Vapor ceases and the Bottle is then stoped, and had it
not an internal Nourishing Seminal Balsamic Sulphur, to preserve its Strength,
it were impossible for it to subsist till another Supply, Succor, or new
Sublimation of Vapor; and had not the Internal Heat dried up and corporified
the said Moisture, 'twere impossible that the subsisting Strength should be so
upheld in Nature as it is even in the Desiciency of the Benevolent Rays of the
Vivifying and Celestial Sun; but it is very evident and agreeable to the Laws
of Nature, that Dryness and internal Warmth should concentrate, so as to give
Durability, in that those, which are Moist, Green, Young and Tender in the
Winter, easily Dye and Wither; nay most Vegetables creep their Heads into the
Earth for Warmth, as the Stork slies to another Climate: Hence it is evident,
That the Sap is not congealed in the Nature of Sap, which is the Chylous Juice
of the first Action; but as the Chyle of Man's Body is by degrees of
Concoction, Fermentation, Digestion and Exaltation converted into the Substance
of Blood and Nervous Juices, etc. so is this into a more Corporal Balsam, nay
even as was said before, into the real Substance of the Tree itself: Hence it
is, and for want of a fresh Supply of Vapor, (by the Radical Fermentative Union
of both which the Sap is again produced) that the whole Tree in all its parts
is abundantly more dry in the Winter than in the Summer; and were the Sap
congealed in the Tree, as some suppose, then certainly would it contain
Moisture sufficient to succor and nourish itself another Year for Vegetation,
without a Supply, which Experience positively contradicts: For if in the spring
the Vapor is obstructed in returning to show its nourishing Virtues, the being
thereof so deprived becomes as the off spring of the Dead, for it has been for
this Season only preserved by the Magnetic Power of the Polar Axis, and by
having Root in the Earth, where the Internal Warmth is, and from the Strength
obtained in the Season from the maturating Sulphur, Central Fire or Internal
Heat, which, as is all-a long said, gives Strength and Maturity to Beings for
the Winter-Season, which is compared to the Hoary Head of Old Age, wherein the
youth full Strength and Vigor is spent; therefore Trees yearly renovate, as
has been touched at, for it is manifest that Trees in their Vegetative Season
are full of Sap, that they will searce or not at all burn; whenas they will in
that of the contrary freely do it; and though Moisture sometimes proceeds from
dryer Wood burned, yet is not that so much the Sap, as the Principles broken by
the Violence of Fire, and a Vineager mostly proceeding from the Sulphurous
Quality, seeing the same may artificially be produced from the driest of Coals:
Thus have you the general Office of the Celestial Sun and Moon, as also of the
Terrestrial and Central in producing and maintaining the Vegetative Power and
Strength in Trees, Plants, etc. whereby it is plain that the External Heat
opens, and the external Cold congeals, and vice versa, that the Internal
Mercurial Spirit Dissolves, but the Internal Sulphurous one coagulates;
therefore is it, that in our Opinion it is most proper to use Cold Water,
because cause that External Heat is apt to stir up the Internal one, and if
that have not some Artificial Check, it will presently work some evil effect;
therefore do we advise, That the Fumes of Sulphur, as also the Distillers Wash,
be used to sweeten, where these Rules have been neglected; because it is full
of that Gum, which assatiates the other's Thirst.

Now as to tunning, there be various manners used by most or all Brewers, one
being of Opinion, That it is best tunned, as it curles or begins to come;
another lets it be yet more ripe; but we say it is best to Cleanse and Tun just
as the Beer comes to a due Ferment, and gets a good Head; for then it has the
most Strength to cleanse itself in the Cask: And you may observe, That what
works over must be again supplied with Fresh Peer of the same Brewing; the
Workings may be added to your Small-Beer, or else to your Barm, and let the
clear run through a large Hyppocrates Sleeve or Flannel Bag, made in Form of a
Piramide, the Point being downwards, with a Hoop at the Top, hanging the same
over a Tub; and if you have great Quantities of Cleansings, you may in a large
Brewing get a Barrel of Beer.

Now things being thus ordered in Fermentation, Cleansing the Vessels and
Tunning, it may be a great means for the preserving of the Beer: But however,
Fixed Niter is as a sole Preserver, for it keeps the Beer from any Fret or
Unnatural Ferment; nay it will restore Decayed Beer unto its pristine Vigor,
as will be seen in the next Chapter; therefore do we conclude this and proceed
to that.

CHAP. V. In which we shall treat of Clearing of Beer, and restoring such as is
Sour and Decayed, so as to render it drinkable.
THe ways of clearing of Beer are many and various; but the best thing to make
it very Fine is Fixed Niter, as also the Quintessence of Malt, and of Wine; for
these, being Spiritual, render it also Clear, Thin and Spiritual, and preserve
it; Whites of Eggs being made into Balls with a little Flower and cast into the
Beer, do wonderfully Cleanse, Feed and preserve the same, especially if. you
add a little Izing-Glass thereunto. The Experience of the Oil of Barley
essentially made gives wonderful Satisfaction in the Feeding and Nourishing of
Beer, seeing that, as all other things, requires nourishment to preserve its
Being. The Quintessence of Barley does also wenderfully Nourish and Strengthen
Beer. It is also Cleared and Strengthened, even to such a degree, as that it
may be called Beer Royal; which is by adding into it in Fermentation some
Burning Spirit, which does not only clear the Beer, but also add Strength and
Durability thereunto, making it fit for Transportation to any Part of the
World, far beyond that of Double Beer, for the same Reason as is rendered in
our Britannean Magazine for Vinum Fortificatum or Syder Royal.

Now Beer thus ordered seldom or never sours for many Years, but if it should
not be so ordered but come to sour, we must look for a Remedy to recover the
same; and this may be eprformed by some Alkalizated Nature, which imbibes the
Acidity by Precipitation, and frees the Liquor therefrom: Of this Nature is the
Salt made from the Ashes of Barley Straw, being put in the Vessel and well
stirred. Glamber commends three or four Handfuls of Beech-Ashes, being throws
into the Vessel after the same manner, or if be not too very sour, a little put
in a Bag, without stirring performs the same. Chalk being put into sour. Beer
immediately renders it drinkable. Also Calcined Oyster-Shells, or Calxvive,
Egg-Shells burned, Tortoise-Shels, Sea-Shells, Crab's-eyes, Alkalized Coral, for
that they imbibe and attract the Sharpness, and turn it into Sweetness: Which
also may in great Measure be performed by a Handful of Wheat being thrown into
the Vessel; for this Sharpness proceeds from the want of Strength and Spirits,
or else from those wnating something to feed on: And therefore do we commend
the true Alkalized Quintessence of Malt, not only for returning Sour Beer
Sweet, but also for the Feeding and Nourishing such, as is Sound, for its
future Preservation. Glauber wonderfully commends his Sal Mirabilis, and Fixed
Niter, to be put in a Linen Bag, and hung in the Top of the Cask, so as to
reach unto the Liquor, not only ^^r rendering Sour Beer Drinkable, but also for
Preserving and Strengthening the same.

Thus having given you the Grounds and Reason, whence Fermentation proceeds,
and how the same may be reasonably exalted or prevented; and how Beer may be
preserved from Souring, as also how measurably to recover the same, when so, by
such Rules and Examples, as may enable you to prescribe others, and make your
Variations as need requires, we think it sufficient; and therefore proceed to
other Requisites.

CHAP. VI. In which we treat concerning the making of several Physical Drinks,
together with their Use and Virtues: Showing the right way of Bottleing Beer.
AS to the Ways of making Physical Drinks, they are varirious; some being made
from Herbs, others by the Spirits thereof exalted, others by their Essential
Salts and their Essences exalted, which indeed is the most superior Way; but
seeing that every Brewer and good Housewife cannot obtain these, we shall
prescribe such, as be of more easy Preparation.

We see that Beer made from Cypress, Cedar, Sassafrax, Wormwood, Scurveygrass,
Elder, Mint, Balm, etc. are highly esteemed, especially Purle and Scurvygrass,
here in England: But here is one thing which I cannot omit, which is this, they
take the Herbs at any Season, with the Gross and more Virtuous part together;
and put these into Low, Weak, Sick, Defective or Pricked Beers, and so the Taste
of the Herb overpowering the same, they think it sufficient, the Pallats of the
Drinkers being pleased, not minding whether they answer the End desired, sc.
the contributing something to the Health of their Drinkers, which they cannot
thus do, seeing they want that Internal Sanity themselves, which should perform
the same. Now seeing it is not only this, but much more, which might be said of
the like Nature, we shall recommend three things to the Consideration of every
Honest Brewer, whereby this Defect may in great Measure be Repaired and
Supplied: The first is, if you design to make any sort of Physical Beer, let
your Wort have a Sound Body, well wrought, and settle three Days, and while it
has yet a more Invisible and Secret Fermentation. Secondly, that you only add
in the Tops and choice Parts of such Herbs as are designed for the same. And
thirdly, That those Herbs lie not so long therein, as that their Spiritual
Qualities may be so much exhausted, that their Terrene ones by the Beer or
Liquor should be extracted; therefore they ought to be well pounded and
macerated, and in a small Bag put into the Cask, that so after their due Time,
which may be at the most twenty Days, they may be taken out again. These being
observed, you may make excellent Beer or Drinks, fully answering the End of
their Preparation. Also instead of such Herbs as are naturally juicy, you may
add in the Juice thereof; if Elder, let it be about two Gallons to a Barrel of
Strong Beer; but if the Juices are S^iptick, Eitter or Astringent, then will a
smaller Quantity serve. You may also have most excellent Physical Ales, by
adding the Spirits of the Concreats truly prepared, about thirty or forty
Drops, more or less, according to their Strength, into a Glass of Beer: The
True Spirit of Salt is an excellent Preserver unto Human Bodies, being taken
ten or twelve Drops after the same manner: It cures the Scurvey, resists
Putrefaction, etc. Also eight or ten Drops hereof being dropped into a Quart of
New Beer, makes it immediately taste St^le, and renders it drinkable. But above
all does our Spiritus Odon^ugiasas perform this, as you may see at large in the
Britannean Magazine of Wines.

Now if you have a mind to have any other Variations, in making diverse Physical
Ales, then proceed thus; Make a Syrrup of the Herb, and put two or three
Spoonfuls thereof into the Ale or Beer in Bottleing, and a Spoonful or two of
the Essence, whether it be Oranges, Lemons, or Scurvygrass, Cypress, Wormwood,
Mint, Balm, or the like: And if you practice this, your Experience will prompt
you beyond Words.

A Compound Physical Ale, good against the Scurvy, Dropsy, and other Diseases.
OF Scurvy grass one Peck,.
Water-Cresces twelve Handfuls, Brooklime six handfuls, English Rhubard six
ounces, Horse Radish four ounces, Anniseeds and Carraway Seeds of each one
ounce, Sweet Fennel one ounce, Sena one ounce, Polipody of the Oak four ounces,
Raisins stoned and Lent Figs, of each eight ounces, New Ale five gallons; make
it S. A.

A good way for the Bottling Beer.
IN the first Place take a little clear Water, or else such as is truly
impregnated with the Essence of any Herb, and to every Quart thereof add half a
pound of Mevis Sugar, and having very gently boiled and scumed the same, adding
thereunto a few Cloves, let it cool, fit to put Barm thereto; and being brought
to work, scum off the same again, and while it is in a smiling condition put
three spoonfuls thereof to each Bottle, and then filling up the same, cork fast
down. A sew Christals of Tartar also do well in Bottling Beer, adding a few
Drops of the Essence of Barley, Essence of Wine, or some other Essential
Spirits. Accept of this (Courteous Reader) until Opportunity shall admit us to
oblige you with things of a more Sublime Nature.

Postscript.
IN this Treatise, having spoke of Waters in general, laying down Rules
sufficient to inform any reasonable Man of their Nature and Preparation, yet I
think it may not be amiss to add a few Words as a Review of the whole, that is,
how Waters are altered by the Accidental Qualities, as well as by the Natural
ones, and from such things that superficially impregnate the Water with
something contrary to its internal Texture, that is, it purges itself therefrom
once, peradventure, in a Natural Day by its being ponderous, it joins with the
earthy Qualities in the Water, and so precipitates and washes away; but however
if it is constantly impregnated with such Heterogeneities, It much alters the
Purity of the Water, and makes the Time very uncertain: When we take it purged,
or when its Body is filled with the said Impurity, and so one and the same
Water shall variously alter in the manner of Decoction and Fermentation, being
taken at various Times. You have an Example of this in Thames water, a pure and
sine River, originally proceeding from a Spring, being fed by the influx of
many small Rivulents, and so increased to such a magnitude, as it is so
navigable, that it challenges many of the European Rivers appertaining unto the
Metropolitan Cities; but however it has these Inconveniences, as others have
also, for being near so great a City, it receives the Common Shores, and from
its adjacent Banks various Excrementious Things, as Dung, Urin, Fish-Bones,
Diers-Liquor, Soap-boylers Drugs, the Butchers Corruptions, and many other
Sulphurous, Stinking and Slimy Things, which wonderfully alter the Water, so
that sometimes, especially if taken in the Time, when it is not purged, the
Wort will not bear boiling, but becomes thick, and will not kindly Ferment, and
so drinks flubby, unpleasant, and shows the like Effects, for it will soon Sour
and corrupt; so that many, who use the Thames Water, are afraid to boil their
Liquor or Wort sufficient, because it will grow thick, and this by them is
generally observed, but the reason thereof not conceived: For other Times the
Water being taken, when it has purged itself, it may be boiled with the same
Success as other Waters, and the Beer or Ale will be very Clear and Durable,
drinking Brisk and Pleasant: The wonderful Difference of Beer and Ale, brewed
from the Thames Water, is not unknown to many of the Curious observers, neither
is the Reason thereof so obscure, but that it may be easily comprehended;
seeing Water is the general Menstruum, taking in the impure as well as the
purer Natures, even after it is in a measure assatiated with the Elixeration of
the Malt; for how many different Savors may be impregnated in the Wort, from
whence the various or different Relishes to Beer or Ale proceeds: For if we add
but a few Coriander-Seeds, gently infused in a small quantity of Wort, and
afterward wrought in the whole, it will make it drink like Chinay-Ale; and so
if you add an Ounce of the Powder of Orrice into a Quart of new Drink, gently
infused, and then add that to a Barrel, it gives it the Relish of the
Rastberry, adding virtue thereunto; for this Reason do we advise you to add six
or eight Ounces of Ginger, and as much Orrice to an Hogshed of Strong Wormwood;
and then you will enrich it so, as two or three Spoonfuls will be sufficient
for a Quart of clear Drink, having Virtues also equal with the smalness of its
Dose. Likewise Black-cherries, Elder-berries, Rasberries, etc. being added,
make excellent and virtuous Drinks; nay how many Physical Ales may be made by
Simple and Compound Infusions; but seeing this is so obvious to all, that
impregnation of different Idea's gives a different Alteration of Virtue,
according as they proceed from a pure Root, but the contrary if they proceed
from an impure one, as is manifested by daily Experience.

Advertisement.
I. DR. Y. worth's Pilula Anodyna Specificata and Cathartica, or the Friendly
Balsamic Pill. The Dose is one Pill, Price one Shill. per Box.

II. Species Nostra Mineralis, or the Spagyrical Triumphant Powder; the Paper
containing 3 Doses, Price one Shilling Six Pence.

III. Cordonum Regale Lenitum, or the Royal Purging Cordial; the Dose is from
one to three Spoonfuls, half Pint Bottle Price two Shillings and six Pence.

Those that desire to be furnished with these, or any of them, either Wholesale
or Retail, may apply themselves to the Author, at the Blue Ball and Star in S.
Paul's Shadwel: Or to Jo. Spire, Physician, at the two Blew twisted Posts in
Fair-Street, on Horsly-Down. or to Jo. Tailor, Bookseller, at the Ship in S.
Paul's Churchyard: Or to Mr. Jo. Baker, Perriwig-maker, at the Wool-pack in
the Strand.

Books Printed for Samuel Clement at the Swan in S. Paul's Churchyard.
THE English Grammar, setting forth the Grounds of the English Tongue; and
particularly its Genius in making Compounds and Derivatives, with many other
Useful and Curious Observations: Wherein are also Explained the usual
Abbreviations, the several Hands used in Writing, and Characters in Printing,
the Variety of Styles, the Art of true Pointing, and the way to understand
Books: With a Prefatory Diiscourse about the Original and Excellency of the
English Tongue; And at the end an Alphabetick Collection of the Monosyllables,
being a Treatise of Orthography for Writers, and of Rhimes for Poets. A
Necessary Work in general for all Persons desirous to understand the Ground and
Genius of the English, and very proper to prepare Young Men for the Latin
Tongue. By Guy Miege, Gent.

God's Revenge against Murder and Adultery, expressed in Thirty several
Tragical Histories: Wherein are lively delinated the various Stratagems, subtle
Practices and deluding Oratory used by our Modern Galants, in order to the
seducing young Ladies to their unlawful Pleasures. To which are annexed the
Triumps of Friendship and Chastity, in some Heroical Examples and Delightful
Histories. The whole illustrated with about fifty Elegant Epistles, relating to
Love and Gallantry. By Thomas Wright, M. A. of S. Peter's College in Cambridge.

A Complete History of the Late Revolution, from the first Rise of it to this
present Time; in Three Parts.


