No Wicked Man a Wise Man, True Wisdom DESCRIBED. The EXCELLENCY OF Spiritual,
Experimental and Saving Knowledge, above all Humane Wisdom and Learning: With
Directions how to become Wise. Wherein also is proved (...) what Sensual Men
account the greatest Freedom, is indeed the most perfect Slavery and
Vassallage. BEING A choice and cheap Gift to profit and please a Friend. By R.
Young (...) in Essex. Florilegu^.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Receive my instruction and not silver, and knowledge rather then choice gold.
For wisdom is better then rubies, and all the things that may be desired are
not to be compared to it, Prove. 8. 10, 11. See Job 28. 15, to 20. Prove. 1. 23.
Psalm. 111. 10. Joh. 7. 17. Psalm. 25. 9, 14. Eccles. 2. 26. Prove. 28. 5. James
1. 5. Rare Scriptures touching Wisdom.

London, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, and are to be sold by James Crumpe in little
St. Bartholomews Well-yard; and by Peter Parker in Popes-Head-Alley. With 39
other pieces composed by the same Author. 1666.

True WISDOM Described, etc.
Section 1.
MEn no more differ from beasts, plants, stones, in shape, speech, reason, then
some men differ from others in brain, in heart, in life: Whence the very
heath^n Poets usually and most fitly compare some men to stones, for their
hardness and ^nsensibleness; others to plants, that only fill their veins; a
third sort to beasts, that please their senses too; a fourth to evil Angels,
that only sin, and cause others to sin; a fifth to good Angels, that are still
in motion, always serving God, and doing good, yet ever rest.

Besides, experience teaches, that men's judgments and censures are as various
as their pallats: for what one admires, another slights, as is evident by our
Saviors auditors, of which some admired, others censured, a third sort wept, a
fourth scoft, a fifth trembled, a sixth blasphemed when they heard him. And how
should it be otherwise? when the greater part are as deeply in love with vice
and error, as the rest are with virtue and truth; when men's conditions and
constitutions vary as much as their faces; as the holy Ghost intimates, in
comparing several men, to almost every several creature in the Universe. Nor is
the Epicure more like a Swine, the Lustful person a Goat* (...) ^udulent man a
Fox, the Backbiter a barking Dog, (...) an Asp, the Oppressor a Wolf, the
Persecutor (...), the Church-robber a Wild Bore, the Seducer a Serpent, yea a
Devil, the Traitor a Viper, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 17. Luke 13. 32. Phil. 3. 2. Psalm.
22. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21. and 74. 13, 14, 19. and 80. 13. Mat. 23. 33. Dan. 7. 4,
5, 6. etc. Zeph. 3. 3, 4, etc. Cant. 2. 15, 17. etc. then every of them is
unlike another.

Amidst so much variety, I have chosen to acquaint you how one man differs
from, and excels another in knowledge and wisdom; and to prove that to be wise
indeed, is the portion but of a few, even in our Goshen, where is so much means
of Light and Grace.

All sorts of men may be comprised under one of these three Heads: The Sensual.
Rational. Spiritual.


For if you observe it, some men like the Moon at Full, have all their light
toward earth, none toward heaven: Others like the Moon at Wain or Change,
have all their light to heaven wards, none to the earth: a third sort like to
the Moon in Eclipse, as having no light in it self, neither toward earth, nor
toward heaven. Insomuch that one excels another (in wisdom) as the stars excel
one another in glory. Of which particularly.

First, There is no less difference between the rational and sensual, the wise
and simple, the learned and unlearned, then there is between men and beasts, as
Menander speaks; or between the living and the dead, as another has it: and
yet the rational do not so far excel the sensual, as the spiritual excel the
rational.

Touching these three degrees of comparison, I begin with the sensual. Sensual,
or (as wise Solomon calls them) brutish men, that have been ill bred, are so
drowned in sin and sensuality, and their spirits so frozen, and pitifully
benumbed with worldliness, and wicked customs, that they cannot judge aright,
either of spiritual matters, or rectified reason. They know no other way then
the flesh leads them. It is the weight that sets all their wheels a going; the
horses that draw their chariot, the very life of their corruption, the
corruption of their life, without which they do nothing. Yea in matters divine
and spiritual, they are of as deep a judgment as was Callico, who stuffed his
pillow (a brass pot) with straw, to make it soft. Or that German Clown, who
undertook to be very ready in the ten Commandments, but being demanded by the
Minister which was the first, made answer, Thou shall not eat. Or that simple
Fellow, who thought Pontius Pilate must needs be a Saint, because his name was
put into the Creed. They are like the Ostrich, Job 39. 17. whom God has
deprived of wisdom, and to whom he has given no part of understanding. And
which leaves them without all hope of being wiser, they had rather keep
conscience blind, that it may flatter them, then inform it, that it may give a
just verdict against them; counting it less trouble to believe a favorable
falsehood, then to examine whether it be true.

Secondly, They are so far from receiving instruction, that they will scorn and
scoff at their Admonishers. As do but tell them of their swearing, drinking,
whoring, you are sure to be called Quaker, Phanatick, or the like. Yea what a
clamor will the blundering rabble make, if they but hear one reprove a
blasphemer, or any way endeavor to stop them in their way to destruction? and
what a number of sharp and deadly arrows will each of them shoot both at the
good and goodness, affirming with incredible impudence, accompanied with
invincible ignorance, that there are not worse men in the world, then the
Religious? and still the more sottish, the more censorious. It is the nature of
ignorant and carnal men, that walk after the flesh, in the lusts of
uncleanness, (whom St. Peter calls Brute beasts led with sensuality, and made
to be taken and destroyed) to speak evil of the things which they understand
not, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Nor will they believe any thing, but what they see with
their eyes, or feel with their fingers.

And as in spiritual, so in natural things also. An Ignorant Rustic seeing a
Geometrician drawing of Lines, not knowing to what end he does the same, is apt
to judge him foolish and fantastic: Tell a plain Country fellow that the Sun
is bigger then his Cart-wheel, and swifter in course then the best of his
Horses, he will laugh you to scorn: yea, I have red of a simple Clown that
killed his Ass for drinking up the Moon, which he had a little before seen in
the water: and of another, that looking into his Well, and seeing face answer
face, ran home in all haste to call for aid to apprehend the thief. And
commonly as they have no reason, so they will hear none. Now he that will learn
of none but himself, has a fool to his Teacher; and such as refuse admonition,
are bruitsh, as the holy Ghost affirms Prove. 12. 1. And destroy their own
souls, chap. 15. 32. By all which it appears, that their knowledge is
ignorance, their wisdom folly, their sight blindness. They neither consider
what reason speaks, or religion commands; but what the will and appetite
affects. For will is the Axeltree, lusts and passions the wheels whereupon
all their actions are carried and do run. Appetite being their Lord, Reason
their Servant, and Religion their Slave. Whereas religion should govern their
judgment, judgment and reason their wills and affections, as Adam should have
done Eve. They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: The
carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 5, to 9. So that it is impossible for fleshly
minded men, to believe what Sots they are, touching the good of their souls.
Wherefore when we see the folly and misery of those that serve sin and Satan,
and how peevishly averse they are to their own eternal salvation, let us pity
them, as being so much more worthy our commiseration, as they are more
incapable of their own misery. And so much of the first sort, namely,
Sensualists.

Sect. 2. Secondly, There is another degree of knowledge, that is accrued or
obtained by education and learning, observation and experience, called natural
or speculative knowledge, or reason improved. For humane learning, is as oil to
the lamp of our reason, and makes it burn clearer; but faith and illumination
of the Spirit, more then doubles the s^ght of our minds, as a prospective glass
does the corporal sight, Mat. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 7, to 17. Joh. 12. 46. For as
the soul is the lamp of the body, and reason of the soul, and religion of
reason, and faith of religion; so Christ is the light and life of Faith, Joh.
1. 9, and 8. 12. Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 14. Christ is the sun of the soul,
reason and faith the two eyes: reason discerns natural object, faith spiritual
and supernatural. We may see far with our bodily eye sense, farther with the
minds eye reason; but farther with the souls eye says then with both. And the
believer has the addition of Gods spirit, and faith above all other men. I am
the ligh^ of the world, says our Savior, he that follows me (meaning by a
lively faith) shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life,
Joh. 8. 12. and more see two eyes then one; yea, the day with one eye, does far
more things descry, then night can do with more then Argos eyes. So that as
mere sense is incapable of the rules of reason, so reason is no less incapable
of the things that are divine and supernatural, Jer. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15,
16. Ephesians. 5. 8. And as to speak is only proper to men, so to know the secrets
of the Kingdom of heaven, is only proper to believers, Psalm. 25. 14. Prove. 3.
32. Amos 3. 7.

Now of natural and speculative knowledge, the wicked have as large a share as
the godly; but of spiritual experimental and saving knowledge, which is
supernatural, and descends from above, Jam. 3. 17. and keeps a man from
every evil way, Prove. 2. 12. the wicked have no part with the godly. Whence all
men in their natural condition are said to be blind and in darkness, Mat. 4.
16. and 15. 14. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. and 5. 8. whereas believers are called children
of light, and of the day, 1 These. 5. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Nor is this kind of knowledge any way attainable but by grace from above. No
learning, experience, or pains in study and books, will bring them to it,
Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. and 3. 19. except they become new creatures, have hearts,
eyes and ears sanctified from above, and that the holy Ghost becomes their
teacher, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3. 4. Psalm. 111. 10. Joh. 15. 15. Romans 8. 14, 15.

Nor is it saving knowledge that they seek after: for though many of them be
great seekers after knowledge, great painstakers to become wise; yet it is not
divine and supernatural knowledge that they labor for, or desire.

Indeed wisdom in the largest sense, has ever carried that show of excellency
with it, that not only the good have highly affected it, (as Moses who studied
for wisdom, and Solomon who prayed for wisdom, and the Queen of Sheba who
traveled for wisdom, and David, who to get wisdom, made the word his
counselor, hated every false way, and was a man after Gods own heart) but the
very wicked have labored for it, who are ashamed of other virtues; as, O the
pleasure that rational men take in it! Prove. 2. 3, 10, 11. and 10. 14. Phil. 3.
8.

Knowledge is so fair a Virgin, that every clear eye is in love with her; it is
a Pearl despised of none but Swine, Prove. 2. 3, 10, 11. (whereas brutish and
blockish men as little regard it) they who care not for one dram of goodness,
would yet have a full scale of knowledge. Amongst all the trees of the garden,
none so pleases them as the tree of knowledge. And as wisdom is excellent
above all, so it is affected of all, as Oil was, both of the wise and foolish
Virgins. It has been a Mark that every man has shot at, ever since Eve sought
to be as wise as her Maker: but as an hundred shoot, for one that hits the
White; so an hundred aim at wisdom, for one that lights upon it, Eccles. 7. 28.
because they are mistaken in the thing: for as Jacob in the dark mistook Leah
for Rachel, so many a blind soul takes that to be wisdom, which is not; like
Eve, who thought it wisdom to eat the forbidden fruit; and Absalom, who thought
it wisdom to lie with his Fathers Con^^^es in the sight of all the people; and
the false Steward, who thought it wisdom to deceive his Master. And so of
Joseph's brethren, of Pharaoh and his deep Counselors, of Ach^ophel, of Herod,
of the Pharisees in their project to destroy Jesus; and many the like. All
these thought they did wisely, but they were mistaken, and their projects
proved foolish, and turned to their own ruin.

Sect. 3. But take some instances to prove that all sorts of Naturians are
Fools, in comparison of the Godly. I Will begin with those that repute
themselves, and are reputed by others, the wisest amongst men: And they are
your profound Humanist, and cunning Politicians, wherein you shall see, whether
the most and greatest number are not grossly mistaken in their opinions and
verdicts touching wisdom.

First, for profound Humanists, a man would think that they were incomparably
wise, for none so thirst after knowledge and wisdom as they, and to get it they
are no niggards of their labor: nor do they leave any thing unstudied but
themselves. They know all parts and places of the created world, can discourse
of every thing visible and invisible, divine, humane, and mundane, whether it
be meant of substances or accidents, are ignorant of nothing but the way to
heaven, are acquainted with all Laws and Customs, save the Law of God, and
Customs of Christianity; they are strangers no where but in the Court of their
own Consciences: Yea, they build as hard, and erect as high as did the
Babel-builders, but all to no purpose; they never come to the roof, and when
they die, they are undone. They spend all their time in seeking after wisdom,
as Alchimists spend all their Estates to find out the Philosophers stone, but
never find it; they never attain to that, which is true wisdom indeed. For as
the ragged Poet told Petronius, that Poetry was a kind of learning, that never
made any man rich: so humane learning of its self, never made a wise man.

As thus (if I may be so bold) what is it, or what does it profit a man, to
have the etymology and derivation of wisdom and knowledge, without being
affected with that which is true wisdom indeed, to be able to decline virtue,
yet not love it? to have the theory, and be able to prattle of wisdom by rote,
yet not know what it is by effect and experience? To have as expert a tongue,
and as quick a memory as Portius, a perfect understanding, great science,
profound eloquence, a sweet style? To have the force of Demosthenes, the depth
of Thesius, the perswas^^e art of Tully, etc. if withal he wants Grace, and
lives remisly? With the A^^ronomer, to observe the motion of the heavens, while
his heart is buried in the earth? to search out the cause of many effects, and
let pass the consideration of the principal, and most necessary? With the
Historian, to know what others have done, and how they have sped, while he
neglects the imitation of such as are gone the right way? With the Lawmakers,
to set down many Laws in particular, and not to remember the common Law of
nature, or Law general that all must die? Or lastly, with Adam to know the
Nature of all the Creatures: and with Solomon to be able to dispute of ever
thing, even from the Cedar to the Hyssop or Pellitory; when in the mean time he
lives like Dives, dies like Nabal, and after all goes to his own place with
Judas? Alas! many a Fool goes to hell with less costs, less pains, and far more
quiet: That is but raw knowledge, which is not digested into practice. It is
not worth the name of knowledge, that may be heard only and not seen, Joh. 13.
17. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Good discourse is but the froth of wisdom: the sweet and solid
fruit of it, is in well framed actions: that is true knowledge, that makes the
knower blessed. We only praise that Mariner, that brings the Ship safe to the
Haven.

What says Aristotle? to be wise and happy are terms reciprocal. And Socrates,
That learning, says he, pleases me but a little, which nothing profits the
owner of it, either to virtue or happiness: And being demanded, Who was the
wisest and happiest man? He answered, He that offends least. He is the best
scholar that learns of Christ obedience, humility, etc. He is the best
Arithmetician, that can add grace to grace; he is the best learned, that knows
how to be saved. Yea, all the Arts in the world, are artless Arts to this.

Sect. 4. The best knowledge is about the best things; and the perfection of
all knowledge, to know God, and our selves: Knowledge and learning, says
Aristotle, consists not so much in the quantity, as in the quality; not in
the greatness, but in the goodness of it. A little gold (we know) is more worth
than much dross: a little Diamond, than a rockie Mountain. So one drop of
wisdom, guided by the fear of God; one spark of spiritual, experimental, and
saving knowledge, is more worth than all humane wisdom and learning: yea, one
scruple of holiness, one dram of faith, one grain of grace, is more worth than
many pounds of natural parts. And indeed, Faith and Holiness, are the nerves
and sinews; yea, the soul of saving knowledge.

What says Aristotle? No more then the knowledge of goodness, makes one to be
named a good man; no more does the knowledge of wisdom alone, cause any person
properly to be called a wiseman. Saving knowledge of the truth, works a love of
the truth known: yea, it is a uniform consent, of knowledge and action. He only
is wise, that is wise for his own soul: he whose conscience pulls all he
hears and reads to his heart, and his heart to God: who turns his knowledge
to faith, his faith to feeling, and all to walk worthy of his Redeemer. He
that subdues his sensual desires and appetite, to the more noble faculties of
reason and understanding, and makes that understanding of his to serve him, by
whom it is, and does understand. He that subdues his lusts to his will, submits
his will to reason, his reason to faith; his says, his reason, his will,
himself, to the will of God: this is practical, experimental, and saving
knowledge; to which the other is but a bare name, or title. A competent estate
(we know) well husbanded, is better than a vast patrimony neglected. Never any
mere man (since the first) knew so much as Solomon; many that have known less,
have had more command of themselves.

Alas! they are not always the wisest, that know most for none more wise and
learned in the worlds account, then the Scribes and Pharisees; yet Christ calls
them four times blind, and twice fools in one chapter, Mat. 23. And the like of
Balaam, 2 Pet. 2. 16. who had such a prophetical knowledge, that scarce any of
the Prophets had a clearer revelation of the Messiah to come. And the same may
be affirmed of Judas and Achitophel; for many that know a great deal less, are
far wiser. Yea, one poor crucified thief, being converted, in an hours time,
had more true wisdom and knowledge infused into him, then had all the Rulers,
Scribes and Pharisees.

It is very observable, what the high Priest told the Council, as they were set
to condemn Christ, Ye know nothing at all: he spoke truer then he meant it; for
if we know not the Lord Jesus, our knowledge is either nothing, or nothing
worth. Rightly a man knows no more then he practices. It is said of Christ, 2
Cor. 5. 21. that he knew no sin, because he did no sin: in which sense, he
knows no good, that does no good. These things if ye know, (says our Savior)
happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13. 17. and in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep the
commandments of God, and do them; for this is your wisdom and understanding
before God and man.

What is the notional sweetness of honey, to the experimental taste of it? It
is one thing to know what riches are, and another thing to be Master of them:
it is not the knowing, but the possessing of them that makes rich. Many have a
depth of knowledge, and yet are not soul-wise; have a Library of Divinity in
their heads, not so much as the least Catechism in their Consciences; full
brains, empty hearts. Yea, you shall hear a flood in the tongue, when you
cannot see one drop in the life. Insomuch, that in the midst of our so much
light, and means of Grace, there be few, I fear, that have the sound and saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified, which was the only care and
study of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

Sect. 5. And that I am not mistaken, the effect shows: For if men knew either
God or Christ, they could not but love him; and loving him, they would keep his
Commandments, Joh. 14. 15. For hereby (says St. John) it is manifest that we
know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 John 2. 3. But he that says, I know
him, and yet keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and there is no truth in
him, ver. 4. What says our Savior? This is life eternal to know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou (...) sent, Joh. 17. 3. But how
shall a man know, whether he has this knowledge? Answ. St. John tells you, 1 John 2. 3. and so plainly, that you cannot be deceived, except you desire to
deceive your own soul.

The knowledge of God that saves us, is more then a bare apprehension of him;
it knows his power, and therefore fears him; knows his Justice, and therefore
serves him; knows his mercy, and therefore truis him; knows his goodness, and
therefore loves him, etc. For he that has the saving knowledge of God, or of
Christ, has every other Grace: there is a sweet correspondence between every
one, where there is any one in truth: As in the generation, the head is not
without the body, nor the body without each member, nor the soul without its
powers and faculties; so in the regeneration, where there is any one grace in
truth, there is every one, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If you will see it in particulars,
read Psalm. 9. 10. Jer. 9. 24. 1 John 4. 6. Joh. 4. 10. 1 John 4. 7, 8 and 2. 3.
Job 42. 5, 6. which Scriptures show, that as feeling is inseparable to all the
organs of sense, the eye sees and feels, the ear hears and feels, the palate
tastes and feels, the nostrils smell and feel; so knowledge is involved in
every grace: Faith knows and believes, Charity knows and loves, Patience knows
and suffers, Temperance knows and abstains, Humility knows and stoops,
Repentance knows and mourns, Obedience knows and does, Confidence knows and
reioyces, Hope knows and expects, Compassion knows and pities: Yea, as there is
a power of water in every thing that grows; it is fatness in the Olive,
sweetness in the fig, cheerfulness in the grape, strength in the Oak, talness
in the Cedar, redness in the Rose, whiteness in the Lilly, etc. So knowledge is
in the hand obedience, in the mouth benediction, in the knee humility, in the
eye compassion, in the heart charity, in the whole body and soul piety. Alas!
If men had the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, it would disperse and dispel all
the black clouds of their reigning sins in a moment; as the Sun does no sooner
show his face but the darkness vanishes: or as Caesar did no sooner look upon
his enemies, but they were gone. Egypt swarmed with locusts, till the west wind
came, that left not one: He cannot delight in sin, nor dote upon this world,
that know^ Christ savingly.

Virtue is ordained a wife for knowledge; and where these two join, there will
proceed from them a noble proginie, a generation of good works. Again, as the
water engenders ice, and the ice again engenders water, so knowledge begets
righteousness, and righteousness again begets knowledge. It is between
science and conscience, as it is between the stomach and the head; for as in
man's body, the raw stomach makes a rhumatick head, and the rhumatick head
makes a raw stomach; so science makes our conscience good, and conscience
makes our science good: Nor is it so much scientiae capitis, as conscientia
cordis, that knows Christ and our selves; whence Solomon says, Give thine
heart to wisdom, Prove. 2. 10. and let wisdom enter into thine heart, Prove. 4.
4. And when he would acquaint us how to become wise, he tells us, that the fear
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1. 7. as if the first lesson to
be wise, were to be holy. Again, if it be asked, Why the natural man perceives
not the things of the spirit of God? Saint Paul answers, he cannot know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and indeed, if they are
spiritually discerned, how should they discern them that have not the spirit?
For though the outward man receives the elements and rudiments of Religion by
breeding and education, yet his inward man receives them by heavenly
inspiration, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12, 13. and 12. 3, 8. Mat. 16. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 29. 2.
3, 4. Psalm. 111. 10. Luke 24. 45. John 15. 15. And this alone is enough to
prove, that no wicked man is a wise man; for if God alone be the giver of it,
we may be sure that he will reveal his secrets to none but such as he knows
will improve their knowledge to his glory and the good of others: Even as the
husbandman will not cast his seed, but into ground that will return him a good
harvest, Psalm. 25. 14. Luke 24. 45. Mark 4. 34. Genesis 18. 17. 1 John 4. 7.

Sect. 6. But would there men (any one, even the best of them) thus improve, or
employ their knowledge? Or do they desire it to any such end? No: but to some
other end, as I shall in the next place acquaint you.

Some men desire not to know, some desire only to know; Or rather thus, Few
men in comparison desire knowledge, fewer that desire divine and supernatural
knowledge; fewest of all that desire to be the better, or that others should be
the better for their knowledge: More particularly, a world of men desire
knowledge for no other end but to remove their ignorance; as Pharaoh used
Moses, but to remove the plagues. Others again study the Scriptures, and other
good Books, only to make gain thereof; or to be the abler to dispute and
discourse, as boys go into the water, only to play and paddle there, not to
wash and be clean. With Eve, they highly desire the tree of knowledge, but
regard not the tree of life.

As I would fain know what fruit or effect the knowledge of most men produces
in them, except it be to enable them to dispute and discourse, to increase wit,
or to increase wealth, or to increase pride, or perhaps to increase Athism, and
to make them the more able and cunning to argue against the truth and power of
Religion? Whether the utmost of their aim be not to enrich, dignifie, and
please themselves; not on^ casting the eye of their souls at Gods glory, their
neighbors good, or their own salvation? Whether their main drift be not
purchasing of a great estate for them and theirs, without either fear of God,
regard of men, or the discharge of their duty and calling? Again, whereas a
godly man and a good Christian, thinks himself as happy in giving light to
others as in receiving it himself; how many are there, who as themselves are
never the better (I mean in regard of grace) for their great wisdom and
learning, so no more are others; for commonly* they resemble dark lanthorns
which have light, but so shut up, and reserved as if it were not: and what is
the difference betwixt concealed skill and ignorance? it is the nature and
praise of good, to be communicative, whereas if their hidden knowledge do ever
look out, it casts so sparing a light, that it only argues it self to have an
unprofitable being.

And for the most part these men if they may be thought great Rabbis, deep and
profound Scholars, this is the height of their ambition, though neither the
Church be benefited, nor God glorified by it; whereas they ought the contrary:
for as the grace of God is the fountain from which our wisdom flows, so the
glory of God should be the Ocean to which it should run: yea, that God may be
honored with, and by our wisdom, is the only end for which he gives us to be
wise: And for default of this end, he not seldom crosses the means whereby
while men strive to expel ignorance, they fail into error; as an Emperick to
cure one disease, causes a worse. Briefly, to conclude this point, So many as
are puffed up with their knowledge, or do not part with their sins, show that
they never sought it for Gods glory, but for their own honor and glory. And
certainly if we seek not Gods glory in doing his work, he will give us no wages
at the latter end.

Sect. 7. But for men to do no good with their gifts is not all; yea it were
well if that were the worst, for not a few of them resemble Achitophel and
Jonadab, who employed their wit wickedly, and do mischief instead of good with
their wisdom: like Herod, whom you shall see turning over the Bible, searching
the Scriptures, examining the Prophets; ^ut to what end and purpose? To know
good, but to do evil: yea, the greatest evil under the Sun, slay Christ in the
cradle: With many, their knowledge and learning is not for God and for Gideon,
but for Antichrist and for Babylon: and so of all other gifts; how many are the
worse for them? As give Saul a Kingdom, and he will tyrannize; give Nabal
plenty, and he will be drunk; give Judas an Apostleship, and he will sell his
Master for money; let Sermantus have a good wit, he will exercise it in scoffing
at holiness. Briefly, how often does wisdom without grace prove like a fair
estate in the hands of a fool, which not seldom becomes the owners ruin: Or
Absoloms hair, which was an ornanent, wherewith he hanged himself: So that
wisdom without grace, is nothing else but a cunning way of undoing our selves
at the last. Many men's knowledge to them, being like the Ark to the Philistims,
which did them more hurt than good; when their knowledge makes them prouder,
not better; more rebellious, not more serviceable; as it is, Isa. 47. 10. Thy
wisdom and thy knowledge they have caused thee to rebel. And very often this
falls out, that as the best soil usually yeildeth the worst air, so without
grace there is nothing more pestilent than a deep wit, no such prey for the
Devil, as a good wit unsanctified. Wit and learning well used, is like the
golden earrings and bracelets of the Israelites, abused, like the same gold
cast into an Idol; than which, nothing more abominable.

Now when it comes to this, That they fight against God with the weapon he has
given them; when with those the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 73. 9. They set their
mouths against heaven, and are like an unruly Jade, that being full fed kicks
at his Master; what course does the Lord take with them? Answ. Read but that
Parable, Luke 19. 24. John 7. 17. it will inform you: For to him that uses his
Talent of knowledge well, he gives more; as to the servant that used his
talents well, he doubled them: but to them that use not their knowledge well,
much more if they abuse it, he takes away that which he had formerly given
them: as he took heat from the fire when it would burn his Children, Dan. 3.
27. As you may see, Isa. 44. 25. (...) These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Joh. 7. 17. Psalm.
111. 10. 1 (...) 26. Prove. 28. 5. Mat. 21. 43. Acts 26. ^8. Isa (...) and 44.
25. and 6. 9, 10. Dan. 2. 19* 23. Job 5. 13, 14. John 9. 39. and 12. 40. Romans
1. 28. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 20. 2 Thessalonians. ^. 10, 11, 12. turn to the
places, for they are rare. I will destroy the tokens of the South sayers, and
make them that conjecture, fools: I will turn the wise men backward, and make
their knowledge foolishness, says the Lord, Isa. 44. 25. He takes the wise in
their own craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish, Job 5. 13.
the case of Achitophel: And justly are they forsaken of their reason, who have
abandoned God; yea, most just it is, that they who want grace, should want wit
too. And so much of abusing their gifts.

Lastly, These great knowers and wise men are so far from desiring soul wisdom,
and saving knowledge to the ends before specified, that they do not at all
desire it, for that it suits not with their condition. For Natural men desire
only humane and mundane knowledge: Spiritual men, that which is heavenly and
supernatural: and the reason why they desire it not, is, for that they know it
not. A man desires not that he knows not, says Chrysostom; neither are
unknown evils feared: wherefore the work of Regeneration, begins at
Illumination, Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Now according as men are wise, they prize and value this wisdom, and endeavor
to obtain it, Prove. 18. 15. For it is more true of divine wisdom, than it was
of that Grecian beauty: No man ever loved her, that never saw her; no man ever
saw her, but he loved her.

And so on the contrary, according as men are ignorant and blockish, they
under-value and dis-esteem it, hate it and are prejudiced aginst it: And
hereupon carnal men being blinded by the Prince of darkness, together with
their own wickedness, and being of a reprobate judgment, do most usually and
familiarly term and esteem this soul-wisdom, this divine, spiritual,
experimental, and saving-knowledge, to be mere foolishness or madness, Wisd. 5.
3. to 9. and the Professors thereof to be fools and madmen: Elisha was counted
no better, 2 Kings 9. 11. and the rest of the Prophets, Hos. 9. 7. and St.
Paul, Acts 26. 20. and all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. 10. Yea, our Savior Christ
himself with open mouth was pronounced mad by his carnal hearers, Joh. 10. 20.
Mark 3. 21. and this has been the worlds vote ever since. The sincere
Christian was so reputed in Pliny's time, and after in St. Austin's time: yea,
Julian the Pelagian could give St. Austin, that he had none of the wise Sages,
nor the learned Senate of Philosophers on his side; but only a company of mean
Tradesmen, of the vulgar sort, that took part with him: whose answer was, Thou
reproachest the weak things of the world, which God has chosen to confound the
things that are mighty.

To worldly men Christian wisdom seems folly faith Gregory. And well it may,
for even the wisdom of God is foolishness with the world, 1 Cor. 1. 18 23.
therefore no disparagement to us his servants, if they repute us fools; nor I
think any honor to such sensualists that so repute us: However we will give
them their due? For,

Sect. 8. I grant that in some kind of skill they outstrip the best ^f Gods
people, who, if they are put to it, may answer as Themistocles did when one
invited him to touch a Lute; for as he said, I cannot fiddle, but I can make a
small town a great State: So the godly may say, we cannot give a solid reason
in Nature, why Nilus should over flow only in the Summer, when waters are at
the lowest? Why the Lodestone should draw Iron; or inc^ine to the pole star?
How the heat of the stomach, and the strength of the nether chap should be so
great? Why a flash of lightning should melt the sword, without making any
impression in the scabbard? Kill the child in the womb, and never hurt the
Mother? How the waters should stand upon a heap, and yet not over flow the
earth? Why the clouds above being heavy with water, should not fall to the
earth suddenly, seeing every heavy thing descends? Except the reason which
God gives, Genesis 1. 6. and Job 38. 8. to 12. and 26* 8. Psa. 104. 9. But we
know the mystery of the Gospel, and what it is to be born a new, and can give a
solid reason of our faith: we know that God is reconciled to us, the Law
satisfied for us, our sins pardoned, our souls acquitted, and that we are in
favor with God* which many of these with their great learning do not know. And
thus the godly are proved wiser than the wisest humanist that wants grace. You
have likewise the reasons why these great knowers, know nothing yet as they
might and ought to know; that is to say,

First, Because they are mistaken in the thing; they take speculative knowledge
for soul wisdom; and soul saving wisdom to be foolishness and madness. Now if a
man take his aim amiss, he may shoot long enough ere he hit the white: and
these men are as one that is gone a good part of his journey, but must come
back again because he has mistaken his way.

Secondly, Because they are Unregenerate, and want the Eye of Faith.

Thirdly, For that they seek not to God for it who is the giver thereof, and
without whose spirit there is no attaining it.

Fourthly, Because they are proud, and so seek not after it, as supposing they
have it already.

Fifthly, Because if they had never so much knowledge, they would be never the
holier, or the better for it, but rather the worse; nor would they employ it to
the honor of God, or the good of others.

Sixthly, Because they either do, or would do mischief in stead of good with
their knowledge.

Seventhly, Because they will not consult with the word about i^ nor advise
with others that have already attained to it. O^ thus, They read and hear the
Scriptures and mind not, (I mean the spirituality of the word) or mind and
understand not, or understand and remember not, or remember and practice not.
No, this they intend not of all the rest; and they that are unwilling to obey,
God thinks unworthy to know.

When the Serpent taught knowledge, he said, If ye eat the forbidden fruit,
your eyes shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil: But God teaches
another lesson, and says, If ye will not eat the forbidden fruit, your eyes
shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil, Romans 12. 2. See Psa. 111.
10. and 119. 97, 98, 99, 100. Or if you do eat it, you shall be like images
that have ears, and cannot hear, Romans 11. 8. Isa. 6. 10. Mat. 13. 14. Psalm.
115. 6.

From all which Reasons we may collect, That there are but a few amongst us,
that are wise indeed, and to purpose; for these Seven Hindrances are appliable
to seventy seven parts of men in the Nation. Besides, if these great knowers
know so little, how ignorant are the rude rabble, that despise all knowledge?
Nor can it be denied but all impenitent persons, all unbelievers (who prefer
their profits and pleasures before pleasing of God; as Herodias preferred John
Baptists head before the one half of Herod's Kingdom) are arrant fools; yea,
fools in Folio: For if they were wise, says Bernard, they would foresee the
torments of Hell, and prevent them.

And so wise are the godly, for they prefer grace, and glory, and Gods favor,
before ten thousand worlds.

And so much to prove, that he is the wisest man, whose knowledge lies in the
best things, (as the weaker vessel may hold the better liquour) and that if men
be never so learned, except they have learned the Mystery of the Gospel, and
what it is to be born again by their own experience (which few with their great
learning do indeed know) they are in Gods account, no better then fools. I come
now to prove, that the greatest Politician is a verier fool then the former.

Sect. 9. Secondly, if we shall look upon the most cunning Politician, with a
single eye, judge righteous judgment, and not according to appearance only, we
shall find that the greatest Politician is the greatest fool; For he turns all
his Religion into hypocrisy, into statism, yea, into Atheism, making
Christianity a very footstool to policy. I consese they are wiser in their
generation, then the children of light, and are so acknowledged by Christ
himself, Luke 16. 8. But why? not that there is a deficiency of power in the
godly, but will: for could not David go as far as Achithophel? could not Paul
show as much cunning as Tertullus? yes, surely if they would: but because their
Ma^^er, Christ, has commanded them to be innocent as Doves; They have resolved
in an heroical disposition with Abraham, Genesis 14. 21. that the King of Sodom
shall not make them rich. No crooked, or indirect means, shall bring them in
profit; they will not be beholden to the King of Hell for a shoo-tie. And
hereupon the Fo^^es wiles, never enter into the Lions head.

But to speak of them as they are: These cunning Politicians, in stead of being
wise as serpents, they are wise serpents, they are so arted in subtilties,
through time and practice, that they are near upon as wise, as that old serpent
the devil. Indeed he has one trick beyond all theirs; for like a cunning
fencer, he that taught them all their tricks, kept this one to himself, namely,
how to cheat them of their souls. But take a short character of them.

They are such cunning dissemblers, that like Pope Alexander the sixth, what
they think they never speak: Why is this cast away, says Judas? Crafty ^ub, he
would have had it himself. They are like a fellow that rides to the Pillory,
they go not the way they look, They will cut a man's throat under color of
courtesy, as Ulysses by gold, and forged letters, was the means of stoning
Palamides, even while he made show of defending him. And then to wipe off all
suspicion from themselves, their gesture and countenance shall be like Julius
Cesar's, who seeing Pompey's head, sell a weeping, as if he had been sorry for
it, when by his only means it was cut off. So like Rowers in a boat, whilst in
their pretense they look one way, in their intent they go the q^ite contra^y:
As our Savior found it to fa^e with the Pharisees and Sadduces, Ma. t 16. 1,
3. which made him to conclude with, O hypocrites! Nor shall any man be able to
determine, either by their gesture, words, or actions, what they resolve,
though like Hebrew letters, you spell them backward. Only this you may be sure
of, that they do not intend, what they pretend: Like as in juggling feats,
though we know not how they are done, yet we know well, that they are not done
as they seem to be.

Now if they can any way advantage themselves by another ruin, and do it
cunningly, as Jezabel did, when she killid Naboth, by suborning false witness
against him, and proclaimed a Fast before the murder: Though all such policy be
but misery, and all such knowlendge ignorance, Yet, O how wise they think
themselves! but they are grossly mistaken: for wherein does this their great
wisdom consist? but first, in being wise to deceive others; as the Old serpent
did our first Parents: or secondly, in the end to deceive themselves, as the
same serpent did, which brought a curse upon himself for so doing, Gen 3. The
crafty Fox hugged himself to think how he had cozened the Crow of her
breakfast: but when he had eaten it, and found himself poisoned with it, he
wished the Crow her own ag^in. Wealth got by deceit, is like a piece of buttered
sponge, an Italian Trick, it goes down glib, but in the stomach, swells, and
will never be got out again. The gains a man gets by deceiving, at last he may
put in his eye, and yet see himself miserable. Sin is the greatest cheater in
the world, for it deceives the deceiver.

Sect. 10. That it is so with them, and all others who go to counsel, and leave
the God of wisdom behind them, let their case be viewed in other persons. What
says Pharaoh to his deep Counselors? Come let us do wisely, when indeed he
went about that which destroyed both him and his Country. The Scribes,
Pharisees, and Elders took counsel against Christ; as though they would most
wisely prevent their own salvation. Joseph's brethren, to prevent his having
dominion over them (as his dreams imported) thought they had taken a very wise
course, in selling him to the Ishmaelitish Merchants, which was indee^ the only
means to effect it. They murder Christ, lest the Romans should come: and by so
doing, their coming was hastened. The Jews say, Come let us kill him, that the
inheritance may be ours: but in killing him, they ^ost the inheritance and
themselves too. And so it always fares with our Machivilians in the end, speed
they never so well for a time. For let the Devil promise them never so fair,
(suppose it be a Kingdom) the upshot will be but sad and doleful: as it fared
with Athaliah, who having slain all the Kings seed, that she alone might reign,
lost both the government, and her life too. Or as it did with Abimelech, who
slew seventy of his brethren, that he might with safety enjoy the Kingdom, lost
both it, and his life with it. And many the like we read of.

Whence St. Ambrose observes, that the plots of the wicked, always return upon
their own heads. A^ Pope Hildebrands servant, by stumbling, was killed with
that stone he should have thrown down on Frederick the Emperor, at his
Devotions. Or as Griphus his Mother, was made to take that draught, wherewith
she intended to poison him. Yea, how little was Judas set by of the High
Priests, when once he had served their turn? How did they shake him off in that
pitiful distress, with, Look thou to it? And so how poor are the witches, that
in confidence of these promises, even sell their souls to the Devil?

See here in these few Examples, you have the depth and solidity of our
greatest and wisest Politicians, and yet lewd men, most ridiculously and
absurdly, call wicked policies, wisdom, and their success, happiness. But
herein Satan makes them of all fools the superlative, in mistaking villainy and
madness, for the best virtues. And what is the summa totalis of all, but this?
Faux-like, they project other men's overthrow, purchase their own. Neither has
any man been wise to do evil, but his wisdom has had an evil end. As O the
multitude of Examples that are recorded, to give credit to this Doctrine! was
not the wisdom of the serpent turned into a curse? the wisdom of the Pharisees
into a woe? the wisdom of A^ithophel into folly^ the wisdom of Nimrod into
confusion? the wisdom of the unjust Steward into expulsion out of Heaven? the
wisdom of Jezabel, into a shameful death? etc. So that in the issue, their case
proves but like the Spiders, that was weaving a curious net to catch the
swallow: who when she came, bore away both net and web, and weaver too.
Wherefore, O God, make me but soul-wise, and I shall never envy their
knowledge, that pity my simplicity: Let me be weak in policy, so I may be wise
to salvation.

And I cannot but wonder to see, how the most are mistaken in them: but being
thus discovered, I hope it will appear, that as love and lust are not all one,
so a cunning Politician and a wise man are not both one. As we have seen some
that could pack the Cards, and yet were not able to play well.

Sect. 11. True, if men shall look upon them side-ways, as Apelles painted
Antigonus; that is, upon their strength of brain and parts alone, and not
consider them whole, and together, their abilities with their deficiencies,
they will take them for wise men, and so be mistaken. But,

If you would know how to call them, they are properly subtle persons, as the
Holy Ghost styles Jonadab, who gave that wicked and crafty counsel to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 3, 5. And the woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. 2. And Elimas, Acts 13. 10.
as being rarely gifted to deceive, and more crafty and wily then is usual. But
not wise men; for this is rather wisdom backward, and to study the dangerous
art of self-sophistry, to the end they may play wily beguile themselves, and to
plot Self-treason, then which there is no greater, when the Betrayer and
Betrayed spell but one man.

Again, admit them the most, they are not wise in good, though they be wise to
do evil: Or if you will, wise in goods, not wise in grace: For as that old
Serpent seemed to boast, that he was richer then Christ, when he said, All
these are mine, Mat. 4. 9. So the Politician may truly say, for the most part,
I am wiser then my plain dealing neighbor by five hundred pounds. So that in
some sense it may be said of them, as one speaks of women, though partially,
that they are more witty in wickedness then men. Nor can I more fitly compare
them, then to Bats, Night-crows Owls, and Cats, which can see better in the
dark, then in the light. Their wisdom is like that of the Polypus, which is a
most stupid and foolish fish, yet uses great skill in taking of other fishes.
Nevertheless, yield them all that has been mentioned, this is the upshot; They
are blind, and in darkness, as having their beginning from Satan, the Prince of
darkness, and their end in Hell, which is the pit of darkness: and because they
are wise only to evil, their wisdom shall have but an evil end.

In the dialect of the wise man, the greatest sinner is the greatest fool,
Prove. 1. 7. And David thinks, there is no fool to the Atheist, Psa. 53. 1. and
49. 13. And St. Austin tells us, that the wisest Politician upon earth, the
most ample, and cunning Machevilian that lives, be he a Doctor in that deep
reaching faculty, is worse then a fool: for if the Holy Ghost, says he, terms
him a fool that only laid up his own goods, Luke 19* 18, 20. find out a name
for him that takes away other men's. And though worldly men call the simple
fools, yet God calls the crafty fools* Jer. 8 9. Mat. 6. 23 And of all Athie^s,
and fools, which seem wise, there ^e no such fools in the world, as they that
love money better then themsel^es.

And so you have the wisdom of ^^umani^s, and Politicians dec^phe^ed; together
with the wisdom of Gods servants Y^u see the difference between them, and
therein as I suppose, that neither of the former are so wise as the godly man,
nor so wise as the world reputes them, or they themselves*

I confess the one speak Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, the other Statutes History,
and Husbandry, well enough to make their neighbors think them wise: but the
truth is, they seem wiser then (...) are, as is said of the Spaniard; whereas
the godly, like the French, are wiser then they seem. The former are wise men
in foolish things, and fo^lish men in wise things: sharp eyed as Eagles, in the
things of the Earth; but blind as Beetles in the matters of Heaven. O that they
had (...) wit to know, that when all is done, Heaven is a brave place, where
are such joys as eye has not seen nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive the things which God has p^epared there for them
that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Sect. 12 Now as I have shown these two sorts of men their folly, so it were as
easy to prove, that all sorts of sinners are no better then Sots, and
Shallow-brains, in comparison of the conscientious Christian. I Will give you
some particular Instances. And the next that I will speak to, shall be such as
come nearest to these last mentioned; that is, your Covetous, Miserly
Muck-worms, who though they be near neighbors to those Ambodexters I last
spoke of, yet they are not the same men.

Now although you cannot name one property of a natural fool, but the Covetous
man is in that particular a greater fool; Yet I will make the parallel in one
only, lest I should weary my Reader, before I have dispatched all my Clients,
or half Li^^ed my men.

The Covetous Miser, if you mark it, esteems not of things according to their
true value; but pref^^reth bables and tri^^es before things of greatest worth,
which is the most rema^kable prop^^ty of a natural fool, that is, being like
the ignorant Indians in Florida, Vi^ginia, New England, and Ken^da, who for a
Copper (...), and a few toys, as Beads and Hatchets, will depart from the
purest gold, and sell you a whole Country, with the h^uses and ground which
they dwell upon.

As Judas preferred thi^ty pieces of si^ver, before him that was Lord of the
whole world, and ^ansom of mankind; so the covet^us man prese^s earth, yea hell
to heaven, time to (...), his b^dy before his soul, yea his outward estate
before either soul or body. Whereas the godly care for the s^ul as the chief
Jew^l* and only treasure; and for the body for the souls sake, and settle
their inheritance in no land but the land of promise; their end being to
possess a Kingd^m without end. They are not like Sh^bna, who built his
Sepulcher in ^n^ Country, and was buried in another. But like our English
Me^chants, that traffic in Turkey, (...) wealth in Turk^y, yet plant not in
Turkey, but transport for England. It cannot be said of them, as it may of the
most, that they worship the Golden Calf, because they consider, that Pe^unia,
the Worlds Queen, (I mean, that world whereof the Devil is King) extends her
R^giments, but to the brim of the grave, and is not current one step farther.

Worldly hearts are penny-wise, and pound foolish; they know how to set high
prizes upon the worthless trash of this world; but for heavenly things, or the
God that owns them, they shamefully undervalue. Like Judas, who valued Mar^es
Ointment, which she bestowed upon the feet of Christ, at three hundred pieces
of silver, and sold his Master, on whom that odor was spent, for thirty. But
it is not so with the godly, they think it the best purchase that ever was in
the world, to buy him who bought them, in comparison of whom all things else
are dross and dung, as Paul speaks, Phil. 3. 8 And indeed if we once have him,
we have all things, as the Apostle argues, Romans 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. So
that the godly man is only rich, the servant of Christ is Lord of all. Whereas
by a just judgment of God upon the covetous Mise^, who makes Mamm^n his god,
the Devil makes them his D^udges, to get and bring him in Gold, (as the King of
Spain does the poor I^dians) that he may keep it in bank, for the next
prodigal to spend as ill, as the other got it. As how often is that spent upon
one Christmas revelling by the Son, which was forty years a getting by the
Father? O fools incompa^able! to take a world of care and pains, en^ure so much
g^ief, sting of conscience, loss of credit, to deprive themselves of h^aven,
damn their own souls, to get wealth; and when they have got it, not to be a ^ot
the better for it. Yea, they are less satisfied, and con^ented then other men,
(...) a^commodated then mean men; Yea, a (...) beggar that has n^thing here,
is in better estate then a rich Miser, that has nothing in effect, either here
or hereafter. O that they would but use that! yea ha^f that wit, study, and
industry hereafter, to save their souls, that they have f^rmerly done to damn
them. But hear more.

Aristippus cared only for his body, as if he had had no soul: Zeno but for
his soul, as if he had had no body: Achitophel for his Family alone, as if
neither soul nor body had been worth caring for: but these neither for body,
nor soul, nor any thing, but for a little muck to leave behind them. Yea, he
can find in his heart to go to h^ll for another, that wishes him gone, and will
damn his own soul to leave his son rich. Yea, what a deal of pains and care
does the covetous man take for his own damnation? ever tormenting himself to
get that, for getting whereof, he shall be tormented? so himself is voluntarily
miserable here and hereafter, that others may be happy. And so much of the
Miser. The next I will fall upon, shall be such as equal these in their
Idolatry another way; as,

Sect. 13. Fourthly, what think you of common Idolaters? are not they arrant
fools? I Will give you but one instance mentioned, Exodus 32. and you will need no
more. Turn to the place, and there you shall find that those blockish
Israelites made them a mo^ten Calf, and then said, This is thy god, that
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, ver. 34. This is such a pregnant
example, that there needs no mo^e to prove it; that a Beast should be their
god, yea, and a Beast of their own making, and that this Beast should have
brought them out of Egypt, which could not move it self, but as it was moved,
and that before it had any being: This is such a blockish absurdity, that as
one would think, should never enter into the heart of him who is endowed with a
reasonable soul. But what can the Prince of darkness propound, that a wicked
heart (blinded with the custom of sin, and given up by God, to be further
blinded by Satan) will not believe? as appears, by Isa. 6. 9, 10. Psalm. 69. 23.
Mat. 13. 15. Joh. 12. 3^, 39, 40. Romans 1, 21, to 33. 2 The. 2. 10, 11, 12 2
Cor. ^. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Ephe. 2. 2.

And such other fools are the Papists, though great Clerks, and Wise men, who
(i^ I could intend to acquaint you) maintain a thousand ridiculous tenants,
stiffly defending those things for truth, which the Holy Ghost calls in express
words, The doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. And most justly are they
forsaken of their reason, who have abandoned God. Yea, most just it is, that
they who want grace, should want wit too. If Idolaters will needs set up a
false god for the true, is it not equal, that the true God should give them
over to the false? Again,

Fifthly, how does Lust blind and be^ot men? when the Adulterer prefers a
filthy Strumpet before his own chaste Wife, though his own lawful Consort is
known to be more comely and lovely then the strange woman. Yea, when they shall
confess the same, (as it was the speech of a Nobleman) That were she not his
Wife, he could love her above all women in the world: a word able to ^ot out
the tongue that spoke it. But take an instance of this nature, I Will give you
one amongst many very remarkable. We read, Judge. 16. that Sampson cared more
for this very sin, then his life. O strange debauchedness! his filthy lust of a
Nazarite, leaves him scarce a man! He that might not drink wine, is drunk with
the cup of fornication. How could he other then think, if Lust had not blinded
and betwitched him, She whose body is mercenary to me, will easily sell me to
others? she will be fal^e, if she be an Ha^lot. Was there ever such a motion
made to a reasonable man? Tell me, wherewith thou may be bound to do thee
hurt. Who would not have spurned such a suitor out of doors? And when upon the
trial he saw such apparent treachery, he yet wilfully betrays his life, by her
to his enemies. All sins, all passions have power to blind and infa^ua^e; but
lust most of all. Never man that had drank flaggons of wine, had less reason
left him, then this Nazarite. Many an one l^ses his life, but he casts it away;
not in hatred to himself, but in love to a Strumpet. He knew ^he aimed at
nothing but his slavery and death, yet had not power to deny her. He had wit
enough to deceive her thrice, nor enough to keep himself from being dece^ved by
her. Thrice had he seen the Philistims in her chamber, ready to surprise him
upon her bands; and yet will needs be a Slave to his T^aytor. Yea, in effect,
bids her bind him, and call in her Executioners to cut his throat. O beware of
a Harlot, as you would of the Devil! And the rather, for that under the habi^
of a woman, it may be the Devil in shape of a woman, as some have so been
cheated. But

Sixthly, what can we think of an improvident Gamester? Is not he a Fool? who
will hazard his whole estate upon the chance of a treacherous Die, that
flatters him with his own hand, to throw away his wealth to another. And a
Thief he is too, for if he wins, he robs another; if he loses, he no less robs
himself.

Sect. 14. Seventhly, let me refer it to any rational man, whether the
Voluptuous Prodigal is not a sta^k Fool? who suffers himself to be stolen away
for an Apple: For, for a little tickling of the Palate, a kind of running
Banquet, he will hazard the loss of eternal comfort, and expose himself to a
devouring fire, an everlasting burning? Isai. 33. 14. And what greater folly?
Is it not a dear purchase, an ill penniworth? yea, a desperate madness, to buy
the merriment of a day (yea, possibly the pleasure of an hour may determine it)
with ages of pangs, with eternity of unsufferable torments, that are capable of
neither ^ase nor end*

Nor is this all, for they run upon Gods judgments, as Balaam did upon the
swords point in the Angels hand, and yet are so far from being afraid, that
they applaud their own wisdom for giving such liberty to their lusts; thinking
no men in the world enjoy the like freedom. When indeed their bondage is much
worse then the cruel and tyrannical bondage and slavery of Egypt. For first,
that bondage was of the body only, but the service of sin is of the whole man,
body and soul.

Secondly, in the bondage of Egypt, they served men; but in this bondage,
service is done to sin and Satan, most vile Lords, which command most base and
filthy works.

Thirdly, in the bondage of Egypt, the most harm was temporal loss of liberty,
smart and pain of body; in this service of sin, the loss is eternal, even
destruction in, Hell for ever (without the infinite goodness of God.) Fourthly,
in this bondage under Phoraoh, they had a sense of their thraldom, and desired
liberty; in this of sin, men do not so much as suspect themselves to be bound,
but think themselves f^ee, and despise liberty. Lastly, in all outward bondage,
they which are bound may possibly help themselves; as by running away, or by
entreaty, or by ^ansom: In this bondage we lie still, as it were, bound hand
and foot (^ill God by his mercy deliver us) not having so much as the least
thought of relieving our selves. By all which it appears, that such who take
the most liberty to sin, a^e the most perfect slaves in the world, because most
voluntary slaves: and that Christ's service is the only true freedom; his yoke
an eas^^ yoke, his bu^den but as the burden of wings to ab^^d, which makes her
^lie the higher. Wherefore, as we serve the laws, that we may be free, so let
us serve Christ, and we shall be the f^eest people a^^ve.

A godly man being demanded, what he thought was the st^angest and foolish^st
thing in the world, answered, an impenitent sinner, or an V^believer: For said
he, that a man should provoke God, so gracious and mighty, that he should
believe Satan the Father of lies and c^uelty, forget his own death so imminent
and inevitable; obey the command of his flesh, a D^udge so ignoble, admire the
world so fickle and dangerous, prefer it before Heaven so blessed and glorious,
wilfully cast himself into Hell, a place so woeful and dolorous, and all for
vanity, such a wretched emp^iness; that he should fear the blasts of men's
breath, and not the (...) Gods w^ath, weep for the loss of friends, and not f^r
his soul. And lastly, that Christ should stand at the door of his heart,
c^aving for entrance, that he may ^emedy all, and make him everlastingly happy;
and God call him every day, either by his Wo^d in the mouths of his Messengers,
or by strange judgments, or extraordinary mercies upon himself, or others, and
all in vain. Such an one, says he, is the most foolish and degenerate creature
alive.

Thus I might go on to Traitors, Murderers, Backbiters, Seducers, Drunka^ds,
Blasphem^s, Persecuters of the godly, proud persons, Hypocrites, Thieves,
A^^iests, and what other sinners you can name; and prove them all fools alike.
But I have already (upon one occesion or other) done it in some other Tract,
only, a word or two more, that may reach to all, that are in their natural
condition, and I shall concude.

Sect. 15. In the last place, Are not all wilful sinners a^^ant fo^ls? who Adam
like, will receive whatever comes, or is offered them? be it b^ibe, or other
sinful bait, not once thinking this is forbidden fruit, and thou shall die the
death. That think the v^wed enemy of their souls, can offer them a bait without
a ho^k? you cannot but acknowledge them stark fools, though thy self be one
of the number.

Again, for men to dishonor God, and blaspheme his Name, while he does support
and relieve them, to run from him* while he does call them, and forget him,
whiles he does ^eed them. To imitate the common Protestants in Queen Marys
time, who laughed the Martyrs to scorn, and esteemed them superstitious fools,
to lose their lives and fortunes, for matters of Religion, accounting Faith,
Holiness, Immortality of the soul, etc. mee^ fopperies and illusions. To be
quick sighted in other men's failings, and blind to their own. Are (...) these
so many infallible properties of a fool? and yet these are the lively
characters of every sensualist. Insomuch, that if I should give you a List or
Catalogue of all the fools in one City, or County: you would bless your selves,
that there are so few Bedlam-houses, and yet so many out of their wits, that
cannot perceive or discern the same. And yet no wonder; for as before I told
you, sensual men are so benighted, and puzzled with blindness, that they know no
other way, then the flesh leads them. Yea, many by loss of conscience become
Athiest^ and by loss of Reason, Beasts. Yea, to any thing that is spiritually
good, the natural man is blind, and deaf, and dead, as ye may see by these
en^uing Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Romans 1. 21, 22, 25. Ephesians. 5. 14. Isa 6. 9, 10.
John 12. 40. Psalm 69 23. Mat. 4. 16. and 15. 14. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. and 5. 8. 1
Pet. 2. 9. Acts 28. 27. Romans 11. 8. Mat. 23. 16, 17, 19, 24, 26. and 27. 3* 4,
5. 2 Pet. 2. 16. Rev. 3. 1^. Romans 6. 13. and 8. 11. Micah 7. 16. Psalm. 58 4.
Ephesians. 2. 1. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, whom the god
of this wo^ld has blinded, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

But it is otherwise with the godly: as let Satan and the world offer a wise
Christian the bait of pleasure or profit; his answer shall be, I will not buy
r^p^nta^ce so dear: I will not lose my s^ul, to please my sense. If affliction
comes, he will consider, that Gods punishments for sin, calls for conv^rsion
from sin: and in case God speaks to him by his Word, to forsake his evil ways,
and turn again to him, he will amend his course, lest i^ he hear not the wo^d,
he should feel the sword. Whereas nothing will con^ute a fool, but fire and
brimstone.

The Lo^d spoke to Manasses and to his people, but they would not regard:
Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the King of
Ashur, that took Manasses, and put him in fetters, and brought him in chains,
and carried him to Babel, 2 Ch^on. 33. 10. 11.

Fools, says holy David, by reason of their transgression, and because of
their iniqui^y, Psalm. 107. 17. From which words Musculus in^ers, that all
wilful transg^ess^rs are a^^ant f^^ls. And it is the saying of Cardan, That
dishonesty is nothing else but folly and madness. Yea, Solomon throughout all
his Proverbs, by a fool, means the natural man; and by a wise man, a man
sanctified. O that it were rightly learned, and laid to heart by all, that are
yet in the state of unregeneracy! for it is every one of their cases. To
conclude in a word, Without knowledge, the soul is not good, Pro. 19. 2. The
ignorant cannot be innocent. I am the light of the world (says our Savior)
John 8, 12. and 12. 46. Where light is not, Christ is not: for Christ is light.

Sect. 16 Object. But here thou will say, (or at least thou have reason to say)
if there be so few that are soul-wise, I have all the reason in the world to
mistrust my self; wherefore, good Sir, tell me how I shall be able to get this
spiritual and experimental knowledge? this divine and supernatural wisdom?

Answ. By observing these Five Rules.

First, Let such a willing and ingenious soul, resolve to practice what he does
already know, or shall hereafter be acquainted with from the Word of God, and
Christ's faithful Messengers: For He that will do my Fathers Will, says our
Savior, shall know the doctrine, whether it be of God or no, John 7. 17. A
good understanding have all they that keep the Commandments (says holy David)
Ps. 111. 10. and proves it true by his own example and experience: I understood
(says he) more than the Ancient, and became wiser than my teachers, because I
kept thy precepts, Psalm. 119. 97, 98, 99, 100. To a man that is good in his
sight, God gives knowledge and wisdom, Eccle. 2. 26. The spiritual man
understands all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. Wicked men understand not judgment,
but they that seek the Lord, understand all things, Prove. 28. 5. Admirable
^nc^uragements for men to become godly and conscientious; I mean p^actical
Christians.

Secondly, If thou would get this precious grace of saving knowledge; the way
is, to be frequent in h^aring the word preached, and to become studious in the
Scriptures, for they and they alone make wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Ye
err (says our Savior) not knowing the Scripture, Matthew. 22. 29. Ma^k 12. 24.
We must not in the search of heavenly matters, either do as we see others do;
neither must we follow the blind guide carnal reas^^, or the deceitful guid^
our corrupt hearts; but the undeceivabl^, and in^al^ible guide of Gods Wo^d,
which is truth it self: and great need there is, for as we cannot perceive the
fullness of our faces, unless it be told us, or we take a glass and look our
selves therein: so neither can we see the blemishes of our Souls, which is a
notable degree of spiritual Wisdom, but either God must make i^ known to us by
his Spi^^, or we must collect the same out of the Sc^iptures, that cel^stial
glass; though this also must be done by the Spirits help. Therefore

Thirdly, If thou will be Soul-wis^, and truly profit by studying the
Scriptures, be (...) and fervent in Prayer to God, who is the only giver of it,
for the direction of his holy Spirit: For first, humble and faithful Prayer,
u^he^ed in by meditation, is the cure of all obscurity. Especially being
accompanied with f^rvour and ferven^y; as you may see, Matthew. 21. 22, If any
^ack wisdom, says St. James, let him ask of God, who gives to all men
liberally and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1. 5. Mark the
words, it is said, if any; wherefore let no man deny his soul this comfort.
Again, ask and have; It cannot come upon easier terms. Yea, God seems to like
this suit so well in Solomon, as if he were beholding to his Creature, for
wishing well to it self. And in vain do we expect that alms of grace, for which
we do not so much as beg. But in praying for Wisdom, do not pray for it without
putting difference; desire not so much brain-knowledge, as to be Soul-wise, and
then you will employ your wisdom to the glory of the giver. Let thine hearts
desire be to know God in Christ, Christ in Faith, Faith in good works; to know
Gods Will, that thou may do it; and before the knowledge of all other things,
desire to know thy self; and in thy self, not so much thy strength, as thy
weakness: Pray that thine heart may serve thee in stead of a commentary, to
help thee understand such points of Religion as are most needful and necessary,
and that thy Life may be an Exposition of thy inward man, that there may be a
sweet harmony betwixt Gods word, thy judgment, and whole conversation, that
what the natural man knows by roat, thou may double by feeling the same in
thine heart and affections. As indeed experimental and saving knowledge is no
less felt then known; and I cannot tell how, comes rather out of the abundance
of the heart, than by extreme study; or rather is sent by God unto good men,
like the Ram that was brought to Abraham when he would have Sacrificed his son
Isaac. When Christ taught in the Temple, they asked, How knows this man the
Scriptures, seeing he never learned them? So it is a wonder what learning some
men have, that have no learning! Like Prisilla and Aquila, poor Tent-makers,
who were able to school Apollos that great Clerk, a man renowned for his
learning: What can we say to it? For no other reason can be given, but as
Christ said, Father, so it pleases thee: For as Jacob said of his Venison,
when his Father asked how he came by it so suddenly? Because the Lord thy God
brought it suddenly to my hands. So holy and righteous men do more easily
understand the words of God, than do the wicked, because God brings the meaning
suddenly to their hearts, as we read, Luke 24. That Christ (standing in the
midst of his Apostles after he was risen from the dead) opened their
understandings, that they might understand clearly the Scriptures, and what was
written of him in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms,
ver. 44. 45. Lo how suddenly their knowledge came unto them! But see what a
general promise God (in the Person of Wisd^m) has made to all that serve him,
Prove. 1. Turn you at my reproof, and behold I will pour out my spirit unto you,
and make known my words unto you, verse. 23. And Psalm. 25. The secrets of the
Lord are revealed to them that fear him, and his covenant is to give them
understanding, ver. 14. These secrets are hid from the wicked, neither has he
made any such covenant with them, but the contrary: As see, Dan. 12. 10. Unto
you it is given to know the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to others in
Parables, that they seeing should not see, and hearing they should not
understand, Luke ^. 10. Mark 3. 11. Matthew. 13. 13.

Again, It is not enough to pray, except also it be in Christ's name, and
according to his will, believing to be heard for his sake, and that it be the
intercession of Gods own spirit in you: And (being truly sensible of your sins
and wants) that you chiefly pray for the pardon of sin, the effusion of grace,
and for the assistance of Gods Spirit: that you may more firmly believe, more
soundly repent, more zealously do, more patiently suffer, and more constantly
persevere in the practice and profession of every duty.

But above all you must know, that as Sampsons companions could never have
found out his Riddle, if they had not plowed with his Heifer, so ^o man can
knew the secrets of God, but by the revelation of his Spirit, 1 Cor. ^2. 8.
Mat. 16. 17. Yea, suppose a man be not inferior to Portius or Pythagoras, who
kept all things in Memory, that ever they had read, ^eard, or seen: To Virgil,
of whom it is reported, that if all Sciences ^ere lost, they might be found
again in him: To Aben Ezra, of whom (...) was said, that if knowledge had put
out her Candle, at his brain she might ^^ght it again; and that his head was a
throne of Wisdom: or Josephus ^aligar, who was skilled in thirty Languages: Yet
if he want the Spirit (...) God to be his teacher, he is a dunce to the meanest
and most illiterate ^^liever. For one excellent and necessary prerogative of
the spiritual man (...) this, he has God for his teacher; he learns the
counsels of God, of that Spirit which only knows Gods counsels, Luke 21. 15.
which is no small privilege: for the Scholar learns quickly, when the holy
Ghost is his Teacher; the Eye sees distinctly, when the holy Ghost does
enlighten it. With the Spirits help, the means can never be too weak; without,
never strong enough, Luke 24. 44, 45. P^^v. 1. 23.

Sect. 17. Fourthly, Thou must get an humble conceit of thine own wisdom. The
first step to knowledge, is to know our own Ignorance. We must become fools in
our own opinion, before we can be truly wise, as the Apostle sets it down* 1
Cor. 3. 18. And indeed, the opinion of our k^owing enough, is one of the
greatest causes fou^ knowing so li^^le: for what we p^esume to have attained we
s^ek not after. Ye^, the very first (...) of a Christian is humility. He will
teach the humble his way, Psalm. 25. 9. Jam. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5 5. And he that has
not learned the first le^^on, is not fit to take out a new. Pride is a great
let to true wisdom: For God resists the (...), and gives grace to the
humble, Jam. 4. 6. 1 Pet 5. 5. Whence it comes to pass, that few proud wits are
reformed, Joh 9. 39. And for this cause also did out Savior propound his woes
to the Pha^^s^es, his d^ct^ines to the People.

A heart full of Pride, is like a vessel full of (...) This self-opinion must
be blown out of us, before saving knowledge will be p^u^ed into us. Christ will
know none but the humble and none but humble souls truly know Christ.

Now the way to become humble, is by taking a serious view of our wants. The
P^aco^ks pride is much abated, when she looks on the blackness of her legs and
feet. Now suppose we know never so much, yet that which we know is (...) then
that which we are ignoran^ of: and the more we know, the more we know we want,
Prove 1. 5, 7. Psalm. 73. 22. And the less ^ensible we are of our blind^ess,
sickness, d^formity, etc. the more blind, sick, and d^fo^med we are.

Fifthly, Thou must labor to get a true and lively faith: for as without faith
we cannot please God, so without faith, no man can know God. Faith most clearly
beholds those things which are hid both from the eye of sense, and the (...) of
reason, John 12. 46. Unregenerate m^n, that want says, are like blind Sampson
without his guide; or like P^liphemus, who never had but one eye, and that
V^ysses put out. For so does the pleasure and custom of sin blind the
Sen^ualist.

We must have minds lifted above nature, to see and love things above nature,
heavenly wisdom, to see heavenly truth; or else that truth which is saving,
will be to us a Mystery, Ma^k 4. 11. If it seem not foolishn^ss, 1 Cor. 2. 7,
8, 14. To them that are lost, the Gospel is hid, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Whereas the
Believer discerns al things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 2, 15,
16 Yea, God gives him a mouth, and wisdom, where-against all his Adversaries
shall not be able to speak or resist, Luke 21. 15. These are the five steps,
which lead up to the palace of wisdom, which all must ascend by, that mean to
enter. If you have once attained this precious grace of saving knowledge, you
will as much as in you lies, employ the same to the glory of the give^.

An end of the first part (as a penyworth of Lawn out of the whole piece) Such
as would have the residue, let them read the Trial of true Wisdom, as it is in
the first part of my Christian Library; out of which Quiver this Arrow is drawn.

FINIS.

