A Copy of a PAPER Written by the Late Duchess of York, etc.
IT is so reasonable to expect, that a Person always bred up in the Ch of
England, and as well instructed in the Doctrine of it, (as the best Divines,
and her Capacity could make her) should be liable to many censures, for leaving
That, and making her self a Member of the Romans Cath. Chapter to which, I confess, I
was one of the greatest Enemies it ever had; That I rather choose to satisfy my
Friends by reading this Paper, than to have the trouble to answer all the
Questions that may daily be asked me: And first, I do protest in the presence
of Almighty God, that no Person, Man, or Woman, directly, nor indirectly, ever
said any thing to me since I came into England, or used the least endeavor to
make me change my Religion; It is a Blessing I wholly owe to Almighty God, and
I hope the hearing of a Prayer I daily made him, ever since I was in France and
Flanders; Where seeing much of the Devotion of the Catholics, (though I had very
little my self.) I made it my continual Request to Almighty God, That if I were
not, I might before I died, be in the true Religion: I did not in the least
doubt, but that I was so, and never had any Scruple till Nov. last, when
reading a Book called the History of the Reformation, by Dr. Heylin, which I
had heard very much commended, and have been told, if ever I had any doubt of
my Religion, that would settle me: Instead of which, I found it the description
of the horridest Sacriledges in the World; and could find no reason why we left
the Church, but for three the most abominable ones, that were ever heard of
among Christians. First, Henry VIII. renounces the Popes Authority, because he
would not give him leave to part with his Wife, and marry another in her
lifetime. Secondly, Edward VI. was a Child, and governed by his Uncle, who
made his Estate out of Church Lands. And then Queen E. who being no Lawful
Heiress to the Crown, could have no way to keep it, but by renouncing a Church
that could never suffer so unlawful a thing to be done by one of her Children.
I confess, I cannot think the Holy Ghost could ever be in such Councels; And it
is very strange, that, if the Bishops had no Design, but (as they ^ay) the
restoring us to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, they could never think
upon it, till Henry VIII. made the breach upon so unlawful a Pretense. These
Scruples being raised, I began to consider of the difference between the
Catholics and Us; and examined them as well as I could by Holy Scripture,
which, though I do not pretend to be able to understand, yet there are some
things I found so easy, that I cannot but wonder, I had been so long without
finding them out: As the Real Presence in the Blessed Sacrament, the
Infallibility of the Church, Confession, and Praying for the Dead. Sheldon A.
B. of Cant.
After this, I spoke severally to two of the best Bishops we have in England,
who both told me there were many things in the Romish Church which (it were
very much to be wished) we had kept; As Confession, which was, no doubt,
commanded by God: Blanford, B. of Worcester. B. of W*
That Praying for the Dead, was one of the Ancient things in Christianity: That
for their parts, They did it daily, tho they would not own it: And afterward,
pressing one of them very much upon the other points, he told me, That if he
had been bred a Catholic, he would not change his Religion; But that being of
another Church, (wherein, he was sure, were all things necessary to Salvation,)
he thohght it very ill, to give that scandal, as to leave that Church wherein
he received his Baptism.

All these discourses did but add more to the desire I had to be a Catholic,
and gave me the most terrible Agonies in the World within my self; for all
this, fearing to be rash in a matter of that weight, I did all I could to
satisfy my self, made it my daily Prayer to God, to settle me in the Right; and
so went on Christmas Day to Receive in the Kings-Chappel: After which, I was
more troubled than ever, and could never be at quiet, till I had told my design
to a Catholic, who brought a Priest to me, and that was the first I ever did
converse with, upon my word. The more I spoke to him, the more I was confirmed
in my design; And, as it is impossible for me to doubt the words of our Blessed
Savior, who says, the Holy Sacrament is his Body and Blood; so cannot believe,
that He, who is the Author of all Truth, and has promised to be with his Church
to the end of the World, would permit them to give that Holy Mystery to the
Laity but in one kind, if it were not lawful so to do.

I am not able, or, if I were, would enter into Disputes with any Body; I only
in short, say this for the changing of my Religion, which I take God to witness
I would never have done, if I had thought it possible to save my Soul
otherwise. I think I need not say, it is any Interest in this World leads me to
it: It will be plain enough to every body, that I must lose all the Friends and
Credit I have here, by it; and have very well weighed, which I could best part
with, my share in this World, or the next: I thank God I found no difficulty in
the choice.

My only Prayer is That the (...) Catholics ^f this Nation, may not suffer for
my being of the^^ Religion, That God (...) give (...) them, and then s^^^ (...)
any A^^^ictio^^ in this World, so I may enjoy a blessed Eternity hereafter.

St. James's. Aug. the 20th. 1670.

