THREE Contending BRETHREN, Mr. WILLIAMS, Mr. LOB, Mr. ALSOP, Reconciled, and
made Friends; By an Occasional CONFERENCE WITH Three Notorious Heretics, Mr.
HVMPHREYS, Mr. CLARK, Dr. CRISP.

And Abram said unto Lot, let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, -- for we are Brethren,

Genesis 13.8. A Man that is a Heretic after the first and second Admonition,
reject.

3 Tit. 10. Quin laniant mundum, tanta est discordia fratrum. By Calvin
Anti-Crispian.

London, Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain. School.

BOOKS Published by the Author, and Sold by John Harris in Little Britain.
WIlliam Pen, and the Quakers, either Impostors or Apostates, which they
please; proved from their avowed Principles and contrary Practices.

A Censure of George Fox's Journal, and an Answer to B. C. and W. C. his
Trepidantium Malleus intrepidanter Malleatus.

A Reprimand for the Author of a Libel entitled, George Keith an Apostate.

Vindiciae Anti-Baxterianae; or, Animadversions on the Life of Mr. Baxter.

An Apology for Congregational Divines, against the Charge of Crispianism,
countenancing of Tradesmens Preaching and Causeless Separation from the Public
Worship.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mr. Williams and Mr. Lob, etc.
Mr. W. WELL met, honest Mr. Lob.


Mr. L. May I say, honest Mr. Williams?


Mr. H. Yes, you may, and tell as notorious an Untruth as he.


Mr. A. Why so hot, Sir? for you ought rather to understand Mr. Williams
figuratively, than be so keen against them both; let me refresh your memory. If
Durior impropriae est Catachresis abusio vocis,
Contra quam sentit solet Ironia jocari,
Insultans hosti illudit sarcasmus amare;
will not do, I hope This will: Antiphrasis voces tibi per contraria signat. As
Symphora for Adversity, though it signify Prosperity. Auri Sacra fames; holy
Covetousness, for wicked. This is known to all Orators, Youths as well as Men.
You know Christ called Judas, Friend; had you been by Christ when he thus did,
what would you have said?


Mr. W. Brother Humphreys, I assure you I spoke in the common literal sense of
the word, without a Trope; for I think many Mistakes in Opinion, and Rashness
in Words, and Weakness in Actions, consistent with Honesty.


Mr. H. Do not call me Brother, for I disown you as such; you are a Brother of
Mr. Alsop, that old Calvinist, he is become your Defender: We now see what you
are. You are able to distinguish, and distinguish, and distinguish a Man out of
his Senses; no man, since Mr. Baxter died, is able to understand you; as if not
only materialiter and formaliter, stricte and late, and a thousand such
distinctions, might unty many a Knot; but as if the old Archipodialiter and
reflexive, etc. must come in for a share. But as it has been long and often
observed of the Popes of Rome, none were more cruel than the Clements, none
greater Cowards than the Leos, none more mischievous than the Bonifaces, none
more vile than the Innocents; so none less honest than you two, call one
another as you please. It was an Innocent that interdicted this Kingdom in the
Reign of King John, and made Pandolphus the Monk poison him, when he laid his
Crown and Scepter at his Holiness, or, if you please, Innocency's feet.


Mr. L. I pray, Mr. Humphreys, how came you to have so hard an Opinion of Mr.
Williams, to question his Honesty, though I never questioned your denial of mine,
for asserting the old Protestant Doctrine of Justification by an imputed
Righteousness in it self, not in the Effects only? You know Mr. Williams is
yours, not ours.


Mr. H. How, Mr. Lob! this is a foul mistake, for I averr he is not ours, but
yours; he has shaken Hands with Mr. Baxter, and bad him Goodnight. This I
have told the World in a Discourse of Justification, and what I there say I
stand to, You and he are both one in Doctrine, though not Phrases; for he asserts
Justification by imputed Righteousness not only in the Effects of it, but in
se: Mark Sir, in se, in it self. What material difference can then be between
you two? And, to be plain, I care not for your Protestant Doctrine, for I speak
roundly, and censure the Doctrine as Protestant: And I say with the Roman
Catholics, Our Righteousness is the Righteousness per quod, by which we are
justified; and the Righteousness of Christ is the Righteousness propter quod,
for which we are justified.


Mr. C. I say my Brother Humphreys is in the right, and many a precious Letter
between him and me will be shortly printed. I, in my Book of Justification,
flee directly in the Face of our first Reformers, as erring Men, for talking of
Imputed Righteousness. I tell all the world, (...) my Doctrine Arminianism,
Popery, or Socinianism, (...) not. I there say, Justifying Faith, Repentance,
Regeneration, the New Birth, Gospel obedience, is all one; these justify us
before God, etc. I have raised such a Dust about the word Justify, what it
signifies almost every where in the Old and New Testament, that never any Deist
or Sceptick could have played the Game better; not a Man that treated on this
Argument did it before me. I could tell you, I could tell you, Mr. Baxter meant
the same thing, though he then thought it not time a day to say it, and therefore
denied, in his Five Disputations, that the Charge of his Adversaries against
his Aphorisms was true; that, according to his Doctrine, Men were justified by
their Repentance, etc. And I tell the World that which is true, That, my Book
is one of the best Books that is on that Subject.


Mr. L. That is Baxterianism all over, Like Master like Man. But I pray, Mr.
Williams, what say you to all this?


Mr. W. I am not to answer for every thing Mr. Baxter did, though I believe he
was mistaken in many things, I pin not my Faith on his Sleeve; he doubted
Perseverance, I do not; he disowned Presbytery, I believe it to be of divine
Right; he asserts Non-resistance, not I. For these two men, I am sorry they
assert downright Popery, their Books are intolerable: I have lately vindicated
my Doctrine, That man is justified by the Righteousness of Christ, not in the
Effects only, but in se, in it self, against Mr. Humphreys; I need not tell
you, Sir, in what Book. These men, I doubt, have given that wound to Mr.
Baxter's Name and Reputation, that will never be healed; as deep a wound as
did, does, and will that Unhappy Book, Vindio. Anti-Baxt.


Mr. L. I even adjure you, Mr. Humphreys, and Mr. Clark, tell us plainly, Do
you believe in your Conscience that Mr. Williams is no Baxterian, but one with
me in Doctrine, though not in Phrases?


Mr. H. Mr. C. Believe Sir! we more than believe it, he that called him in two
Books a Semi-Baxterian, might honor him in this thing beyond his desert: And
seeing you adjure me, were it not too high an Expression, I could almost
protest, by the sacred Name of Richard Baxter, that it is true. Seeing you have
him, beware of him, for he has one unpardonable Fanlt we cannot forgive him
for, neither, I doubt, will you.


Mr. L. What is that, I pray?


Mr. H. He has too much Wit for one man.


Mr. L. Now I will speak roundly: Honest Mr. Williams, I am in a rapture or
transport with joy, let you and I have a Friendly Debate, for I doubt we have
been mistaken in one-another, and these Gentlemen's Opinions of us both true and
right: I know you are afraid of Crispianism or Antinomianism, as well you may,
a filthy, poisonous, abominable Weed, and I have written against it, for which
they revile me as they do you and the Apologist. I have been much afraid of
Arminianism and Socinianism, now grown to a great height: This might make us
not so well to understand one-another as else we might.


Mr. A. A Friendly Debate Gentleman! that is a word out of joint, and is an
unlucky Omen; you will talk but little Sense or Truth. A Friendly Debate! the
Phrase is grown odious, since Patrick (thirty years since) wrote his Friendly
Debate, wherein the friendly Con tells the Noncon, He was no good Subject, and
therefore no good Christian, for living in a Corporation, or within Five miles
of it, contrary to Law. He brings in the Noncon as a Fool, I pray, Sir, explain
your meaning, I am not skilled in definitions. And when the Question was,
whether our white Caps under our black ones might justify Laun sleeves? the
Answer is, Any thing becomes a good Man. On goes Jack to prove the Bishops good
men; his Comparison of the Gentleman's praying in the morning, at nine of the
Clock, in the Parlour, requiring his Servants to come then, and there, not in a
Stable, with clean Clothes, Faces, and Hands, not all dirty, was as much to the
purpose about Symbolical Ceremonies of human appointment, as his Story of the
Cupboard of Plate God had, and would return to it, but it must be well beaten
first, and that was when the King must pack up and be gone. Who, I pray, sent
their King packing since? Gentlemen, I shall for this reason protest against a
Friendly Debate, but should be glad to hear a Friendly Conference between you.


Mr. H. I could wish Mr. Baxter alive (were it proper to wish the greatest
Saint that ever went to Heaven here on Earth again) to see what his reputed
Advocate, but real Adversary, (said to take the Chair since his death) has
said and written.


Mr. L. If these men judge right, what have I done to be so tenacious of a
Phrase, Commutation of Persons, and so to raise such a Dust, to trouble Bishop
Stillingfleet and D. Edwards, famous Men, my Friends, as I thought by their
Books; but your Friends, as I find by their Letters? And many say, our late
Controversy is one of the most fruitless ones that ever was brought on the
Stage. A Story of matter of Fact, and a Phrase; and my Friends, as well as
Adversaries, say, That by my Rashness all is in a flame; for though we long since
lost our Union, yet our Peace continued: but now that is gone too.


Mr. W. I doubt I have been mistaken too in some things; seeing you confess
your mistakes, I do mine: So true is that, Incidit in Syllam -- You ran so fast
from the Tents of the Socinians, that you might come in some Phrases too nigh
the Tents of the Crispians; and I ran so fast and far from the Tents of the
Crispians, that I might err, as I am sure you did.


Mr. L. Who is this that comes toward us with so much Rage and Fury?


Mr. W. It is Dr. Crisp.


Mr. A. No, that cannot be, for I remember that of old they pictured him like
an old Hermit, and had I been a Manichean, I should have spent time to consider
who made him. This looks more comely, sure it is not he.


Mr. W. Why, Sir, you must know, his Son has been so troubled about it, to see
his Father pictured as if with Cain his maker had set a mark on him, that he
has played the Barber himself, like a kind Son, to make his Father look
better, or, if you will, less ugly, and has clapped a few tolerable Sermons, to
make the intolerable Sermons go down the better.


Dr. C. Have I found you, O my two Enemies, that have written against my
Doctrine! You Old-Testament-Daniel, and you New-Testament-Stephen, some say,
that as the Old and New Testament make one Bible, so you two are one in the
main. I say, as that Heretic Humphreys, you two are one in Doctrine, though you
differ in Phrases. You are both corrupt, though I say it on a different account:
You both deny Justification without Faith, and make Gods Covenant a Bargain,
etc.


Mr. L. You will find, Gentlemen, this man cannot express himself, he had need
get one to do it for him.


Dr. C. What! do you make me such a Dunce, that am a Doctor?


Mr. A. I have heard of a noted Doctor, Head of a House in Oxon in the
Interregnum, famous for advising young Students never to go into the Water,
till they first learnt to swim, etc. That once telling a Story, how the Proctor
always at night seeing a Candle in his Study, said, That man will be a Doctor
or a Dunce, his Servant replied, In good truth, Master, you are both. I apply
not the Story before a D. in D.


Dr. C. Will you deny, that there are any good things in my Book?


Mr. L. In what Book are there not some good things? Your Book may therefore be
called good, as some Philosophers call an Ethiopian white, not simpliciter, but
secundum quid, about the Teeth.


Dr. C. You, Mr. L. are neither for Mr. Baxter nor me, but have written against
us both: When some say, If he be not in the right, I must be so; if not I, he
must be so.


Mr. L. I have heard of a Captain in our Civil Wars, who meeting with a poor
man on the Highway, asked him who he was for, for the Kings Soldiers, or the
Parliaments, and promised him, if he spoke his mind, no harm should come to
him: Then, Master, said the poor man, I am for both: How so, said the Captain?
Why, said he, for the hanging of both sorts; for, Master, said he, we cannot
keep a little Bacon in the House, but one comes one time, and another at
another time, till all be gone. So say I, we cannot keep a little Protestant
Doctrine in the Church, one pulls one way, another another way, till all be
gone. Yet I wished well to Mr. Baxter's Person, and so to yours, but to neither
of your Doctrine.


Dr. C. See how Daniel Williams, that pure Stick, sits there like a
Sheep-stealer; he has nothing to say, I think my Disciples have done his Work
for him, and told the World of his lewd Life.


Mr. A. He has said so much to you already, that he has done enough for one
man, and need say no more till he be well answered. Indeed there was a story,
that one man had it from his Maid, that said she had it from Mr. Williams's
Maid, who said she had it from her Mistress; that Mr. Williams dropped an
unsavory Joke, (though the Maid by the way denied it on Oath) had it been true
(as it was false). Let the Defamers consider, if all their unsavory Jokes (or
other sins) were written on the Palms of their Hands, would they not be ashamed
to take off their Gloves, even at Meal times?


Dr. C. He wrote against me, and that was Crime enough, though I brought
Scripture for every thing I said.


Mr. W. So did the Devil, 4 Mat. You prove things by Scripture as he that found
fault with the Sign of the King or Queen, etc. and urged that place of
Scripture, A wicked and adulterous Generation seeks a Sign, but no Sign shall
be given to them, but the Sign of the Prophet Jonah; and therefore once seeing
Jonah in a Sign, said, that was lawful. I also remember, about twenty year
since, preaching in a Parish Church, (without Conformity by the way) I reproved
a Country Farmer for sleeping whilst I was preaching; the ignorant man replied,
He had been a long Journey, and was come home weary, and Christ said, Come unto
me all you that are weary and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. So
odly, Mr. D. have you applied many Scriptures, and that in particular. Is it
come to this, that when we tell your People that talk of their breaking the Law
because Christ kept it, Tell us roundly, what have we to do with the Law?


Dr. C. Say what you will, Mr. W. one that animadverted on the Reliquiae tells
what you and such as you are; that Book pleased my Followers to the Heart.


Mr. W. He there told what you were, with your abominable Phrases and Doctrine,
p. 11, of Justif. and I have heard him say, That if he thought that Book did
your Cause any service, he should wish his Pen split to the head when he wrote
it; but he believed no such thing. His Discourse of Justification there (on a
new bottom, I confess, for which he had no President) differs toto coelo from
your Doctrine of Justification without Faith; Modesty forbids me to tell you
what a florid Encomium he gave me, p. 175, 177. when he stigmatized you; yet
some of your Creatures here say, he then wrote for you, and against me; and
since for me, and against you; when it is evident there is no discord in the
Vindiciae and Apology in this respect: He and we all wonder how you came to
employ such a bad man to plead your Cause, as a late Tradesman, turning a
Speaker.


Dr. C. Bad do you call him! that was before his Conversion.


Mr. A. Conversion man! I can easily prove, on his own Confession, he is no
Convert.


Dr. C. How so?


Mr. A. He that says, he never was troubled for Sin, is no Penitent; you had as
good talk of an impenitent Penitent: He that is no Peniteut is no Convert; you
had as good talk of an unconverted Convert: He is one of Crisp's Believers, not
Christ's Converts.


Dr. C. Troubled for Sin! Heaven forbid, I hope he never will be such a
Legalist, being so famous a Preacher of Free Grace.


Mr. L. Why was not David troubled for his Sin? Was it not a heavy burden to
him?


Dr. C. Read the 298th, 299th, and 300th Pages, and you have my Answer to the
full. I prove plainly, that seeing our Sin is transferred from us to Christ, if
ever Sin be laid home, it is so by Satan: That David sinned; or had it been
lawful, it cannot be to us now, since the great Sacrifice is offered up: Before
the offering of Sacrifice, then, if it were lawful, it was not so after.


Mr. L. What Sacrifice was there for Murder or Adultery under the Law?
Therefore says David, I would have offered Sacrifice, (Psalm. 51.16.) but the
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit. You make it a Sacrifice for the Devil,
Mr. Doctor: A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Where,
by a Meiosis, more is meant than is expressed, Thou will greatly delight in;
but you make sport of it. The bones, says David, thou have broken may rejoice;
but, according to you, the Devil broke 'em, not God. To be plain, Mr. Williams
and Mr. Edwards dealt too tenderly with you, almost to a fault, and that in
this particular: I tell you, you are fitter to preach out of a Cage or Grate,
than preach out of a Pulpit such damnable Doctrine; you put out the Eye of
Repentance, this alone proves you a notorious Heretic: Notwithstanding, some
say you spoke of Sadness leading to Despair, etc. did David then lie in your
way? Any thing. They are three cursed pages.


Mr. W. Pray Dr. hear me --


Dr. C. No, I care not to hear any Baxterian of you all.


Mr. W. Strange! Mr. Humphreys just now censured me for being not a Baxterian,
and you for being one, what shall I do?


Mr. A. Will you hear me then?


Dr. C. No, that I will not; You once wished you had Windows in your Breast,
that the late Popish Tyrant might see your Loyalty: I heard a Tory then say, He
wished he had the making them, (being a Surgeon) he would have made them of a
large size. And the late Prefacer tells what you are.


Mr. A. Mr. Williams has answered for me; I care not for the Censure of that
late Plotter, of whom the ejected King gave order, That Care might be taken of
him, that he might want nothing. In a late Traytorous Book he charge King W.
to have Testimonials by him of his being reconciled to the Church of Rome: And
I think, among my Accusers, there is none of them worth a hanging but he; he
is, I confess, a man of parts, would he had been so too who answered Melius
inquirendum.


Dr. C. You are reputed to be a second Hugh Peter's, or Daniel Burgis, who have
made their pulpits Stages, and themselves as Theological Mountebanks; read your
Sermon about Wowens Dresses, when so many Ministers pulled their Hats over
their Faces to hear you.


Mr. L. Mr. Alsop is a graver man in the pulpit than you; half the Stories of
D. B. are Fables, as the Story of the Cloak, and how he lost Sixty pound a Year
for Christ, etc. yet I wish him more Gravity with his Zeal.


Dr. C. I pray have a little patience, and I will give you some account of my
censured Book.


Mr. A. I doubt a little Patience will not serve the turn, we had need have a
great deal, to hear such woeful stuff, which to hear contentedly, some would
think Stupidity, not Patience.


Dr. C. I will do it, say what you will; my Son tells the World, to the
Crispian Reader, (for so it should have been instead of Christian) That he has
written about 5200 Sermons after Dr. Owen and other famous Divines, and that
not six Sermons contradict any Doctrine of mine.


Mr. L. That proves either that your Son never understood Dr. Owen or them, or
understood not you, nor those neither whom he censures to bear the Number of
the Beast; and what have such private men to do with our Controversies, who by
this thing declares plainly he understands them not?


Dr. C. If he please you not, I hope my good Friend Mr. Cokyan the wise will,
in his learned well-pen'd Epistle to his Precious Hearts, who says, He is
confident all that are led by the Spirit of God will be satisfied. He tells you
as well as Paul and I, If an Angel from Heaven preach other Doctrine, he is
accursed.


Mr. L. If they be accursed who bring in Works in Justification, must not they
keep them company who leave out Faith? Is there not a Curse in taking from, as
well as in adding to?


Dr. C. In the beginning of my Book on 14 John 6. I am the way, the truth, and
the life, I told my Hearers, that I would tickle their Ears, and tickle their
Hearts too; and for this end I told them, p. 3, of the Hiddeness of Grace, and
the Overmasterfulness of Sin, and that there was a threefold Power of Sin, 1, A
reigning power, 2. A tyrannical power, 3. A bustling and ruffling power; and
also, that --


Mr. A. Doctor, stop; I suppose you meant grate their Ears, when you talked of
tickling them.


Mr. W. Let him go on, you shall hear worse by and by, and then judge whether
the Cry against me be true, That I have misrepresented him.


Dr. C. Against Qualifications in them that come to Christ, I often urge that
pertinent place of Scripture, 11 Mat. 28. Come unto me all you that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.


Mr. A. But why had you not urged another place of Scripture more pertinent
than that?


Dr. C. What is that?


Mr. A. And the Gibeonites came to Joshua with old Shoes, and clouted; does not
that place prove as much as any the contrary to what you assert?


Dr. C. You and all the World know, you may as soon teach a Cat to hold a
Trencher, as me to manage a Controversy, or answer Objections, and yet you
will be pelting at me; I am such a very Sir John, no one expects it of me that
knows me, and is in his Wits.


Mr. A. Well, Sir John, then go on with your blunders in Divinity.


Dr. C. I often said also, That God was never oflended (or angry) with a
Believer, nor could not be, unless he was offended or angry where was no cause.


Mr. L. This is bustling, ruffling Stuff; but did you Answer such Objections,
The Anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, 4 Exodus 14. and a thousand
such places of Scripture?


Dr. C. At what an idle rate does this man talk! I knew I could say what I
pleased, though I could prove nothing. Instead of this, I said, That I declared
all from God, and in the name of the Lord; and that if any Scripture seemed
contrary, we must believe what God in the Text says, God cannot contradict
himself. Then I tell them of Love, and other Graces, as they call them.


Mr. A. Yes, we know you often say, as we call them, and so the Scripture calls
them; What do you call them I pray, Whims, with our modern Deists?


Dr. C. I tell them of such as you all: You make Gods Covenant a Bargain or
Sale, p. 24, I will do this, and thou shall do that, etc. but God will not set
his Son to sale: And somewhere I tell them, Such shall have a Whip as soon as a
Christ; and p. 73, I tell them, If they thought to get any thing by Duty, they
should get a knock.


Mr. A. Oh, for Love and Pity sake, send some one for a Cordial, for I am ready
to faint away to hear such Gibberish; if this be tickling our Ears, would his
Master had tickled this Toby every day, and taught him to speak, though but at a
common rate; did you think you were at a Play?


Dr. C. I tell you, you cannot endure sound Doctrine: I brought more Proofs
against Qualifications coming to Christ, p. 35, If men thirst, they may come;
that is, have but a mind to Christ.


Mr. L. Why is not thirsting a Qualification? Is a mind to some Drinks
thirsting?


Dr. C. I told them, I came in the Name of the Lord; and that if this was not
true, God is a Liar, and Christ is a Liar, with reverence be it spoken, -- and
that you are ravening Wolves, p. 56, and strait is the Gate. I have expounded
to admiration 6 Mat. 13.


Mr. L. Oh thou blasphemous Wretch! do thou think to speak of Christ as if of
Oliver's Porter? with reverence be it spoken, some think, gilds all their nasty
Phrases. If you should have a Promise from the King, and you doubted not his
word, would you dare to say, If it be not so, your majesty is a Liar, with
reverence be it spoken? Offer it now to thy Governor, say I, as the Prophet in
a ease not so bad.


Mr. W. Seeing you make so bold with Christ, which is intolerable, had your
Doctrine been as true, (as it is false) I hope I may make bold with you, his
Enemy, and mine, and of all the Churches of God. If the Doctrine be false, and
the Expressions blasphemous, you are a filthy Heretic, with reverence be it
spoken; or an ignorant impudent Fellow, with reverence be it spoken, and that
you had need to be sent to School again, with reverence be it spoken, because
of your notorious Contradictions, childish Repetitions of the same things, etc.


Dr. C. Such may thus find fault, that never read over my Book, nor observed
the coherence of things.


Mr. A. I have read it over every word, but I confess I never observed (as you
say) the coherence of things, for little is there of this, but incoherence
enough have we all observed.


Dr. C. I told them also, men might come to Christ in any pickle, etc. That
justifying Faith is to believe a man' Sins were laid on Christ. Other things
were not necessary as not to concurrence, so not to presence, etc. That the
general tender of the Gospel was the best Security we could have, etc. I often
harp on this thing, God justifies the Ungodly, in whom is no change; and I
unanswerably proved it from 55 Isa. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters: incline your ear, hear, and your soul shall live. 22 Rev. 17, He
that is a thirst, let him come. Some will not have Christ unless they pay for
him. I said, I wish they were cut off that trouble us, and little less than
damn them all.


Mr. A. Prithee Crisp, how long have thou been crazy? If this be proving,
return to thy old way of telling; these are Proofs for your Adversaries, and
Objections for you.


Dr. C. I said to them from the Lord, That Sin could be no bar to them from
coming to Christ; no Sin, not Unbelief: Some say, Men must receive Christ by a
hand of Faith; but I say, They may receive Christ without a hand, passively; --
I disown the word Hand or Instrument in Justification. There is a passive
receiving of Christ against a man's will, as we pour Physic down the Throat of
a Patient, p. 98. I said also, p. 102, When Christ is said to bind up the
broken in Spirit, it is of those that are undone, not of those that are
sensible of being so; as a man may be broken in his Estate or Credit, though not
sensible of it.


Mr. A. Was there ever such a senseless Perverter of Scripture! I doubt thy Head
was early broken, if thy Heart was never so: Is this to be broken or wounded in
Spirit? p. 106.


Dr. C. Of general tenders read much. In 127, I there make sport with men's
Complaints; I say, O what a noise is here! I must have a broken Heart,
mortification, etc. And p. 114, I bewail it, that the Servants of God should
lose the Name of Libertines: And p. 170, I said, God s^es no Sins in his own,
never punishes for them; and p. 198, God is not such a Changling; and p. 202,
If thou be a common Swearer or Blasphemer, come; if there be no alteration in
thee, come; if thou be as sinful as thy skin can hold, come. 16 Ezekiel. I cite
again, and again, and again, etc. v. 6, When cast in the open field, when in
thy blood, I said to thee, live. This was a time of love, I made a covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine.


Mr. L. For that Scripture, can you deny that the primary intention of it is,
to show the state of the Jewish Nation? Ver. 3, Thy Father was a Amorite, thy
Mother a Hittite. Abraham and Sarah could not be such strictly, but like as 1
Isa. 10, Hear, you Rulers of Sodom; give ear ye People of Gomorrah. Jerusalem
was so called, because like them in manners and life. 13 Ver. of the 16. of
Ezekiel. After they multiplied, and God put Ornaments on them, it is said, they
prosper'd into a Kingdom. Read the 15 Verse, he charge these with playing the
Harlot, committing Fornication: 17. That they made Images with these Jewels,
(not Graces sure). 21, Thou have made my Children pass through the fire. 20.
Thou remembredst not the days of thy youth, when thou wast polluted in thy
blood. 29, Woe unto thee, says the Lord God: they committed Fornication with
the Egyptians, and in the Land of Canaan. 26, 29, O Harlot, hear the word of
the Lord. Is there, Sir, any falling from Grace? 60, 61, Shows, God would bring
them again out of Babylon, and humble them: Yet all this is well accommodated
by Divines spiritually; but Parabola non sunt Argumentativa nisi ratione scopi,
is a common known Rule.


Dr. C. What say you to the 15th of John?


Mr. L. 15 John 4. If you abide in me, the Branch abides in the Vine: 5th, 6th
and 7th Verses speak of Abiding, not Uniting.


Dr. C. What say you to Isaiah, I am found of them that sought me not? Isaiah
65 1, are plain words, are they not?


Mr. L. That makes nothing to your purpose, I said, Behold me, behold me, to a
People not called by my Name; they had no Helps to seek: But, I pray, what
specific difference is there between the Echo or Belief of a man who believes
his Sins laid on Christ, that proves vile still, and his that does not so? What
is the matter, that in all your wordy Book you do not, according to all men,
distinguish as becomes a Scholar or a Man?


Dr. C. You know the reason well enough without my telling, would you have me,
like a young Conjurer, to raise a Spirit I could not alay? A Dr. in Oxford once
distinguished in the Hall, Aliquo modo est, and aliquo modo non. I do like a
Moderator I knew in that University, who when the Question was, An Omne Ens
potefl apprehendi? (carried in the affirmative) one brought a shrewd Argument
against it, he answered, Nos disputamus non de iis Entibus, quae non possunt
apprehendi, sed quae possunt apprehendi. I often expound 11 Heb. 1, Faith is
the evidence of things not seen; that is, that they were pardoned and justified
before they believed in the height of all their wickedness. Alas, they were
nothing that expounded on this Text, till I gave the true sense; I gave the
World the first light of those words: see whether you can find Mr. Pool (that
great man) to think of it. I have also said in about fourteen or fifteen
Sermons on this Text, On him has God laid the Iniquity of us all; p. 160, 177,
170, It was the Iniquity it self laid on Christ, so that it cannot be found in
the Conscience of the elect to sting there; they are not our Sins, but Christ's
actually so. -- I over and over observe it is not God does lay, or will lay,
but has laid, in the Preterperfect Tense, and therefore God laid them on him
from Eternity. --


Mr. L. You might as well say, Christ was actually crucified from Eternity: it
is said in the same Chapter, He was a man of sorrows; not is, or shall be: He
was lead as a Lamb before the Shearers; not is, or shall be: He was numbered
amoug Transgressors; not is, or shall be.


Dr. C. I tell them, p. 18, They should not make God so childish, as some do;
p. 195, I said, If God were not separated from Christ, Christ told an untruth,
when he said, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? No Sin can be charged
on that man, to whom the Lord gives a heart to believe his Iniquities are laid
on Christ. P. 196, That it is a lying Spirit that says Sin can waste the
Conscience of a Believer; I tell them, That by their Graces and Prayers they
throw Dirt in the Face of God, and spit Poison there, even the best Saints; and
the Wise man says, They are an Abomination to the Lord.


Mr. A. You are a Child, and worse, with Reverence be it spoken. Solomon says
thus of the Prayers of the wicked; but of the righteous, that they are his
delight.


Dr. C. I carefully distinguish once, p. 358, our Sins were laid on Christ by
way of Obligation from Eternity; 2. By way of Execution; 3. By way of
Application. I told them, Christ stood as very a Sinner in Gods Eye as a
Reprobate: That our Sins were laid on Christ's Back, is my common Phrase: That
his Back was large enough and broad enough to bear all our Transgressions: --
God wore out the Rod of Vengeance, even to the very stumps, on Christ. The
washing, 16 Ezekiel. 9, was the washing of Justification not Sanctification. Sin
stares men in the Face, and spits Fire in them before they come to Christ. P.
517, and p. 543, We must not think God so humoursome, and so peevish: We tell
God, That he lies to his Face, if we tell Believers, that if they do not this
and that, they shall come under the wrath of God. P. 559, Against
Qualifications, (at which I strike on all occasions, even Faith it self) for
they make the Covenant of Grace a Covenant of Works. P. 633, I make this
notable Remark, 16 Luke 20, The young Prodigal returned to his Father like a
Rogue, then the Robes were put on him.


Mr. L. Was not this an excellent Proof? No; he returned not like a Rogue,
(neatly phras'd, like a D. of D. by the way) though (if you will so
untheologically express it) he went away like one, for it is said before, When
he came to himself (I hope by the way you may in time) he was, you find, so
changed; there was Humility in his Heart, Confessions in his Mouth, and a begun
Reformation: I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father,
I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son, make me one of thy hired Servants.


Dr. C. I see you will still be objecting, which thing I could never endure,
being known to be the weakest and feeblest Sect-master that ever was since the
Creation. But what makes you smile, Mr. Alsop?


Mr. A. To see a man plead for a Faith without Repentance, or Sorrow and
Sadness, and make such Proselytes. It puts me in mind what the King of the
Ammonites did to David's messengers, 2 Samuel 10.4, shaved off one half of their
Beards, and cut off their Garments to the middle, even to their Buttocks. and
sent them away: So you send away, and so look, your Converts with Faith without
Repentance; but David bids them tarry at Jericho, till their Beards were grown.
Let Repentance grow, else you are not complete, but half Christians; Hanun paid
dear for what he did, and so may you.


Dr. C. Do you think I am a Witch, to answer such a man as you:


Mr. A. No truly, they would do you a great deal of wrong that should so charge
you.


Mr. L. Brother Williams, and Brother Alsop, let us be gone, I care to stay no
longer to hear such abominable Phrases, Doctrius, and Heresies, from such a
Brainless man.


Dr. C. Pray, Sirs, come back; I will now endeavor to say something that may
please you: I said, after all, p. 638, Good works are comfortable Evidences
that we are in Christ.


Mr. W. Well said Dr. then a man may fetch some comfort from his Graces:
Consider what Paul said, 1 Cor. 2.12, For our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our
conversation in the World. Have you not denied fetching Comfort from hence,
because all from Christ, and argued all-along at such an idle rate, as if I,
preaching in those words, 1 Timothy iv. 16, So shall thou save thy self and them
that hear thee; I should lay down this Doctrine, Ministers are their own
Saviors, and the Saviors of their hearers: then God is not their Savior, nor
Christ, etc.


Dr. C. I will think of it: I said also, That Christ draws without an absolute
necessary compulsion, but draws sweetly and freely to good works.


Mr. L. What! is the Physic poured down the Throat come to this?


Dr. C. And p. 676, in the Sermon about the Fast appointed by my good King C.
the first, (whom I there commend) I said, The end of a Fast is, 1. The humbling
us for Sin; 2. The pleasing of God; 3. The averting of Wrath. That Faith that
justifies alone, stands not alone without good works. 685. Then I tell them,
when a Man sees Christ as the chief of ten thousand, and all sair, then he
comes to him, 101. That God hides his Face from a Believer when he harbors
Sin, 688.


Mr. L. But did you not say things over and over, and with great Zeal, things
diametrically opposite? Is the justified blind man at the same time a seeing
man? Sees Christ fair, etc? Sure these be unusual contradictions: No doubt Mr.
Edwards's Charge in his Crispianism Unmasked is too true; but I doubt, after
all this, the Vertigo will soon take you again, notwithstanding some intervals.


Mr. L. I doubt Brethren, this man makes not a few Atheists or Scepticks. Though
great is their folly that conclude Christ is not of God because we contend,
about his person, and offices. As if because there are disputes among
Philosophers whether the Sun be (...), whether it heat formaliter or eminenter,
whether the old Ptolomaicks or new Capernicans be right about the Suns motion
or the earths motion, therefore should conclude there is no Sun nor Earth
neither, and so might we name a thousand other things.


M. W. You speak honestly and soberly, good Mr. Lob: You know this man's
Followers preach up, that Conversion changes not a man's state but nature only.


Dr. C. Oh, how Herod and Pontius Pilate became Friends against Christ! how
friendly you two are against Free Grace!


Mr. A. Lay aside the Comparison of Herod and Pontius Pilate, they have served
all turns, and are grown threadbare, and therefore it is high time to let them
alone.


Dr. C. Look to your selves, I tell you, If any man Preach any other Doctrine
than I do, you know the Consequence, as I say in my Book? Look yonder, here is
coming my Brother Town, and my Brother Eaton, they will justify me, and knock
you all down. For some say they write something like sense and truth, who will
by no means grant that I do.


Mr. L. What say you, Mr. Town?


Mr. T. Gentlemen, you are men of known worth, and therefore you cannot be
ignorant, that to understand a Polemical man, you must consider against whom he
writ: I wrote against the Arminians (Dr. Tailor in particular) not against the
Calvinists, as Crup did, whose madness has ruined our Cause, he is as. 1 Timothy
1.7. a Doctor of the Law, and understands not what he says, nor whereof he
affirms. Read, worthy Sirs, p. 115. of my Book of Free Grace, if p. 33. seems
harsh, I am not of your opinion, great Sirs: I modestly confess, and be sure
not of Crisps, for, on my principles as well as yours, he is guilty of damnable
Heresies.


Dr. C. Bless me! Did I send for thee Town, to justify me, and knock down my
Enemies, and do thou justify my Enemies in their Charge against me, and
knock down me? Good Brother Eaton, speak one word for me, let your lips drop as
the Honycomb.


Mr. W. What say you, Mr. Eaton?


Mr. E. Brethren, (I hope I may call you so) though our Heads differ, yet I
cannot call this tattling prating Dr. so, being of your Opinion and Mr.
Toune's, he is a notorious Heretic; for, if it please you, read the beginning
of my Honycomb, and you will find I was so far from Crisp's mad definition of
Justification, that I rather gave one more like yours than his. These are my
very words, Justification is when we, feeling what loft creatures we are in our
selves, and in all our works and holy walkings, by reason of our sins, and
sighing up unto Christ for help, are by the power of God's Imputation so
clothed, with the Wedding Garment of Christ 's own perfect Righteousness, that
of unjust, we are made just before God; that is, all our sins are utterly
abolished out of God's sight, and we are made, from all spot of sin, perfectly
holy, and righteous in the sight of God, freely.


Mr. L. We are well satisfied, you need say no more, you are not in the number
of those Heretics we now censure; I hope you drove not at this, That men
should never have any sadness for sin, etc.


Mr. E. I should be glad, Gentlemen, of your good company at another time.


Mr. W. And we of yours, Mr. Eaton.


Mr. L. Dr. Crisp, what say you to all this?


Dr. C. One thing, I am sure I shall not want Followers for all this; for if
all Wise men leave me, there are Fools enough to follow me, ay, Preachers too;
a D. and J. are to be found in all places.


Mr. A. I will not say pares cum paribus.


Dr. C. Stop, I tell you, you will never give over your Buffoonry. It was a
great trouble of mind to your Brother Hugh Peter's, as he tells us in his honest
Legacy to his Daughter, where he says, I wish I had not been vain in a vain
World. And though he says, Not three men ever dealt with him in a serious way
about it, you cannot say so. It is said of some, when they are in the Pulpit,
It is pity they should ever come out; others, That when they are out, it is
pity they should ever come in; you, Sir, however are accounted a good man, that
is to say, in a Pulpit.


Mr. A. I cannot endure to be reflected on for being good only in a Pulpit, by
them that are not good out of it, nor there neither. Did I ever play in the
Pulpit, as you, on your own confessions and others, know much worse. H. Peter's
played with Divinity it self too often, though I have reason to hope he was a
good man, I only with a D. of Divinity, that is to say, he with holy things, I
with profane. However, I remember what good Moniea got by a chiding word of an
angry Gossip, Aug. Confess.


Mr. L. A little of this is too much; We even beseech you, Dr. Crisp, Answer us
plainly to a few Questions, the Company desire it.


Dr. C. Gentlemen, I will; seeing you ask me so civilly, only I desire you to
keep that Alsop quiet, it it be possible.


Nr. L. I pray, of what Communion or Party were you?


Dr. C. Had I thought that had been one of the Questions, I would not have make
you such a Promise, for not one to a hundred of my Ignoramus's know: I tell
you, of the Church of England, and so was Mr. Town, who glories, in his Book,
that he was no Separatist; and Mr. Eaton was of the same Party; and yet most
think I was some great Dissenter, a kind of Independent.


Mr. L. Must the Independents have your Bastardly Brats and Heretical Doctrines
laid at their Doors? All such Weeds grow in your Church, Socinianism,
Arminianism, Antinomianism, Deism and what not; and yet the Independents,
forsooth, must be charged with your mad Notions. Some of your Followers will
not confess Sin, nor beg Pardon; was this your Practice?


Dr. C. No; how could I, when clothed with a Surplice under a black Gown, (as
an Emblem of the Justification of an unchanged unsanctified Sinner) and when
the Common Prayer Book was in my hand? how could I read the Confession, (what
without Confession?) the Absolution, the Litany, or other good Prayers of the
Church?


Mr. L. Then you made Confession of Sin politickly, if not conscientiously!
thank your fat Benefice, your Tyth-corn, and Tythpigs, that hung in your Teeth,
I wonder the Letany had not choked you, and other Prayers. Can you say nothing
for your Followers contrary Practice?


Dr. C. Yes, yes for if all Sins, past, present, and to come, be at once
forgiven, (which I call in my Book, the Doctrine of all Protestants) they say,
what need then of Confession and begging pardon?


Mr. L. And yet you have said, That all sins were forgiven from Eternity: is
this Protestanism? Let the Proposition of all Sins pardoned together (tho it
seems hard to say a Sin is actually pardoned before it is actually committed)
let it be how it will, yet such a wild consequence can never follow.


Dr. C. Some good Christians, and Exalters of Christ alone, are satisfied; to
pray for manifestative pardon, so it be done seldom and sparingly, tho some of
the Godly be not so.


Mr. L. David was assured of Pardon from God by Nathan, when he was humbled and
confessed, have sinned. The Lord has pardoned thy sin, says Nathan. Yet after
all this, David perm'd this Psalm of Psalms, the Penitential Psalm, and 1.
prays, blot out my iniquity. 2. sorrows, my sin is ever before me. 3.
confesses, agairst thee, thee only, have I sinned. Besides, Christ taught them
to whom God was a Father to pray daily, Forgive us our Trespasses. What
Trespasses, all or some? if some, which? I say, all. Job was an upright man,
and yet says, Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the
sins of my Youth. Judgments came on the Land for the Sins of Manassah, which
the Lord (as is said) would not pardon; yet he was then in Heaven, I hope you
mistake me not; consider the Text and my Design. Gods Command is sufficient,
and he will this way make us to keep up the sense of sin, our desert of
damnation and wrath, his infinite goodness to pardon, etc. But to pass to
another thing; you talked so much of purity of Doctrine, how came it to pass you
minded no more purity of Discipline in that Church? You read Prayers of other
men's making; you added an additional Humane Sacrament to one of Divine
appointment, the Cross in Baptism; is not the Cross made a Tessara, or Symbol,
or Livery, as well as Baptism, by which you dedicated Children to a dying
Savior?


Dr. C. You know, Mr. L. I am no distinguisher, but yet I have heard some men
distinguish between an immediate and proper, and an improper and declarative
Dedication: I hate your Discipline as much as did the old Puritans my Doctrine.


Mr. L. Would you not think it Sawciness, or worse, for a Subject to prescribe
what badges or marks of subjection or office such and such should wear, who
were thus to be ordered by the King?


Dr. C. May not the Church appoint sacred Rights, as well as the Primitive
Christians their Love Feasts?


Mr. L. I might invite all my Communicants to Dinner after the Lords Supper,
and all but a civil custom, if in some Parishes.


Dr. C. But the Use of the Cross is ancient.


Mr. L. Not in Baptism: Why use you it not often as the Papist do, if so
useful, spit on the Child, put a Taper in his hand, as they do, and give
Significations to those Signs.


Dr. C. What say you to Christ's washing his Disciples Feet, and bidding them
do the like?


Mr. L. Christ then observed a common Custom going then among the Jews, as
Scripture and other Histories assure us. But why call you not for the Parents
to engage to instruct the Children, whom God commands to do it, and require
ignorant profane men to come, who promise all in vain?


Dr. C. It is the Custom of our Church, and I shall not question her Authority;
it you think your self wiser than she, you may, for my part I do not, I have no
such thoughts of my selt.


Mr. L. Pray, Sir, tell us what Converts you had by preaching your Free Grace;
I expected great things of this from you, in your Book, or some Preface, but
found nothing: Some say thousands were converted (tho not pricked to the Heart,
for that had been a legal Conversion).


Dr. C. My Son tells you of one converted by a Sermon of mine, and stops the
Reader in the midst of the Sermon, to take notice of it; I S. C. do declare a
poor creature at Brinksworth, an Innkeeper, by hearing this Sermon, was
reformed from his drunken course in a great measure.


Mr. A. I can be quiet no longer; that was but half a Convert: What mean the
words in a great measure? that whereas it may be he was drunk once or twice
every day, he was but so every week: But pray remember when this miracle was
wrought, it was when you preached against Drunkenness, not when you preached up
your Free Grace; so that the Question is yet unanswered, Answer me then to
another thing; Prithee Dr. how many Broad-pieces did you get for your smooth
Doctrine, that wanted but one little word to make it good.


Dr. C. What is that?


Mr. A. Truth.


Dr. C. I got more than you know of, or ever shall for me: But who made you an
Examiner? I entered my Caution against you when I began; seeing it is impossible
to keep you quiet, I will answer no more Questions of yours nor theirs, but
will be gone, you are able to make a man wild.


Mr. A. You were never otherwise, and besides, a Wildshire man.


Mr. L. I suppose, if Mr. C. and Mr. H. go with you, none will call after them.


Mr. C. We three then bid you Farewell.


Mr. L. Brother Williams, and Brother Alsop, what have we done to employ those
Abilities God has given us against one-another, to the scandal of our common
Cause, when such Heretics multiply. God forgive us, and incline our Hearts to
forgive one-another: what Time I have to spare for writing of Controversal
Divinity is at the service of the Crispians; and what Time you have, I pray
take Clark and Humphreys and such Semipopish Persons, to an account, or else
all will say (what many now do) They speak plainer than you, but you mean the
same with them, and that this lay in the bottom of Baxterianism. Some Friends,
Mr. Williams, to you and me, (for such there are no Bigots) say, your Young Men
are not so much corrupted about lustification as was feared, you have somewhat
trig'd them who were Popish in that point.


Mr. W. Brother Lob, it is now late, and we will consider this thing the next
meeting.


Mr. A. A good Night, Brethren, to you both; and though I am glad such Innovators
as the three that are gone have been the occasion of the healing of our
Breaches, yet I am sorry I cannot say of them, considering what they are Beati
pacifici, blessed are the Peacemakers.


FINIS.

