TWO Assize SERMONS Preached at WINCHESTER.

THE FIRST Feb. 26. 1694. JAMES HUNT of Popham, Esquire Being Sheriff of the County
of Southampton.

THE SECOND July 14. 1686. CHARLES WITHER of Hall, Esquire Being Sheriff, etc.

BY E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester-College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XCV.

TO JAMES HUNT, Esquire
Dear Nephew,
THE Obligation was so natural for me to be Your Preacher, that my declining
the Office would have looked like want of Affection; and this was the Reason
why I did not decline it, as otherwise I should have done, in regard of that
great Indisposition of Body which has of late afflicted me. It is the Wisdom of
those that are Well, but the Necessity of the Sick, to think upon Awful things;
And at the time when You came to bespeak me for Your Service, a Thought of that
sort was lying upon my mind, which I found apposite to determine my Subject:
That Thought I pursued into the Sermon which I now Publish; and the more
willingly, because part of its Matter seems to me to come too little into
public Consideration; although there are not many Things we can consider, that
are of greater moment to Christian Living. Let me deal familiarly with You, and
desire You to make Your self Judge in the case; Peruse this Sermon sometimes at
a retired hour, and contemplate the naked Argument, which is purely Scriptural
(for I would not be interpreted to recommend any thing in it that is Mine,) and
tell me whether You do not find it well conducing to the great End You aim at;
which is (I know) to be a Good Man, and to finish those Commendable Respects
which You bear to Your King, Church, and Country, with a just and proper Sense
of God: To whose Blessing I heartily recommend You, and rest

Your Affectionate and Humble Servant E. Young.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 13. for unto read us to. Page 28. l. II. for avoid r. void. P.
39. l. ult. for Importance r. Impertinence. P. 40. l. I. r. Inconsiderate.

SERMON I.
HEB. iv. 13. -- But all things are naked and opened to the eyes of Him with
whom we have to do.
AFter that the Law has provided against Ungodliness and Wrong never so wisely,
and the Magistrate attended on its Execution never so Diligently; yet still
Human Justice will find great Obstruction from the bare want of Evidence: Facts
will be Obscure; and Circumstances Doubtful, and Allegations Presumptive, and
Testimonies Inconsistent; so that the probably Guilty must often go unpunished,
lest the possibly Innocent should suffer; which would be the greater Evil of
the Two.

But my Text points at a Tribunal set above the reach of this Obstruction: a
Tribunal where all the Matters of Cognizance are thoroughly Known, and the
Proofs all ready for Conviction, and the Evidence as unexceptionable as the
Justice.

And this is the very Scope of the Words: Wherein we have (1.) God set forth as
the Judge, (...), with whom we have to do, so runs our Translation; but it is
somewhat short of expressing the Original; which signifies more fully, To whom
we are to give an Account: For (...) when it is applied to Matters in Charge,
signifies an Account: As when it is said to the Unjust Steward (Luke xvi. 2.)
(...); we render it Give an Account of thy Stewardship. So then We are to give
an Account unto God: This is the First Intimation of the Text.

And then (2.) to intimate that This Account shall be Clearly taken, and the
Judgment upon it liable to no Exceptions for want of Evidence; It tells us,
that To the Eyes of our Judge all things are Naked and Opened, (...) signifies
that which has no Outward Covering, and (...) signifies that whose Inside may
be looked into: For it signifies primarily a Beast opened down the Chine; as it
was the Manner of the Priests to Chine the Sacrifice, and open it so that the
state and foundness of every Entrail might appear. And thus All things we do
are so Manifest unto God, that they are not capable of any Covering; either
from without by Secrecy or Collusion, or from within by Palliation or Denial.

The Words therefore are an Argument for a Circumspect and Upright
Conversation, drawn both from the Omniscience, and the Justice of God; Because
God Knows all things, and because He will Judge all things. But I shall not now
meddle with the Second Part of the Argument, Gods Justice; I shall confine my
self to the Consideration of his Omniscience: And in Treating of this, I shall
not take in the whole Extent or the Attribute, (as whereby God knows the
Nature, State, Qualities, Defects, Powers, and Possibilities of All Things,
that either Are, or Can be) but I shall speak only to Those Things for which we
stand Accountable; As the Scope of my Text prescribes me.

Now the things for which we stand Accountable are of three Kinds, (viz.)
Actions, Words and Thoughts; For Each of These are capable of Moral Good and
Evil, and as so they make up the matter of our Account. My Business therefore
shall be,

I. To show that God does Know Each of these Things: and then II. To make some
Reflections upon the Doctrine, that may farther conduce to Practice.
That God knows all our Actions, Words and Thoughts, the Scripture is every
where Express. And,

I. As to our Actions. Thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out
all my ways, says the Psalmist, Psalm. cxxxix. 3. And lest we should interpret
that this Inspection of God was Peculiar upon the Actions of that particular
Man; Solomon tells us that the same Inspection is of Universal extent; Prove.
xv. 3. For the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the
good: whence it is Evident that God not only can Know, if he will, but likewise
that he actually wills to Know all that we do. It is Profane to imagine that
the Divine Nature is Incurious or Regardless: And accordingly it is observable
that as Holy David calls it Brutishness to think in any Case that God does not
Know what we do; Understand, O ye brutish among the people, he that formed the
eye, shall not he see? So he calls it Blasphemy to think that God does not
Regard what we do; How long shall the wicked blaspheme God, saying, thou God
carest not for it?

II. As to our Words. -- There is not a word, in my tongue, but that thou
know it altogether; says the Psalmist, Psalm. cxxxix. 4. And to bring this
Home to every ones case, The Author of the Book of Wisdom, Chapter i. 10. tell us,
that Gods ear is the ear of jealousy; that is, an Ear not only Quick of
hearing, but likewise always Intent to hear; so that when we sometimes speak
that which either Shame or Fear will not suffer us to speak aloud, yet the
Caution of Whispering will not conceal it from God: For (as that Author goes
on) The ear of jealousy hears all things; and the noise of whisperings is
not hid; and there is no word so secret, that it shall pass for naught.

III. As to our Thoughts, that is Inclusively, our Deliberations, Judgments,
Choices, Wishes and Desires, the Searcher of hearts is acquainted with them
All. So says Holy Job, Chapter xlii. 2. I know that no thought can be witholden
from thee. But the Psalmist speaks yet Higher to the Point, and cries Psalm.
cxxxix. 1. Thou know my thoughts long before: Thou Know my Thoughts long
Before; even Before they are Conceived. Nor does this Expression give any
ground to Argue, that because God foreknows our Thoughts (as likewise he does
our Actions) that therefore he does Predetermine and Ordain them; This would be
clearly to acquit our selves, and to charge God with the Fault of our
Miscarriages: And I doubt not but many would fain have the Charge run so, and
therefore are Fond of this Opinion: But on the contrary, as God tempts no man
(in the Words of S. James) so much less does he force or predetermine any one
to Sin: No, He leaves us to our Liberty to Think either Better or Worse, and
yet this notwithstanding he foreknows our Thoughts; Because, Having an Intimate
Knowledge of the State of our Souls, of all the Affections, Passions, Springs,
and Weights wherewith they are moved, he knows Infallibly how every possible
Object, that presents it self will determine our Judgments and Choices, tho He
himself does not Determine them at all. As the Man that sees the Setting of the
Chimes, can tell several hours before what Tune they will Play, without any
Positive Influence either upon their Setting, or their Playing.

Thus the Scriptures represent the Omniscience of God. And farther, they offer
us Two Especial Considerations, whereby this Notion may be better cleared, and
the Conviction of it made to set Firmer upon our Minds.

The First Consideration is that of Gods Presence: the Second is that of his
Power.

I. Gods Presence is that which we call an Omnipresence, that is an Universal
Presence, In all places, and with all persons: And this the Author of the Book
of Wisdom makes his Argument for Gods Omniscience, Chapter i. 7. God (says he) is
witness of the reins, and a true beholder of the heart, and a hearer of the
tongue; For (this is the Proof of it, because) the spirit of the Lord fills
the world: that is, God Knows Every Thing, because he Is Every Where. And the
Psalmist asserting the Omniscience of God at large, Psalm. cxxxix. confirms his
Argument, and inculcates the Belief of the Doctrine with This Reflection, ver.
6. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy
Presence? If I climb up to heaven, thou art there; and if I go down to hell,
thou art there also, etc.

Now this Consideration of the Omnipresence of God is useful and proper to
prevent those Mistakes in our Opinion of Him, which we are wont to take up by
Thinking of him Weakly, i. e. with Resemblance to our selves. For so, In Our
First Thoughts, we are apt to Confine God to a Place, and to Limit him to a
Distance in the Perception of Things; Because we our selves are so Limited and
Confined. And so we are apt to imagine that a Constant Inspection and
Observation of all Men, and all their Actions would beget either Trouble or
Weariness, or Distraction in God; because any Great Application does so in us.
Most of the Great Men among the Heathens were overtaken with these Prejudices.
Whereas, on the Contrary, the Notion of Gods Being Every where Leads our
Understanding to apprehend that it is as Easy for Him to observe Every Man, as
One Man; and Every Action, as One Single Action of our Lives. Remember
therefore that God is as near to our Mouth, when we Speak, as that Man is, that
Leans his Ear to our Whispers: He is as near to our Actions, when we act in
Secret, as they are whom we admit into our Confederacy: He is as near to our
Thoughts, when we Purpose, Wish, or Design any thing, as is Our own Soul that
conceives them; and in Consequence he is as Familiarly acquainted with them.

The Second Consideration which the Scripture offers to inculcate the belief of
God's Omniscience, is that of his Power, viz. that Plastic Operative Power,
whereby he is the Fountain and Author of all our Beings: From which Topic the
Psalmist thus argues: Psalm. xciv. 9, 10. He that planted the ear, shall not he
hear? He that formed the eye, shall not he see? He that teaches man knowledge,
shall not he know? The Argument (You see) reaches each Particular of my Matter,
Words, Deeds and Thoughts; and to show the Strength of it, I shall consider it
somewhat more exactly. If we resolve it into a general Form of Reasoning, it
may run thus; All our Faculties of Knowing, all our Organs and Instruments of
Information we have from God, and can we think then that God wants any for his
Own Use? All of us are his Creatures, and can we think he has made any Creature
of such a Capacity as to act any thing beside his Privity, or beyond his
Comprehension? This would be a Weak, and (as the Psalmist calls it) a Brutish
Imagination. But to come to the particular Instances.

God has planted the Ear, and Formed the Eye: And yet when all is done, It Is
neither our Ear that hears, nor our Eye that sees; but it is our Spirit that
hears and sees through these, as its proper Instruments. It Is our Spirit
therefore only that has the Power of Hearing and Seeing: And tho Our Spirits
are limited to the Use and Assistance of such Instruments, we must not
therefore imagine but that Spirits of a Superior Order can perform all Their
Perceptions without Them. To think otherwise would be as Absurd, as if a Man of
Weak Eyes should argue that it is Impossible for Any Eye to see without a
Glass. When therefore God or Angels are said to have Ears or Eyes, it is only in
Accommodation to our Mode of Thinking; For when we come to Reason upon the
Subject we must acknowledge that it is Part of their Perfection to need no such
Helps.

Whereas therefore, First, We account that the Sense of Hearing is Limited to a
Respective Distance; And this Thought makes us Bold to whisper that, which we
dare not Speak aloud; However we account of our Own Hearing, we ought not to
esteem That of Others to be so Limited. Nay when we find by Experience that the
Softest Whisper, when conveyed by a Smooth or Hollow Surface, will reach our
Ear distinctly, though at a great distance from the Speaker; We have so little
reason to doubt whether God hears our Whispers, that we may be sure (on the
other hand) he can command a small Ring of Air to carry our Whispers to the End
of the Earth, and make them heard by whoever else he pleases. And by This very
Means the Prophet Elisha might hear what was spoken in the King of Assyria's
Bedchamber, 2 Kings vi. 12. as well as by the Intercourse or Ministry of an
Angel.

II. Though Our act of Seeing be confined to the Assistance of Outward Light;
we must not conclude That of Others is so: If I say, per adventure darkness
shall cover me, then shall my night be turned into day: the darkness is no
darkness with thee; the light and darkness to thee are both alike: says the
Psalmist. Nay, we may learn from the most Contemptible Creatures, that Outward
Light is not Necessary to Seeing; For the Batt and the Owl can See without it:
And perhaps Providence designed these Contemptible Creatures to teach us the
Lesson, that Darkness is no Covering; and to provoke unto Jealousy and
Apprehension that Thousands may see our Retired Actions, whom we see not, and
therefore foolishly are not Aware of them: Good Spirits can see us and lament,
and Evil Spirits can see us and rejoice at the Issues of our sin and folly.

III. It is God that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? We allow that
God gives us the whole Faculty and Power of Knowing; And, if so, to think that
we can know any thing in our selves, which God does not Know, is a
Contradiction; for it implies that we have power to Know something without God.

The most awful Faculty that God has given us, and that which lies most under
our present Consideration is that of Knowing or Remembering what we have done,
together with the Consciousness of that Good or Evil that is in it: Now let us
consider how this Faculty performs its Office: How come we to Know at any time
what we have Spoken, Done, or Thought, after once those Acts of Speaking,
Doing, or Thinking are past? Is it not by seeing the Images or Impressions
which those several Acts do produce within us? Do we not by seeking find such
Images of things, which we have Spoken, Done, or Thought of several years
before? Nay do not those Images frequently present themselves without our
seeking, and make us see them whether we will or no? Which is a Proof that they
have a Real Being and Lasting Subsistence within us, and are wholly Independent
on our Will; for we cannot extinguish or erase any of them at our Pleasure; we
cannot do it, would we never so fain. We may conclude therefore, that
whatsoever we either Speak or Do, Purpose, Wish, or Design, so far as these
Acts are of a Moral Concern, and bear Relation to Virtue or Vice, they leave
the Notices of themselves upon our Consciences, imprinted there in Characters
Fair and Intelligible, nay I may add, Indelible too: For though it must be
allowed that we Forget many things which we have been Conscious of; yet in that
Case, the Notices of such things are not Erased or Extinguished, they are only
Covered over. There is no Forgetfulness in a Spirit; Its Forgetfulness is only
Accidental, and occasioned by the Impediments of the Flesh: As we may observe
that sometimes a Man of a Faithful Memory, will by the Disorder of a Sickness
grow Delirous, and forget all that ever he Knew; and yet upon the Removal of
his Disease, all his former Notices will appear Fresh again. And how Reasonable
is it to believe that our Souls, whether in the State of Separation from the
Body, or of Reunion to the Body when Defecated and made free from Obstructions
(so far as All Bodies even of the Unjust shall be at the Resurrection) I say,
how Reasonable is it to believe, that our Souls shall Then have a Clear View
and perfect Remembrance of all that we have done; Though Now most of those
Notices lie in us like the Inscriptions of a Marble covered over with Dust and
Rubbish.

Now if Conscience be thus like a Written Book, and Faithful Register of our
Behavior, there is no room to doubt but God can read that Book, as well as we:
Nay, He can Read through all those Impediments that Shade it, which we cannot:
Nay he can, when he pleases, make this Book Legible to all Others, as much as
it is to our selves. For He can so far Elevate the Understandings of all Men,
or Open their Eyes (in that Sense that he is said to have opened the eyes of
Elisha's servant, that he might see the host of Angels: 2 Kings vi. 14.) I say,
God can open the Eyes of all Men to such a Spiritual Intuition, as that All
shall be able, at a short glance, to Read each others History (imprinted on
their Consciences in Intelligible Signatures) as familiarly as if it were
graven on their foreheads, or printed in a Book. And thus we may probably
Conceive that those Books mentioned by the Prophet Daniel, Chapter vii. 10. and by
S. John in his Revelation, Chapter xx. 12. Books that are to be opened in order to
the Universal Judgment, are no other than that Volume of things Recorded in
every Man's Conscience; which being opened and exposed to View, shall make (as
it were) a Tally or Counterpart to that Memorial which God himself Keeps of all
we do.

Having said thus much for the Stating or Explication of Gods Omniscience, I
shall now proceed to make some Reflections upon the Doctrine, that may farther
conduce to Practice.

God Almighty has planted Two Passions in our Souls; whose most proper Use is
to deter us from sin; and they are Shame and Fear: The Object of Fear is
Punishment, and the Object of Shame is Discovery: and his Omniscience does
import both these Consequences to sin ( viz.) that it shall be discovered, and
that it shall be punished: For Gods Omniscience does not terminate in bare
Knowing; he Sees and Knows in order to farther Acts of Justice; so he tells,
Jer. xvii. 19. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every
man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doing. I shall not
now extend my Reflections so far as the Punishment of sin (though that be of
the most moving Importance) I shall insist only upon the Discovery of it; and
show what Shame is threatened to it from Gods Omniscience. In order hereto, my
first Inference from the Doctrine shall be This (viz.) That no sin can be
Secret; (absolutely speaking, no sin can be so.)

Now did this Notion sit so close upon our minds as it ought to do, it would
necessarily be of great advantage to the Cause of Virtue; because nothing gives
more occasion to sin in the world, than the contrary Expectation, and hopes of
Secrecy. For even after a Man has divested his Soul of Probity, he cannot so
easily divest it of Shame; and therefore when he has never so strong an
Inclination to sin, yet still he will start at the apprehension of being
discovered; and be still willing to retain that Reputation, which is the Shadow
of Virtue, though he has been so hardy as to shake hands with the substance.
How many Calumnies, Dissimulations, Frauds and Falsehoods; how many of all Kinds
of sinful acts (wherein there is any acknowledged Baseness and Turpitude) would
be absolutely prevented; if so be the Actors, when they began to meditate the
doing of these things, were thoroughly persuaded that they would come to light,
and be made known, and so expose them to public Reproach? Now, is not that sin
sufficiently known, of which we acknowledge that God does know it? And is not
the knowledge of God sufficiently Awful, since He is most of all affronted by
our Guilt? And how comes it to pass then that our Shame is so Jealous and Quick
in regard of Men, but so remiss and languishing in regard of God? How come we
to be able to blush at the apprehension of a Man seeing us; When yet the
Consideration that God sees us, that the most Just sees our Iniquities, that
the most Holy sees our Filthiness, that the most Loving sees our
Unthankfulness, when this Consideration is not able to move the Passion or
provoke a blush? For we must acknowledge that this is the common State of that
Passion in us; so partial and unreasonable is our Shame; It acts as if Men
alone had the Custody of our Credit, and Gods Estimation were of no Importance
to it.

The best Reason that can be given for such an Unreasonable behavior, can be
no other than a Bad one; but I take the Best to be this, (viz.)

We presume all Men to be subject in some measure to such Passions, as would
tempt them (should they be acquainted with our sins) to be severe upon us, to
insult over us, and to publish our Reproach; and therefore we dare not trust
our Secret, and consequently our Reputation with Men: But, on the other hand,
we look upon God as purely Merciful; and at the same time we look upon it as an
Office of Mercy to Cover sins: So that although God knows our sins, yet we
imagine he alone shall know them; For, by some method of Repentance which we
propose to our selves, we hope to atone Gods displeasure; and so to have our
sins both forgiven and covered, and our selves secured both from punishment and
scandal too. But for Correction of this Mistake (for so it is) I shall draw my
Inference one Step farther, and argue from the Omniscience of God:

II. That All sin shall be brought to an Universal and public Discovery: so
that it is but desperate hope for any Man to think he shall escape the Shame
that is due unto his Guilt.

That Gods Omniscience carries in it the Power of such a Discovery is no
Dispute; the Question is, Whether he actually will make such a Discovery? And
let us fairly consult Scripture and Reason, what we ought to believe concerning
this.

The Apostle tells us ( Romans ii. 16.) that, In that day God shall judge the
secrets of all men: and to signify that the Judging of Secrets implies the
Revealing of Secrets, he tells us again (1 Cor. iv. 5.) that in order to
Judgment, He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the Counsels of the heart. Again he tells us (1 Timothy iii. ult.) that
of the actions of Men (both Good and Evil) Some are manifest in this life; and
what are Otherwise cannot be hid. And what can be more Express than that of our
Savior (S. Luke viii. 17.) Nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest;
neither any thing hid, that shall not be known, and come abroad: Which words
(as they are not capable of any adequate Completion till the day of Judgment,
so) the Ancients interpret them purely to respect the Process of That Day. Now
the Importance of all these Texts is clearly this; That God will make a
Discovery of all human Actions in order to his Judicial Sentence, whether of
Absolution, or Condemnation.

All that Reason can have to allege against This, must (as I have intimated
already) be founded on this supposition, That it is an Office of Mercy to Cover
sins: as indeed the Scripture frequently expresses it to be. And so undoubtedly
it is, During this Life; Where, if all sins were Discovered, many Men would be
impeded in their Repentance, and many cut off from the opportunity of
Repenting: And, besides, the World would only be so much the worse for the
Example; For sin would only grow more Insolent and Shameless, by reason of the
more apparent number of its Party. But hereafter the Case will be quite
otherwise: There Repentance will have no Opportunity to lose; nor Ill Example
be able to do harm any longer: And when God passes Sentence upon the Lives of
Men, his Mercy will be as much exalted by the Discovery of those sins he shall
pardon; as his Justice will be Cleared by the Discovery of those he shall
punish.

I know the main strength of the mentioned Objection must be borrowed from
those places of Scripture, where the Terms of Blotting out; and Covering sins,
are applied to God as a proper act of his Mercy. It is holy David's Prayer;
Lord, Blot out all mine Iniquities: and so he pronounces them Blessed, whose sins
are Covered: And God himself says in the Prophet ( Is. xliii. 25.) I even I am
he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. But now, to know the proper Meaning of these Expressions,
let us begin with the Last of them, wherein God says, I will not Remember thy
sins: Now it is certain that this Phrase of Gods not Remembering cannot be taken
literally; because it is impossible for God to Forget; But the Meaning is, that
He will not Remember so, as to punish: And so, in like manner, by Blotting out
and Covering is not meant literally the Concealing of sins, but only the
Abolishing of their Condemning power. And this we may evidently confirm from
the Instance of David himself, in that very place where he uses these
Expressions: It Is Psalm li. 9. where he cries, Hide thy face from my sins, O
Lord, and Blot out all my misdeeds: But here his Petition is so far from
meaning the Concealment of his sins from the Knowledge of the World, that he
was then actually proclaiming them, and registring them in a Form of
Confession, which he intended not only for the Exercise of his Own Repentance,
but likewise for the Conduct of all Others: so that we cannot interpret him to
have deprecated the Notoriety of his sins, but merely the Wrath of God, whereby
he might justly have been Condemned for them.

We may therefore look upon it as one Certain Consequence from the Omniscience
of God, that all human Actions shall be exposed to public View and Censure;
That a Light shall be struck into all the Works of Darkness, through all the
Recesses of Subtlety, through all the Disguises of Hypocrisy: That then the
Masque shall be pulled off from all dissembled Virtues, and every Vice shall
appear in its proper Color, and every Secret Injury shall proclaim its Author:
That there shall be no summary Absolutions, no Pardons in Gross without Enquiry
into the Retail, as the slight Repentances of Men do seem to require; but that
Repentances shall be weighed as well as Sins; and Mercy dispensed upon Rational
Terms, and the Pardon of Sinners justified by the Measures of their Contrition.

If this Reflection can work in us any more abundant Shame for what we have
done amiss, it has its proper and wholesome Effect upon us. It is the hope of
being Undiscovered that makes the Sinner walk haughtily; and (on the contrary)
the Belief of a Certain Discovery ought in all Reason to render us more Abject
and Vile in our own Eyes; which is the first step to True Repentance. Shame
thus Taken upon our selves is the only Expedient the Sinner has to prevent the
Future: Penitential shame will avoid the Judicial, and break that Blow that
will otherwise strike us with Unknown Confusion. For be assured That Shame for
Sin is a Natural Debt; and it must be paid at one time or other; and we can
escape it no more than we can escape Death.

Indeed there are some Men who seem to be Proof against the Influence of this
Reflection; I mean such as are arrived to sin boldly and openly; who as they
seek no Covering, so they seem to fear no Discovery, but bid Defiance to Shame.
In respect of such I shall add One Reflection more, ( viz.) That

Although the Knowledge of Men may not have the power of working Shame in a
hardy Sinner; yet the Omniscience of God, when it comes to manifest it self,
shall bring even the Shameless to Shame; and make it appear that, As Shame for
sin can be escaped no more than Death, so it can be defied no more than Hell.

To open the Truth of this Assertion; Let us but consider, How it comes to pass
that since sin is naturally Shameful (as being a Baffle to Man's Reason, as
well as a Blow to his Conscience) I say, since sin is naturally Shameful, how
comes it to pass that Men can sin and yet not be ashamed.

Now this Effect may follow from Three Causes, (1.) From Corrupt Notions. (2.)
From Common Guilt: and (3.) From Impudence of Temper.

I. Shamelesness in sin may proceed from Corrupt Notions. For so it is, The
World has past its Verdict, and Christians to their Scandal are led by the
Anticipation, That there are some sins that have nothing shameful in them. It Is
allowed perhaps that Fraud and Lying, and Ingratitude, and Perfidiousness (and
the like) are of a Nature marked with Infamy; But then to be a Witty Scoffer,
to be a brisk Revenger, to be stout in Intemperance, and the like, are no other
then fashionable Commendations; and why then should any be ashamed for these?
Now this is a Dream that may hold till the World be better awakened; but when
all Actions shall be brought to their true Standard, as it will then appear,
that to serve God is Man's greatest Honor; so it will appear, that there is
Shame in every thing whereby we do offend him: And that those sins which Men
boast of in the doing, are as Unworthy and Inglorious, as those which they
acknowledge are not fit to bear the Light.

II. Common Guilt may make Men sin without Shame. For even in those sins, which
the World owns for Shameful, Partnership will be able to carry off the Shame:
Thus a Thief will not be ashamed to be surpised by a Thief, nor an Adulterer
by an Adulterer; though a Man of an Awful Character would produce a Blush from
such a one at the surprise: And therefore we may Observe, that they who give
themselves up to any Vice, do generally withal give themselves up to
Calumniating, i. e. they take pleasure to represent, or to suppose all others
as bad as themselves: And all is for this very purpose, That they may beat down
the Reverence that is due to any Good Example, and so contemn the Censures of
all Men alike. But this is a Method that cannot take place when God comes to
make the Discovery; For as his Holiness is beyond the Reach of Calumny; as none
shall be able to say of God, that He is either Unrighteous, or Friend to those
that are so; so his Awful Censure will not fail to reduce every Guilty mind to
its proper Acknowledgments.

But, III. That which consummates the Evil is Impudence of Temper: such as the
Prophet Jeremy laments in the people of Israel, after that Affluence and Luxury
had brought them to a great height of wickedness (Chapter vi. 15.) Were they
Ashamed, when they had committed Abomination? Nay they were not ashamed at all,
neither could they blush.

Now this Impudence is a Temper contracted by Industrious Iniquity, and raised
upon the Ruins of Reason: It can be no otherwise; because Shame for sin is so
Connatural to Reason, that it cannot be extinguished but with Reason it self.
Which we may contemplate in the Instance of Fools and Madmen; the only Causewhy
they are not ashamed, being this, that they want Reason to reflect upon the
Turpitude of what they do. And it is certain that whosoever grows Impudent, he
so far keeps Reason a Prisoner, suffers it not to act, holds it in servitude to
his Lusts, and so sets his Soul in the nearest approach unto Brutality.

But this is a State that will not always last: For when God comes to do Right
to his Creatures, Reason shall be asserted to its Liberty of acting; and then
Shame shall be let loose to demand all its Arrears: It shall be let loose like
an Armed Man; and undoubtedly it shall act then with the same Force upon all
Bold Transgressors, that it does now sometimes upon those Unhappy Souls that
makes themselves away to avoid its Lashes: For as these flee from Life (though
the greatest Blessing they have) so they then shall flee from God with the same
Confusion; And being not able to bear the Terror of his Majesty, shall
voluntarily betake themselves to any place that is abandoned by Him, and that
is simply Hell. So that the Impudent Sinner seems not to need any Compulsion to
settle him in the place of Torment, but that of his Own Shame: That will be his
(...) his proper, his natural place; To Which (we know) all things move of
their own accord. And no less is intimated concerning Judas, according to our
Common Version of that passage ( Acts i. 25.) where it is said that Judas by
transgression fell from his part in the Apostleship, that he might go to his
Own place; (...) his Own, his Proper place: Implying that Judas's shame sunk
him down to Hell, as naturally as weight sinks a Stone down toward the Center.

These Reflections upon Gods Omniscience are such as seem proper to make the
Consideration of it Useful to us. And as for the Conduct of our particular
Practice, the best of all Rules may be borrowed from Holy David's Example,
Psalm. xvi. 9. where he says I have set God always before me: So let us: God is
always By us, let us set him always before us; His Eyes are always upon Us, let
Ours be likewise proportionably upon Him: Let us keep our minds in a Lively
Sense of the Venerableness of his Presence, and the Awfulness of his
Inspection; And this is the best Method to guard us from treating that
Inspection irreverently, and to keep us tender of doing any thing unsuitable to
such a Presence.

Come see the man that told me all that ever I did, cries the Woman of Samaria,
after her Conversation with our Savior at Jacob's Well: Think a little upon
that Conversation, or upon such a possible one with thy self: Think what
Commotions, what Struggling of several Passions started up in that Woman's
Breast, so soon as she found One, whom she looked upon as a pure Stranger to
her, to break in upon all her Secrets: The same shall one day be every ones
Case; The same Jesus (though in more awful Circumstances) shall tell every one
of us all that ever we did: And say then where lies our Wisdom but in a
Constant Endeavor to do that that will bear the Telling? Happy are they that
pursue this Endeavor! Almighty God assist us all to do so by his Merciful
Grace!

To whom be Glory and Thanksgiving for ever and ever.

Amen.
AN Assize SERMON Preached at WINCHESTER, July 14. 1686. CHARLES WITHER of
Hall, Esquire Being Sheriff, etc.
TO CHARLES WITHER, Esquire
SIR,
MY publishing the foregoing Sermon puts me in mind of a Debt of the same Kind
to Your self, which I shall discharge by publishing that which follows. Why it
was not published when first desired, the Sermon it self will speak my Apology.
I there represent Good King Jehosaphat giving such Counsel to His Judges, as
was not given to the Judges of this Realm in the Year 1686. etc. And although,
preaching upon such an Occasion, I thought it no less than my Duty to Speak
what I did; yet to Print it (which was beyond my Duty) would have been no other
than an Officious Imprudence. The Printing it Now gives me a Fresh Admonition
to be Thankful to God for the wonderful Providence whereby we were delivered
from those fearful apprehensions which possessed us at that Time; and whereby we
are settled in such a state of Happiness and Freedom, that any One may say what
is Consonant to Law and Justice, without fear of Thwarting the Measures of the
Government; or hazard of being brought under Censure for it. And Your self may
now Safely (which then you could not) espouse the Dedication, as a Testimony of
my Respect, who am

Sir, Your Affectionate and humble Servant, E. Young.

SERMON II.
2 CHRONICLES. xix. 6. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for men, but for the
Lord.
THE Heathens themselves did never set about any Solemn Business, but they
began with Religious Offices: And Hierocles (one of them) gives us account of
the Notion on which this their Piety was grounded; He says, They prayed to the
Gods, before they set about their Business, for Two Reasons (1.) That they
might procure the Divine Assistance in what they went about, and (2.) That in
Contemplation of that Assistance, they might act Soberly and in such a manner
as to do nothing Unworthy of it. The Reasons are as Enforcing, as the Example
is Commendable; and I hope there is no Soul in this Assembly so Loose as not to
be suitably affected with Both: I hope none here is so Profane as to account
Going to Church the Great Importance of a Circuit; or so Inconsiderable as to
think that the Administration of Justice is a Business of such a Nature as may
be done well enough without particular Regard to Gods Assistance: Let a Man but
weigh the Words now read unto you, he shall find Reason in them sufficient to
confute any such Apprehension.

They are the Words of King Jehosaphat, of whom the former Verse tells us, That
He set Judges in the land throughout all the Cities of Judah: and in this
Verse, He is brought in as giving Instruction and Caution to those Judges in
this Form, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for men, but for the Lord.

For the Explication of which Words I shall use no other Method than the making
of this Paraphrase upon them in the Person of the King: Ye Men (and Now, ye
Principal Men) of Judah! I have advanced You to the Magistracy, and made You
the Guardians of Peace and Justice; It is become Your Province to give Life to
the Laws, to redress the Injured, to check the Insolent, and to bound the
Unruly: Power and Honor always attend Your Persons, and Submission waits on
Your Decrees: But this notwithstanding, let me advise You, Be not overmuch
Pleased with Your Station, but rather Take heed, Consider and be afraid: For
Magistracy does not only advance, it likewises Indicates and Tries; Your Honor
is balanced with Duty, and Your Power is clogged with Temptation; Please not
Your selves therefore in thinking that I have conferred on You the Power to do
Great things, but rather Take heed what ye do: For You cannot but be tempted to
do Amiss; You will find Your Integrity assaulted through Every Passion. Among
those Persons over whose Causes You will Preside, some are Great, and they may
possibly bias You by Your Fear; some are Bountiful, and they will not fail to
bait Your Desire; some are Insinuating, and they may chance to warp You by
Affection; But Take heed, and remember that Ye Judge not for Men. I my self,
Your King, what a Temptation must I needs be to You? You cannot but reflect in
all Your Transactions, that You are Mine by Original Duty, Mine by present
Obligation, Mine by all Future Expectances; and what Prudence then can hinder
You from concluding that My Pleasure ought to be Your Supreme Rule? But
remember that You Judge not even for Me: For though I can communicate that
Power to You, which I have received from God; yet I cannot prescribe any other
Ends and Uses of that Power, than what God himself has prescribed both to You
and Me; I can give You Authority to Judge, but God has fixed the Mark and Scope
of Your Judgment in the Indispensable Measures of Right and Truth: Remember
therefore that You Judge for the Lord; It is Gods Business that Your Character
engages You in; It Is His Cause You have now undertaken.

To this Effect that Good and Wise King cautioned his Judges: and it well
became Him; but I am aware that to the Manners of Other Men there must be Other
Measures; and for such a One as I am, to pursue the same Advice to Persons of
that Conspicuous Order were too great an Indecency.

I shall therefore choose to extend the Concern of the Advice to All that
either do, or may any way Relate to Public Justice.

And the Words will very well bear that Extension; When we consider that in the
Transactions of Judicature, many may be said to Judge in Effect, besides him
who pronounces the Last Sentence: For as in a Clock, though the Hand only
indicates the Point of Time; yet the Weight and Spring, and every subordinate
Wheel influences the Motion to that Point which the Hand does Indicate: so in
the Administration of Justice, they that Inform and Testify; They that Inquire
and Report, they that Color and Represent what is alleged, do all judge in
Effect, i. e. They have all a necessary Influence upon the Issue; and the
Sentence of the Judge is no more than the Index of a Judgment, which Remoter
Agents do move and direct to.

To All therefore that either do, or may Relate to Judgment; The Words offer
these two Propositions:

I. That the Judgment is for the Lord: and II. That This Consideration is of
great Importance to make Men act as they ought to do in that Affair. Take heed,
etc.
I. The Judgment is for the Lord: By Judgment I mean (suitably to the Notion of
the Text) that Business which this Honorable Assembly is by and by proceeding
upon; ( viz.) The Administration of Justice in all its Acts and Offices,
whether Punitive, Coercive, or Decisive: Concerning which Judgment the Vulgar
Opinion is, that it is indeed the Great Civil Affair, the Prime and most
important Business of the Government; And this Opinion is True, but it is
Short; For my Text alleges that this Judgment is moreover a Religious Affair,
and the very Business of God: Ye Judge for the Lord: And the Truth of this
Assertion I shall clear to you in these Four Positions; Each of them bringing
in a several Instance for the Proof of it; ( viz.)

I. That the Power of Judgment is Gods Right. II. That the Matter of Judgment
is Gods Cause. III. That the Issue of Judgment is Gods End: and IV. That the
Formal Judgment, that is, The Sentence of Judgment is Gods Sentence.
The first Position is this, that the Power of Judgment is Gods Right.

None may doubt but that every Supreme Magistrate is vested with a proper
Judicial Power; which Power He may either Exercise Himself, or else Delegate it
to any Others whom he shall think Fit for the Exercise of it: But this I
assert; That no Supreme Magistrate can pretend to the Right of this Judicial
Power from any Human Title, or manner of Acquisition: It is a Prerogative above
any Station or Character that One Man can advance Another unto; And Every one
that has it, has it derived to him from God, in as real a Sense, as he can be
said to derive it to any Inferior and Deputed Minister or Judge.

Our Savior has told us what we are to believe in this Matter, from his Own
Case: Who upon the Insinuation of Pilat, the Roman Judge, that He was One who
had Power either to Condemn, or to Release him, makes this Reply; I know thou
could have no power over me, unless it were given thee from above: (...),
(not from Rome, but) from Heaven; from Caesar indeed Immediately, but Fontally
and Originally from God.

And so Sacred a thing is the Exercise of this Power, that not only Princes
themselves, but even their Deputed Ministers of Justice are therefore honored
in the Scripture with the Style of Gods; as sustaining Gods Person in Judgment,
and acting in His Right.

The Evidence that the Holy Scripture brings in to this Assertion is Abundant:
And He whose Curiosity seeks for Conviction of another kind, let him Consider
this Instance: (viz.) The Magistrate Bears the Sword (as S. Paul expresses it)
which is the Ensign of the Judicial Power, and imports a Jurisdiction extending
over Life; and he Bears it not in vain (says the same Apostle) that is, He has
Right to use it: But now, let any one Consider by what possible Human Right the
Magistrate can acquire a Jurisdiction that extends Over Life: For no Man has
this Right in Himself; no Man has Power over his Own Life; and How then can any
confer it on Another?

I know any Man may forfeit his Life by his Crimes; but when he has so done, no
Other Man can take that Forfeiture, without Gods Claim: And therefore after a
Man has deserved to Die never so Justly, it is not Lawful for him to Execute
that Judgment upon himself; Nor yet can he, by his Own Act, render it Lawful
for any Other to execute It upon him; And therefore the Magistrate, which bears
the Sword for that purpose, and has the Only Right of Executing this Judgment,
is for that very Reason called by S. Paul, in the same place, (...), the
Minister of God, as Invested with Gods Authority, and acting in His Right; who
as he is the only Author, so ( therefore) He is the only Lord of Life.

II. The Matter of Judgment is Gods Cause; I call the Matter of Judgment such
Matters and Cases as properly fall under Judicial Cognizance: And they (for the
greatest part) are such as are Intrinsically Moral, involving Good or Evil in
their Own Nature: such as are all the Concerns of Truth, Right, Equity, Mercy;
and all the Contrary Violations that proceed from Maiice, Falsehood or
Unfaithfulness. Now All these are properly Gods Cause; For they were the
Matters of His Law before they were of Man's; and Human Laws in Respect of
those are only the Transcripts of that which is Divine and Eternal: And that is
the Reason why the Just Determination of all such Cases (which is the Executing
of True and Righteous Judgment) is said in the Holy Scripture to be the Direct
and Proper Service of God, and is required of Magistrates under that Notion.
And this is the Reason why the Heathens, though they knew not the True God,
were yet interpreted to honor and serve the True God by the Offices of Justice
and Judgment: For so the Fathers doubt not to assert that God prospered even
Idolatrous Nations for this Reason; and particularly that the Romans extended
their Empire to that height of glory by Gods blessing upon their Eminent
Justice. For as the Author of the Book of Wisdom argues (on the other hand)
concerning Perjury in those Idolaters; that when they swore falsely, though it
were by False Gods, yet they were punished by the True, because the sin was
against Him: (Meaning that every Deviation from the Natural Law, or the
Dictates of our Consciences, is a sin against that God that planted these
Dictates in us, in order to this that they should be our Law:) So likewise (on
the contrary) so long as those Idolaters did observe these Natural Dictates,
and assert and maintain them in their Public Judgments, they pleased and
served the True God (though to them Unknown) and were accordingly prospered and
blessed by him for it.

It is no Doubt but that in Cases where the Matter under Determination
appertains to Natural Right, the Cause is Gods, and an Equitable Determination
of them is His Proper Service: But we must allow that there are many Cases of
Judicial Cognizance, whose Matters are not of Natural, but only of Positive
Right; which happens as often as Laws are enacted about things that are in
their Own Nature Indifferent. Now it is certain, these Matters do not Directly
belong to Gods Cause; and yet they do Consequentially; Because Indifferent
things do generally carry in them the Advantages and Encouragements of
Necessary Things; And, whether they do or no, God will have our Obedience
approved in Indifferent Things as well as Necessary. We conclude therefore that
Moral Things (which are most commonly the Matter of Human Laws) are Gods Cause
by Antecedent Relation; and that Indifferent things when they once are made
Matter of Human Laws, do then become Gods Cause by Espousal: And therefore it
is that Both are charged upon the Consciences of Men by the Apostle; and Both
are to be observed for the sake of God; Or in Case they are not observed, the
Animadversion upon those that do not observe them, is no less than a Judgment
executed in Gods Behalf.

III. The Issue of Judgment is Gods End. The Political End of Judgment is the
Maintenance of the Laws, the securing of Rights, the encouragement of Industry,
and the establishing of Peace; in which consists that Political Happiness that
Every Government aims at: But God has a Greater End in it than All this, and
that is the making of Men Internally Good and Virtuous, and laying in them the
Foundation of a Future Happiness, a Happiness that will last when all the
Polities of the World are past off the Stage and expired.

So that we ought to look upon Judgment as a Part of Gods Providence, whereby
he governs the World to his most holy Purposes. For as we all acknowledge that
God has a Providence whereby he does govern the World; so if we enquire into
the Nature and End of that Providence, we shall find it to be no other than a
series of several Methods to make Men Good; to which End this of Human Judgment
is conducing in the most Eminent manner. For no doubt but Judgment is the
greatest possible External Bond of Human Virtue; and the most effectual Check
of disorderly Passions: It guards Men from doing Ill by a Wholesome Fear; and
those that have done Ill, it brings to Repentance by Suffering: Insomuch that
in the Scripture it is recommended as the great Disposition to Christianity,
and the great Preparatory to the salvation of God: For the Prophet Isaiah
speaking of the Coming of our Savior, and explaining as it were that future
Message of John the Baptist; Prepare ye the way of the Lord, he does it in
these Words, Isaiah lvi. 1. thus says the Lord, keep ye judgment and do
justice, for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.
And to the same sense is that Passage Psalm xcvii. where after it has been said
(verse 1.) The Lord reigns, the earth may be glad thereof; it follows (verse
2.) justice and judgment are the establishment of his throne; As if, according
to the Ordinary nature of Things, God could not Reign, where the Government did
not assert him: He may in Compassion hover over a People; but he can never
pitch his Tent and Dwell amongst them, unless the Magistrate fix him a Throne,
by looking to that Point, which S. Paul therefore calls the very End of
Magistracy, viz. To be a terror to evil doers and a Praise to them that do
well.

Thus God has put into the hands of the Magistrate not only a Godlike Power,
but likewise the Power of a Godlike Retaliation; For as He makes them Govern;
so they may (and who questions but that they ought to) make Him Govern
Reciprocally.

I know indeed that God has had a Church in the World (and that the most
glorious Church that ever was in the World) without the Assistance of
Magistrates: But that was in an Age of Visible Miracles, and at a time when the
World and the Church stood notoriously distinguished; and while those that were
of the Church were kept so Humble by Persecution, and Mortified by Poverty, and
Sober by the Daily Expectation of Death, that they needed no Other Laws to
restrain their Appetites: But now that the World it self is come into the
Church, and Men can maintain their Temporal Hopes and Passions, and their
Christian Profession together, it is impossible but that the Tares of Common
Corruption should choke and wast the Good seed, unless the Magistrate step in
to weed and to pluck up, and assist in the Cultivation of the Field.

IV. The Formal Judgment, i. e. the Sentence of Judgment, is Gods Sentence. For
says the Psalmist, God is judge himself, Psalm. 1. 6. And though Delegated
Powers act for him at present, and pass the Sentence; yet he Recognizes and
Imputes that Sentence, and takes it into his Own Account. We are aware that God
has appointed a Day in the which he will Judge the World in Righteousness; And
the Rule of Proceeding in that Day (as the Holy Scripture avouches) shall be
this, viz. Men shall Reap as they Sow; and He that has done Wrong, shall
receive for the Wrong that he has done: Now the very same being the Rule of
all Human Judicature, we ought to look upon every Judicial Sessions here to be
no other than a Particular Dispatch of Business, subordinate and preparatory to
the Universal Judgment. Thus when wrong is Recompensed by Human Judgment, the
Judgment of God is so far Prevented. If indeed the Sentence it self happen to
be Wrong and Injurious, then (in the Psalmist's Style) The poor commits
himself to God, that he may take the matter into his own hands: Thus, I say, it
happens should the Sentence of Judgment be in it self Wrong and Injurious; But
both the Law, and Good Manners look upon this as the Supposition of an
Impossible thing ( Turpe est Impossible, says the Rule of Law) and therefore
without farther supposing it, I shall form This Conclusion, viz. That Every
Sentence of Human Judgment is Ingredient to the Retribution of the Great Day;
and that All that Men suffer here for their Crimes (if they suffer it with a
just sense of their Crimes) shall then be imputed to such a Measure of their
Purgation; and All the Impunity that Guilt meets with here, shall be reckoned
for in the Sentence that shall then be passed. I say not, that a Man may work
out his Future Absolution by any satisfactions that he can make here to Public
Justice; or that he cannot be Absolved in the Future without such satisfactions
here paid: Blessed be the Love of Christ, whose Satisfactions are
Allsufficient! But this I say, that since God has made True Repentance a
necessary Condition, without which none can lay hold on that Satisfaction which
Christ has made; and no Repentance is True that does not engage a Man to make
what Satisfaction he is able himself, both to Men by Compensation for Injuries,
and to God by Sorrow for Guilt; And since Men left to their Own Discretion, are
usually so Indulgent to themselves as not to reach the Measures of such a
Repentance, but to take up with that which is slight and deceiving; upon this
Consideration I say, Kind and Friendly is the Force of Public Justice that
does oftentimes terrify and compel Men to Repent: Happy is the Necessity that
procures Virtue; But especially, Adorable is the Mercy that will accept of
that Virtue which Necessity does procure!

Thus I apprehend my self to have sufficiently cleared my first Proposition:
And now the Remainder of my Business is to show, that this Consideration is of
Great Importance to make Men act as they ought to do in every Relation they
bear to Public Justice. And this I shall do Distinctly according to the Method
of my former Positions, showing what Arguments for Integrity do Naturally arise
from the Consideration of Each of them.

I. The Doctrine of the First Position was this; That the Magistrate in
Judgment Sustains the Person of God, and acts for Him. Now this Consideration
is of a Reasonable Force to keep the Magistrate Just and Upright in his
Determinations; and no other but this.

For let the Magistrate suppose himself to sustain any other Person, or to act
by or for any other whatsoever, but only God, he shall find himself immediately
fallen under the power of such Reasons as will pervert him from being Just;
because there is no Person in the World, but God alone, whose Ends may not
sometimes be better served by Injustice: Gods Ends are always served by
Justice, and no bodies always so, but His.

And hence Springs the Great Difficulty of being Just, and the necessity of
that Caution, which we find so frequently inculcated to Magistrates in the Holy
Scripture, viz. That they should be Strong, Courageous, very Courageous:
Because it is but Needful that He whose Duty will not permit him to Oblige in
what is Unjust, should arm himself against the possible Malevolence of Many,
who will account themselves Disobliged by the Direct Issues of Justice. He
therefore that will be Just, must harden himself against all the Impressions of
Interest; tho in that he may seem Imprudent; against all the Impressions of
Affection, though in that he may seem Ill-natured; against all the Impressions
of Benefits, though in that he may seem Ungrateful; nay, against all the
Impressions of Vulgar Pity, though in that he seem Hardhearted: He must render
himself disengaged from all the World, and from Himself above all; Because Self
is undoubtedly the greatest Bias to Human Prevarication.

But these (in the mean time) are Difficulties, which I think no other
Consideration can enable a Man to surmount, but only the Respect of God, and
the Conscience of doing that service which God himself does both Require and
Reward.

I know indeed that to be Just is in it self a very glorious thing, without any
farther Religious Prospect: And therefore there are some Spirits (naturally
Generous) which though it shall happen that they have not much of Religion,
will yet despise all the Temptations of Interest, and be Just for the very
Glory of being so: But then we must observe that Glory it self is another
Bias, and can draw Men from their Integrity, as well as any other Passion; And
so it sometimes happens that a Man, that could not have been bribed with Gold,
will yet be bribed with Air, that is, the Affectation of a Popular Fame. An
Instance of this kind is intended in that Precept, Ex. xxiii. 3. where it is
said, Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his cause: Intimating, that when
a Poor Man has a Bad Cause, though there can be no Other Temptation, yet there
may be that of Vainglory, to be Unjust: Because a Sentence given in behalf of
a Poor Man is so Popular and Specious, that though it should be Unjust, yet it
may gain a Man the Reputation of a more Impartial Justice. And indeed when a
Man comes to affect Glory from any thing, though from Virtue it self, he is
fallen into the Temptation of preferring the Glory above the Virtue; and so of
Leaving the Virtue for the Glory's sake, if at any time they shall happen to be
Divided. So Important a Reason there is for that Precept of the Apostle, Let
him that glories, glory in the Lord: To which let me subjoin; Let him that
will be just, be just for the Lord; Because it is impossible for any one to be
accurately Just for any other Prospect.

II. The second Position was this, That the Matter of Judgment is Gods Cause:
And this Consideration is very forcible to engage all Others to bring in their
Respective due Assistances to Public Justice.

It Is a Notion to be met with more than once among the Heathen Moralists, that
A Good Man is a Perpetual Magistrate; and that, though he be not made so by the
Governing Power, he is made so by Nature; that is, A Good Man cannot but be a
Friend and Patron to the Laws; His Love to Virtue and the Public Good will not
suffer him to be Unconcerned, when he sees them broken and contemned. And if it
be so with a Good Man; I am sure it cannot be otherwise with a Good Christian:
It is impossible that such a one should see and bear with Indifference, that
the Concerns of Truth, the Offices of Morality and Religion (which I say are
the general Matters of the Law) those Duties wherein Gods Honor, and the
Common Welfare, nay the Common Salvation are so nearly concerned, should be
broken and neglected without a proper Animadversion.

We all conclude that He wants Compassion, and sins against the Law of
Humanity, who will suffer the Poor to perish for want of Relieving; But if the
Perishing of Souls be of greater Moment than the Perishing of Bodies, I am sure
he has less Compassion, and sins more against the Law of Humanity, who will
suffer Good Manners to be run down for want of Asserting, I do not say that
every Good Christian should rise up like Phineas, and execute the Judgment of
Zeal (as the Rabbis call it;) but this I say, that every Good Christian ought
to have a constant Regard to the Ends of Public Justice, which are the
Restraint of Vice, and the Maintenance of Good Manners; and to these Ends he
ought never to be wanting in any sort of Prudential Assistance.

And in this Point I humbly wish that the Gentlemen would be pleased to hear me
as their Particular Remembrancer. Whether they are Magistrates or no, let them
always bear in mind, that an Awful Example carries Magistracy in it self; and
he that lives Christianly is the Best Justiciary; he gives the Best Assistance
to Public Justice, and cures most Crimes among the People.

God has given this Precept among other Judicial Laws, Lev. xix. as that which
has a most direct Influence upon the Affairs of Public Justice, viz. Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. The Charge
is given to All, but it obliges the Gentleman most, whose Fortunes give him the
Advantage of Executing it with the happiest success: For in Matters of Duty,
Our Power is always the Measure of our Obligation.

It is an Ill Crisis, when Men's Religion comes to be so Modest, that they will
not Rebuke sin, or keep Virtue in Countenance, for fear of Invading the
Preachers Office; as if it were pure Officiousness in Others, and exceeding the
Measures of their Obligation. But tell me, ye Men of Quality and Power,
superior to those that are about you! Tell me how God who is the Equal Father
of All, came to distinguish You from the Crowd of Indigents, and to prefer You
to such an Unequal Distribution. Can you say it is for Services already done? I
must say it is for Services to be Done; It is not for Naught: God has put your
Fortunes as a Trial and Opportunity into your hands: Your Fortunes are the
Means of your Influence upon Men; and your Influence upon Men is your Power of
doing Good; and your Power of doing Good is your Debt to do it; And if you do
it not, you run into Debt even for that which is your Own.

It would trouble me to doubt of any of your Zeal for that Religion, which You
and the Laws profess: Look where you will, you will never find any Constituted
of a more saving Wisdom than that is: But be pleased to bear in mind, That to
appear for Religion, and not to appear against Vice, is in effect a
Contradiction; and he that will not assert his Religion better than so, is in
the nearest hazard of losing it.

III. The third Position was this, That the Issue of Judgment is Gods End. And
this Consideration does most Effectually discover the Great Iniquity of
Perverting Judgment. We know that Christianity permits no Evil to be done, tho
softened with the Issue of never so Good a Consequence: But much more
Inexcusable is the Evil, whose Product is likewise evil; this is a Double Sin:
And so is every Iniquity interposed in the Administration of Justice; It is a
solemn Evil in the Act, and yet a Worse in the Effect it produces. Ex. Gt. All
Corruption or Falsehood in Evidence is a Solemn Evil; It is a great Affront to
the God of Truth; especially considering that God himself is called in to be
Witness to the Affront: All Partiality of Verdicts is a Solemn Evil; It is a
breach both of Truth and Trust, and an Implicit Defiance of the Christian
Faith, which is there plight and pawned as a Pledge of Integrity: All
Prevarication in Pleadings is a Solemn Evil; wherein Parts and Learning are
employed to elude Right, and Color Frauds; which is no other than a Profane
prostituting the Talents of God to the service of Mammon: Torturing the Laws to
make them speak Contrary to the Intention of the Makers is a Solemn Evil; It is
the Extremest Violation and Contempt of the Governing and Legislative Power,
which if not held Sacred in one Point, it has no security of being so in Any:
All these are Solemn Deliberate Iniquity in the Act; And yet the Effect of them
is Worse, for it tends to no other Issue (to the Public) than this, viz. to
Harden Men in their sins by the Means of Impunity. For the only End of Public
Justice is to Correct ill Men, and make them do Right whether they will or no;
to bring Criminals to Repentance, and meliorate the World by the Example of
their Punishment: Whereas All those Artifices through which Men aim at
Impunity, directly frustrate this Good End, and render Men secure in the
pursuit of their Ill Inclinations: which they must stand Accountable for, who
might have hindered it.

IV. The Last Position was this, That the Sentence of Judgment is Gods
Sentence: i. e. It is espoused by God, and taken into his Own Account, and
shall be so Imputed at the Judgment which shall be Universal. And this
Consideration may serve as Effectually to discover the Folly of perverting
Judgment.

The Traveller when overtaken by a Storm gets himself to a Tree, and when he is
there, he pleases himself with the Commodiousness of his Shelter; but if the
Shower happen to be so strong as once to break through the Boughs, then he
finds to his disappointment that the Standing, wherein he lately pleased
himself, is Now become more Insufferable than any part of the Open Road: And
just so it happens when any Man meets with Protection or Covert from any Unjust
or Misguided Sentence of Judgment; when either his False Titles are Confirmed,
or his Injuries Concealed by any Favor or Misrepresentation of the Court: The
Foolish Litigant hugs himself, that now he is safe, because he has a Verdict on
his side; because his Penny is saved, or his Credit unexposed, by reason of
those Practices which have past on his behalf; But he thinks not in the mean
time, that by and by the Storm will certainly beat through the Covert, and then
his Station will be able to afford him no safety; Then he will complain of that
Success, which now he calls his Good Fortune; and wish that either Force had
brought him to Right, or Shame to Repentance; that so he might have taken
Refuge under some more Durable Shelter.

You therefore, whosoever pretend to have Favor for Any, whose Faults have
made them Obnoxious to the Laws, show your Friendship in this, Help to clear
them against the Great Assize; Help to bring them to Repentance and
Satisfaction; and Remember that it is absolute Cruelty to assist a Man from
being Just and Good.

And You (My Lords) give me Leave to offer You One Advice, which is this, That
You would look upon Your selves and Your Assistants as the most Lively
Resemblance that the World affords, of our Savior Christ coming in the Clouds
with his Holy Angels: Be pleased therefore but to think this of Yourselves, and
to act in Contemplation of this Resemblance; And then we doubt not but All You
do will tend to the Public Welfare, and to the Glory of Him for whom You are
to Judge.

To whom be Glory and Thanksgiving for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

