Mr. YOUNG's SERMON Before the QUEEN, On EASTER DAY, 1693.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, On EASTER DAY, 1693.

By E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester-College, Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

1 THESSALONIANS. iv. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words.
THE Words related to, are those in the foregoing Verses; where the Apostle
delivers the Doctrine of the Resurrection: Telling us, That at the sound of the
Trump of God all the dead shall be raised; and the dead in Christ shall rise
first; and be taken up to meet the Lord in the Air; and thence accompany him
into glory; and there abide with him for ever. And having delivered this
Doctrine, he directs the Application of it (in the Text) to an End of all
others the most serviceable to Humane Life, that is, to the administering of
Comfort in case of any Worldly Trouble or Affliction.

I shall premise a Word or two concerning the Article it self, and then proceed
to the Application directed.

We may observe how differently the World was affected at the News of our
Savior's Resurrection: The Disciples heard it as that which they most longed
to hear; and the Message of those Travelers from Emmaus telling them, The Lord
is risen indeed, was such a Cordial to Them, that it came to be prescribed to
succeeding Christians as an Antidote against all Worldly Fears: The Lord is
risen, growing into a common form of Salutation among them, whereby they were
wont to congratulate and give Joy to one another.

On the contrary, When the same Report was brought to the other Jews, and that
with the strongest evidence of Truth that any Report was capable of, ( viz.)
from the Intimation of the Earthquake, and the Attestation of the Band of
Soldiers, and the concurrent Resurrection of several of their own Acquaintance
that were known to have appeared in the City (and what more could be desired to
convince the Reasonable?) yet for all this they would not believe it; they
would rather believe their own absurd Fiction, That his Disciples came by night
and stole him away.

We need not look far for a Reason why this News was so differently
entertained: The Disciples had an Interest in it; for all their Hopes depended
upon the Divinity of their Master, which was now demonstrated by his Rising
again from the Dead. Whereas the Jews Interest (as their Malice had brought it
about) lay quite on the other side: The Report of his Resurrection threatened
them with the danger of being called to account for their malicious Prosecution
of him; and therefore they feared and hated the Report; and therefore they
would not believe it, how credible soever the Testimonies made it appear.

It is no wonder then, if the Doctrine of our Common Resurrection shall
sometimes meet with the same stubborn Infidelity; if there are Men that will
reject the Belief of the Resurrection as Absurd, and yet swallow much greater
Absurdities in their own Scheme of No-Resurrection: It is only manifest, That
such Men's Interest lies against the Article; and that they Err not for want of
Evidence, but barely for want of Compliance in their Affections. It is not
Reason but Vice, that opposes the Belief of the Resurrection; and Vice opposes
it Irreconcileably: For although many vicious Men do believe the Resurrection,
yet it is certain, that all vicious Men would rather not believe it; they all
lay under the Temptation of wishing they knew how to evade the belief of it;
and therefore what wonder if some, setting their Wits heartily about it, make a
shift to compass the Delusion they Desire?

It were vain to attempt the reclaiming of these Men from their Error by
Reason and Arguments; for they that pretend to fathom the Power of God, and to
state all the possibilities of its acting, must needs think all men's Reason
shallow, in comparison of their own: And they that will deny the Scripture to
be the Word of God, because it asserts a Resurrection, neither would they
believe a Resurrection, though one rose from the Dead: For, supposing such a
Miracle were wrought before their Eyes, they might as well conclude that
Evidence to be a Phantasm, as they now conclude the Scripture to be a Forgery.
He that will hope to reform such men's Judgments, must have the Art of
reforming their Manners, and the power of awakening their Consciences: For in
the Conscience it is (as our Apostle has observed, 1 Timothy 1. 19.) that the
Shipwreck of Faith begins, and There only it can be repaired. Let them be
persuaded to live so as to be able to Wish a Resurrection, and then the Article
will soon appear as credible as that there are Antipodes; which we know has
sometimes been looked on as a strange Opinion, and yet now every one finds it
to be true.

But in the mean time, We may be bold to argue against these men, what the
Apostle argues against other Apostates, (viz.) That professing to be wise, they
become fools: I mean Fools by their own Standard: Because that by not-believing
the Resurrection, they quit hold of the greatest Temporal Comfort that humane
life is capable of; The Resurrection being a Truth that God has revealed, among
other Reasons for this in particular, That it might serve to support and cheer
our minds, amidst those many Evils to which we are obnoxious in this present
World. Which is the particular Argument that my Text obliges me to pursue.

I need not bring Evidence to holy Job's Observation, That Man is born to
trouble; the multitude of Complainers may save me that labor: But there is
another Observation, which he grafts upon this, well worth our Contemplating,
and that is, That Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, nor does Trouble
spring out of the Ground: Whereby he intimates that no Evils befall us, but the
Divine Providence has a hand in the disposal of them: And, this being so, we
may farther assure our selves, That God inflicts no Evils in this life, without
having made a Provision of such possible Reliefs as may suffice to the
comfortable bearing of them: And to think otherwise, would not only be
injurious to the Goodness of God, but likewise the way to make our selves more
miserable than God is willing any of us should be. God ordains no Grief without
a Medicine; inflicts no Trouble without an Expedient of proportionable
Consolation; and accordingly my Text offers one that is Adequate to all that
can befall us. But before I insist on That, I shall enquire what expedients of
this kind the Fancies of Men have been able to project for themselves; and from
the Insufficiency of these I shall make it appear, That there is no solid
support of a Man's mind, when under the pressure of worldly Troubles, but only
that which offers it self in the prospect of the Resurrection.

No search has been more curiously pursued in all ages than this, What Cure for
Grief? What Remedy for Afflictions? What Recompense might a Man possibly make
himself for the Troubles he endures? And several methods have been directed in
the Case. But that which pleased Men most, and therefore has been most in
practice, was to betake themselves to Intemperance and sensual Pleasures;
proposing by these to make themselves amends for the Evil they suffered, or at
least to stupifie and harden themselves against its Impressions. Intemperance
never wanted other Arguments, but this has always been looked upon as its
fairest Apology, when used to remove sorrow from the heart, and to make men
forget their Trouble. Thus the Epicure, Eccles. 2. 23. puts the Question, What
has man for the vexation of his heart? All his days are sorrows, and his
Travail grief: and thereupon he concludes, Wherefore there is nothing better
for a man, than to eat and to drink, and delight his senses. And so those
Libertines, Wisd. 2. having first laid down their Scheme to prove themselves
wholly Material and wholly Mortal, and so no better than Beasts of another
shape, they make this Reflection, That Life is short and tedious, short in
time, and yet tedious in vexations; and thence they infer, Therefore let us
enjoy the good things that are present; and let none go without his share of
our voluptuousness. I confess that this Conclusion and Method is less
reproachful, when consequent to such a Scheme of Relief: And yet even Then, How
narrow are the Comforts of it? How many Griefs are there that will not abide
this Remedy? And how many that it cannot reach? And those it does reach, how
thin a shelter does it afford them? And how soon will the storm break through?
And in the mean time, how many are its own mischiefs? and greater oftentimes
than those it is applied to cure? But, on the other side, while we own a God,
what an affront is it to that God to stupifie our selves against the awaknings
of his Discipline? While we own a future Reward, what a madness is it to
overlook that Reward, and to take our Consolations here, in bar to those that
are to come? While we own a Conscience, what a violation and outrage is it to
that awful faculty to flee to Vice for a shelter from Misfortune?

Upon this single Consideration of Conscience, the wiser Heathens grew into an
abhorrence of this Sensual Method; and set up another in opposition to it: For
some of their Philosophers advised men to fortify themselves against
Afflictions with this Notion ( viz.) that they were not Evil: For they would
not allow any thing to be Evil, that was not in a man's own power, nor
occasioned by his own default. Their Meaning hereby was no more than this, (and
thus much is certainly true,) That Afflictions are not Evil in comparison of
Sins: But yet we must acknowledge that Afflictions are such Evils as will make
a man Miserable, if he has no other prospect than this Notion to support
himself withal: And therefore I do not mention this Notion of Theirs as a
competent means of Comfort; but as it is a noble Provocation to Virtue: For let
us consider with our selves; If those Heathens arrived to such a pitch of moral
Fortitude, as to account Calamities not Evil in comparison of Sins; a Gout not
Evil in comparison of an irregular Appetite; a Prison not Evil in comparison of
a ruling Passion; What confusion and reproach does this threaten to Christians,
if they, notwithstanding their Profession of the Cross, shall be found to
choose Vice rather than Trouble, and perhaps to fear many Sins less than they
fear One Calamity?

The best Rules that Humane Wisdom has ever prescribed for the management of
Afflictions, are these Two, Business and Patience. The help of Business lies in
diverting the Thoughts; for so long as we can suspend our mind from thinking on
that which grieves us, so long we have a Truce with our grief, and it affects
us very little. And this is the Reason why Trouble has its full blow at the
Idle man, because he has nothing else to think of; whereas while the mind is
taken off by its attention on something else, a great part of the violence of
that blow is broken. But in the mean time, How many Troubles of Life are there,
that are too sullen to be employed, and too importunate to be diverted?
Troubles that can absolutely command us to bear and to attend them: In case of
which, there is no Remedy but Patience; And let us see what Remedy there is in
That.

It is the work of Patience to summon up the powers of the mind, and to fit us
to bear what we cannot help, as Composedly as we may: And by this means we are
secured at least against the mischiefs of Impatience; which is always found
both to increase the burden, and likewise to impair the strength of the Bearer.
But in the mean time, Though Patience be a prudent Guard and Defensative against
farther Evil; it is not any Comfort or Relief of the Present: As, when a man
lies pained of a broken Bone, the more restless he is, the more torment he
creates himself; but be he never so quiet, that does no way alleviate what he
actually feels, nor offer any compensation for the feeling of it. I speak not
now of Patience as it is a Christian Grace; as it is a dutiful submission of
our Wills to the Discipline of God, and so the Parent of Hope; for in this
Sense, it is the very Consolation directed to in the Text: but I speak of
Patience as it is simply a method of humane Wisdom to bear quietly that which
we cannot help; In which Sense, it neither carries any such Virtue in it, nor
can it found any such Consolation. And therefore They that were truly Wise
among the Heathen, having well considered this state of things, That the
Afflictions and Troubles of Life were numerous, and that they fell
indiscriminately upon Good Men as well as Bad, and that there was no
proportionable Compensation to be met with in this World; from this very
Foundation they raised their Reasonings to the Conjecture of a Life to come;
wherein the God that governs all things should acquit and manifest the Goodness
of his Nature; and those Men that were Patient and Virtuous under their present
Evils, should receive a full and satisfactory reward. This, though it were
their bare Guess, pleased them so much, that they could not choose but nurse it
into Hope; and though they could advance it no farther than Hope, yet that very
Hope was more entertaining to them in their Troubles, than all other Expedients
that the World could offer.

Now, what was their Guess is our Evidence; and what was their Hope is our
Assurance. Nay, our Assurance amounts to the state of a much greater Felicity
than they could either guess or hope for. Let us see then in particular, What
it is that the Text offers for the Matter of our Comfort, and what every Good
Christian has Right to Hope for from the state of the Resurrection.

The Holy Scripture represents it Thus, ( viz.) That Christ our Lord, Who is
the Author of salvation to all them that obey him, shall raise us up at the
last day; and shall take us into the Mansions of his Father's house; That where
He is, we may be also: And that we shall not only be with Him, but (what is
greater) we shall be like him too: 1 John 3. 2. For he shall change our vile
bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body; and we shall
bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam. The Apostle, to give us a more distinct
light into that wonderful change that shall pass upon every Good Christian at
the Resurrection expresses it 1 Cor. 15. in these Five opposite respects: He
tells us that our Bodies in their present state, are Weak, and Dishonorable,
and Animal, and Corruptible, and Mortal; Weak, by reason of the jarring
principles of their Composition; Dishonorable, by reason of the many noisome
and humbling effects that those principles produce; Animal, because their Life
depends (as that of Beasts does) upon the Return of an uncertain Breath;
Corruptible, for that they tend every day toward Dissolution, which at last is
finished in actual Death. But on the contrary, he says, Those Bodies that shall
be, are Vigorous, and Glorious, and Spiritual, and Incorruptible, and Immortal;
Vigorous, without any Weakness or Impediment; Glorious, without any Darkness or
Deformity; Spiritual, without any Grosness or Encumbrance; Incorruptible,
without any Pain or Passibility; Immortal, without any Alteration or Decay.

Our Blessed Savior, to fortify his Disciples against those Troubles which he
had told them were likely to ensue, took as many of them with Him into the
Mount as made up a legal Evidence, and there gave them an Ocular Conviction of
this happy change: Where he transfigured himself before them, and assumed for a
while the luster of a glorified Body; under which appearance, it is said, that
his Face shone like the Sun; and his Raiment (pierced through with the beams
that darted from his limbs) became as white as the Light: Insomuch that his
Disciples fell into an Ecstasie at the beholding their Own Appearance; being
too weak at present to bear the very sight of that Majesty and Glory, which in
due time they themselves were to put on.

Now this is the Hope that is set before every one of us in the prospect of the
Resurrection; and this is that Hope which the Apostle, Heb. 6. 18. calls the
strong Consolation. Indeed what Consolation can be stronger? Or what state of
life can be so uncomfortable as that this may not fuffice to compose and
sweeten it? How strong a Consolation is it for a Man under bodily grief and
pains, to contemplate a state, whereunto he is passing, where shall be no more
sorrow, no more pain, and where all Tears shall be wiped from his eyes? How
strong a Consolation is it for a Man under the circumstances of destitution and
neglect to contemplate that there is not any person in the World so Great, so
Happy, so Honored, so Beloved, but that (having a little patience) he himself
shall be more so. How strong a Consolation may it be to any of us to consider
that all we suffer shall turn to a happy Account; if only we take care to
direct it to that Account: and that All we lose, is not lost; unless we fling
it after Providence, and lose it by our own peevishness; For otherwise it is
only taken up to an Interest, which shall be paid at the Resurrection of the
Just?

It is very remarkable in the Case of Holy Job, that when he was stripped and
destitute of all that the World calls Comfort, God was pleased to reveal this
Doctrine of the Resurrection to him in so bright a manner, that we cannot have
the Article fuller expressed at this day, than it is in those Words of his, I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the Earth; and though after my skin, worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and Mine eyes shall behold, and
not another. That Job had so full a Revelation of this healing Truth was a
particular mercy to Him; but it is likewise an Instruction to Us, That, since
the Man of Universal Afflictions had this Revelation given him for a sure means
of his Comfort, there can be no Affliction to which the same means may not be
applied with all desirable success.

And from hence I shall take occasion to reflect upon one common miscarriage;
which is This, There are few in the World, who being under the state of
Affliction, do not look upon it as their undoubted Right to Complain: And from
the Color of this Right they insensibly fall into several both Sins and
Mischiefs: For while they complain of the Issue it self, they impeach
Providence, and become Irreligious; while they complain against immediate
Causes and Instruments, they nurse Uncharitableness, and inflame themselves to
Revenge; while they indulge this humor of complaining, they frustrate the
Discipline of their Afflictions, and refuse to be made better by them; and
lastly they preclude themselves from the Comfort offered in my Text, because
they are not in a state of mind to apply it. In order to prevent this Evil, I
shall strike at the Root, and show That all such Complaining is Originally
Unjust.

And to make it appear so, We may consider, That all the Evils we complain of
are either such as we bring upon our selves, or else such as are inflicted upon
us from without: Now if they are such as we bring upon our selves, by our own
act and default, we have no Reason to complain of These; all the Reason we have
in this case, is to complain of the Cause, that is, of our selves; and so to
correct the Fault, and so to prevent the Evil. But if they are such as are
inflicted from without, and such as it is not in our power to prevent, we have
no Need to complain of These, because God offers us a Consolation
proportionable to the Evil; and therefore the only need we have in this Case,
is to take hold of the Comfort, and so to stop the mouth of the Complaint.

Now let us look out into the Complaining World, and how many shall we find the
apparent Authors of those Evils whereof they complain? How many are there that
complain of Want, and yet owe that Want to their own Lavishness or Sloth? How
many that complain of Disgrace, and yet owe that Disgrace to their own unworthy
behavior? How many that complain of Enemies, and yet owe those Enemies to
their own Pride or Contention? How many that complain of the Desertion of
Friends, and yet owe that Desertion to their own Ingratitude? How many that
complain of the Undutifulness of Children, and yet owe that Undutifulness to
their own ill Example? How many that complain of Pains and Diseases, and yet
owe those Griefs to their own Luxury and Lust? Now is there any Justice in such
Complaints as These? Shall a man (says the Prophet Jeremy,) complain for the
punishment of his sins? Especially for such punishments as are the necessary
effects and consequences of his Sins? The Truth is, that men are so far from
being just in complaining of such Evils as These, that they have much more
Reason to bless God for them: There being no small Mercy in that Providence of
God that orders Sin to be attended with such punishing consequences: For if it
be hard to wean Men from their ill Inclinations, notwithstanding these
Mortifications and Checks they meet with in the pursuit of them; How
desperately obstinate would such Inclinations grow, if so be they were not so
attended?

On the other hand, as for all those Evils that are not of our own procuring,
but are laid upon us by the direction of Providence, what Justice, or what
Wisdom is there, to spend that time in Complaining, which we might otherwise
employ to the making our selves amends? For this is the Point my Text calls us
to, To meditate on the Joy of the Resurrection, and thence to draw that Comfort
that is needful for our Relief.

And now I shall add a Motive or Two to enforce the Practice of this necessary
Duty.

Let us then consider, ( First,) If God has prescribed an Expedient to make our
Lives comfortable, and we at the same time acknowledge the Insufficiency of all
other Expedients, What Apology can we make for not applying That which God has
prescribed? When the Prophet Elisha prescribed to Naaman the Syrian for the
cure of his Leprosy, That he should go wash in Jordan, we know the Syrian took
Exceptions at the Method; Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, were in better
esteem with him, and why should Jordan be preferred? Had he, in this Pett,
returned to Damascus and washed in his own Country Rivers, and lost his pains;
we could not but have looked upon him as well rewarded for his Peevishness: But
the Syrian grew wiser, and went and washed in Jordan, and was healed. Let us
grow wiser by his Example; and when God points us out the proper means for our
healing, say why we should adhere to our Abana and Pharpar, why we should
prefer the Methods of our Native Country, the World, though in the mean time
universal Experience warns us that we must necessarily lose our pains.

But Iosing our Pains is not the worst on it; Let us consider ( Secondly) that
we must as necessarily lose our Virtue. For although the burden and grief of
Afflictions be a great Evil, yet their Temptation is usually a greater. Because
since our Souls cannot possibly close with Afflictions, nor be contented with
Uneasiness, but lie under a natural force to seek out something that may
relieve; it must necessarily follow, that if we do not take hold of such means
as are Just and Honest to relieve our selves withal, we cannot but engage in
such as are sinful. And hence it comes to pass, That for one Man made Miserable
by bearing Afflictions, Thousands are made Guilty by shifting Afflictions;
which is a much more formidable Issue. Our Savior therefore, after he had
warned his Disciples, that Troubles must certainly come, yet he frequently aims
Them with this Advice: Be not Troubled; Let not your hearts be Troubled; See
that ye be not Troubled. They must not be troubled, though Troubles came; that
is, when Troubles came, they were to shelter themselves under the Consolation
of his Promises, and there stand at Guard both against the Grief and the
Temptation of them: Knowing This, That if a Man sink under Troubles, then his
State is a Snare; because it hinders him from serving either God or himself in
that manner as is fit: But on the other hand, If a Man betake himself to
worldly Shifts and Comforts, then his Means are a Snare and betray him into the
actual disservice both of God and his own Soul. So that He, who in case of
Troubles applies the Expedient of the Text, and entertains his mind with the
Hope of the Resurrection, he alone is in the proper method that can both case
his present circumstances, and at the same time preserve his Integrity.

I must confess that the Expedient of the Text lies liable to One Exception,
which is This, That however excellent it may be in its own nature, yet it is
not fit for every ones Application. For how shall every man draw Comfort from
the prospect of the Resurrection, when most men find it the greatest horror of
their Thoughts? The Coming of our Lord in the Clouds to Judge the World in
Righteousness, is not so soft a Contemplation as to sit easy upon every ones
mind, much less to give him courage and relief. And this indeed is True: And so
in like manner it may sometimes happen, that the best Medicine in the World
will not be able to heal an ordinary wound: For when the habit of Blood and
Juices is extremely vitiated, whatsoever is applied, will not so much heal as
inflame. But then what does the Patient in such a case? He purges and diets,
'till such time as his Habit mends; and then, having discharged the
hindrances, he soon finds the benefit of his Medicine. And this directs the
method in our parallel case: If the Thoughts of the Resurrection do not comfort
us, the fault lies not in That, but in our selves: Wherefore we must cleanse
and change our selves to such a state wherein the Application may have better
Influence upon us. Now we must observe, for the great Commendation of this
Expedient, that it is not only Healing, but Cleansing too: To meditate on the
Resurrection Sanctifies as well as Comforts; and is as effectual to make men
Good, as to cheer and support them when they are so. So long therefore as the
Thought of the Resurrection startles us, it is only a Proof That our Minds are
unaccustomed to the Subject: Let us think of it frequently, and it will grow
softer at every Thought: We shall perceive it to loosen us from our sinful
Habits; and to make us take heed to our ways, and to raise our Affections to
heavenly things; and then, as often as we shall think of the Coming of our Lord,
the Graciousness of the Redeemer will void the Terror of the Judge; and we
shall be able to enjoy the prospect of our Recompense, an humble Faith securing
it to be Ours.

Since therefore to meditate on the Resurrection is our necessary work; and
will, in a while, be our pleasant work; and will in the end be our happiest
work; Let us do it with all our might; and think what shame it will be to have
it said, That many honest Heathens spent more Thoughts about a Future Life, and
loved it more, and enjoyed it more, while it was but a bare Conjecture, than we
do, now it is a Certainty.

And now I shall conclude the whole with this Reflection. We may observe, That
all those glorious Accessions and Improvements, which the Scripture mentions as
accruing to Good Men at the Resurrection, belong simply to the Body: It is
said, That our Bodies shall be changed; they shall be refined and sublimated,
and so prepared to sustain the Joys of Heaven; which otherwise they could not
do: But no such substantial Improvements are mentioned of the Soul; which we
may take for an Intimation, how Noble and Excellent a Being the Soul is in its
original Nature: It is breathed from God; and impressed with His Image; and that
Image imports no less than such Perfections as are Divine: And accordingly the
Soul is in it self Incorruptible, and Immortal, and of an immense Capacity both
to know and to enjoy: Indeed it is constituted to see through the Body as
through its Glass; and that Glass at present is very dark; but when once that
Glass shall come to be brightned, so soon as the Soul shall be discharged from
the Grossness of Flesh, and the Cloud of Passions, and the Stains of Sin, it
will need no other Elevation to behold the Face of God, no other Capacity to
comprehend all the Treasures of Wisdom, no other Strength to bear the Weight of
Eternal Glory.

I mention this to incline our Thoughts to the care of that precious part of
our Being: We often take care of our Bodies to a sinful Excess; while we
neglect our Souls, where our Care could not exceed; so worthy they are of all
the Care we can bestow.

But if we will needs take care of our Bodies, why so much of these vile
Bodies, which notwithstanding all our care, are every moment tending to
Corruption? Why not rather of those Glorious and Incorruptible Bodies, which by
God's blessing shall be ours; if so be our due care be not wanting? Let us then
consider the difference between our Present Bodies, and our Future; and in Them
let us consider the difference between Heaviness and Vigor, between Grief and
Indolence, between Pain and Alacrity, between Corruption and Incorruption,
between Decay and Everlastingness: Beseeching God that the Thoughts of this may
provoke us to take such a Care, That when our earthly house of this Tabernacle
shall be dissolved, we may have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 4. 1682. On Mat. V. 3.

A Sermon, Exhorting to Union in Religion, Preached at Bow-Church, May 20.
1688. on John XVI. 31, 32.

Both by the Reverend Mr. E. Young. And Sold by W. Kettilby.


