Laudensium Apostasia: OR A DIALOGUE In which is shown, That some Divines
risen up in our Church since the greatness of the late Archbishop, are in
sundry Points of great Moment, quite fallen off from the DOCTRINE Received in
the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

By HENRY HICKMAN Fellow of Magd. College Oxon.

Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, Where is the good
way? and walk therein, Jer. 6. 16. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them who are given to change, Prove. 24. 21. LONDON, Printed by
D. Maxwell, for SA. GELLIBRAND, at the Sign of the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

A PREFACE To the READER.
Christian Reader,
PErhaps thou art not ignorant that I set forth a little Pamphlet entitled, A
Justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen; the drift whereof was to show That
the generally received opinion of the Privative Nature of sin, was neither so
absurd nor so impious as it had been represented by a Luxuriant pen. After
about a twelve months labor and travail Mr. T. P. conceived and brought forth
something which he called the Discoverer Discovered, elemented of such palpable
untruths, as did scarce ever drop from the pen of any person pretending to
learning or ingenuity. In way of Appendix to that monstrous piece, something
was added relating to me, but so worded and managed, as if the Authors design
had been only to make an essay, whether it were not possible when he despaired
to subdue my judgment by reason, at least to conquer my patience by clamor. I
had hoped, that after he had shot so many bitter words against my credit and
reputation, we should at last have received something from him savouring if not
of the meekness of a Christian, yet of the Candor of a Scholar. But contrary to
my desire I still find him foaming out his own shame; and as is the nature of
seducers, waxing worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. In such a case
what is most advisable? Should I pay him with words as bad as he brings? that
were impossible; unless I would have been at the charges to keep and maintain
for some time a factor at Billings-gate. 2. If such a course had pleased some
wanton wits, yet it must needs have much displeased the more sober and
judicious, to whom I must strive to approve my self and my writings. Should I
chastise the folly of the man with a more innocent satyr? Mr. Bagshaw has so
done, and what is the effect of it? why, (after an Apologetical Parenthesis for
bringing so unclean a thing into a Gentlewomans presence) he is arraigned
before the Tribunal of Mris. Peito, and is told, that it is the honor of her
Sex that they read Mr. P's writings, and the shame of ours that we so much
slight them: in which way, if Mr. Bagshaw should follow him, it would be such a
piece of -- as scarce has had its parallel since the time that the two Kings
after some years fighting about Religion, left the controversy at last to be
decided by the fisti-cuffs of their two -- For what though Mris. Peito be a
gentlewoman made up of grace, and every thing that may render her amiable (as I
believe she is) yet being but a Gentlewoman, she cannot well be presumed to be
a meet Umpire in so great a Controversy as that of Gods Decrees. Shall I
therefore take notice of the Argumentative part of his book? then there is
nothing for me to do, he having never ventured to make the least assault on the
rational part of my book; save that he once says, That I make no difference
betwixt an action and a quality: and why so? because, forsooth, I say, the
Action of hatred; as if they who say, the act of Adultery, or actus adulterii
in Latin, do presently make adultery not a quality but an action. The folly of
such reasonings are already made manifest; but the huge plot is to make the
world believe I am a Compilator, a Plagiary. Is this worth writing a book
about? then sure we are prodigi temporis, cujus solius honesta est avaritia. If
Mr. P. be of the temper of the Cardinal in the Council of Trent, who said, That
he could willingly consent to a Reformation, but only he liked not that it
should be brought about by means of such a poor Monk as Luther: or if he have
any thing of the humor of Bucephalus in him, who would be mounted by none but
Alexander. If he can be content to acknowledge that his cause is fallen to the
gronnd, I can easily so far gratify his ambition, as to let it be thought that
the blow was given by a learneder hand then my own. Let Mr. P. have as low
thoughts of me as he pleases; I shall always endeavor to have lower thoughts
of my self. I daily more and more see how far I fall short not only of what
others have attained unto, but also of what I my self might have attained, had
I but spent my time with that diligence and industry which for the future I
shall aim at. Yet shall I not altogether leave that blot which Mr. P. and his
egregious advocates Dr. H. and M. O. have let fall, to dry on my name. I am
charged to have played the Plagiary, and to make good the charge Mr. P. has
employed I know not how many hands to pick up any words or phrases that they
could meet with in any Author that had affinity with my words and phrases; and
when they were so picked, to faggot them up together, with an intent that they
may by him be made public for my disgrace. Had he made it appear that I had
borrowed any set continued discourse from any Author, he had then, though not
helped his own cause, yet sufficiently disgraced me. But seeing he only
charge me with taking here and there a quotation and applying it to my
purpose, naming the first Author though not the second: the matter is not much
if the charge were true. Whether it be so or no will shortly be tried. But,

1. Were I a Plagiary, I should not be alone; others and those none of the
meanest, are impeached of the like crime, by Authors who are at least as much
to be regarded as Mr. P. Concerning some of the Ancients, let Dr. Brown be
heard, Enquiries into vulgar and common errors. Lib. 1. chapter 6. Not a few of the
Ancients have written transcriptively, subscribing their names unto other men's
endeavors, and merely transcribing almost all they have written; the Latins
transcribing the Greeks, the Greeks and Latins each other: Thus has Justine
borrowed all from Trogus Pompeius, and Julius Solinus, in a manner transcribed
Pliny. Thus have Lucian and Apuleius served Lucius Pratensis, men both living
in the same time, and both transcribing the same Author in those famous Books,
Entitled Lucius by the one, and Aureus Asinus by the other; in the same
measure has Simocrates in his Tract de Nilo dealt with Diodorus Siculus, as
may be observed in that work annexed unto Herodotus, and translated by
Jungermanuus. Thus Eratosthenes wholly translated Timotheus de infulis, not
reserving the very Preface: The same does Strabo report of Eudorus, and Ariston
in a Treatise, Eutituled de Nilo. Clemens Alexandrinus has observed many
examples hereof among the Greeks, and Pliny in his Preface spcaketh very
plainly, that conferring his Authors, and comparing their works together; he
generally found those that went before verbatim transcribed by those that
followed after and their original never so much as mentioned. To omit how much
the wittiest piece of Ovid is beholding unto Parthenius Chius; even the
magnified Virgil has borrowed almost in all his works: in his Eclogues from
Theocritus, his Georgicks from Hesiod and Aratus, his AEneads from Homer, the
second Book whereof containing the exploit of Sinon, and the Trojan Horse (as
Macrobius observes) he has Verbatim, derived from Pisander. Our own
prosession is not excusable herein. Thus Oribasus, Etius, and AEgineta have in
a manner transcribed Galen. But Marcellus Empiricus, who has left a famous
work, de medicamentis has word for word, transcribed all Scribonius Largus de
compositione Medicamentorum, and not left out his very Peroration. Thus
Plagiary had not its Nativity with Printing, but began in times when thefts
difficult, and the paucity of Books scarce wanted that invention.

Rhodiginus a famous writer, is chastised by the Varro of our age Gerh. Vossius
de Orig. Idol. lib. 3. c. 84. for not relating the names of those, to whose
labors he had been beholden. Unde ista hauserit non addit. Quam facile fuerat
Athaenei nomen apposuisse. Nempe hoc actum Rhodigino passim, ut dissimulatis
scriptoribus, unde sua hausisser, non alius quam ipse, testis laudaretur; and
hic nos etiam fontes, unde quidque hauserint, dissimulandi, summis aliquot
viris saeculo nostro est perfamiliaris. And the learned and pious Barthol
Keckerman tells us in his praecognita Logica, that the admired piece of Peter
Hispan, is not Hispan's own, but taken out of Psellus, an Author ancienter then
himself; yea, and that the very doctrine of Supposition which we look upon as a
School invention, is by him handled in a whole Chapter. The same Keckerman also
somwhere tells us, the censures passed upon Aristodes Logic by Ramus are most
of them taken out of Ludovicus Vives; and that the Methodus Theologiae made by
Hyperius, was reprinted under the name of Laurentius Villavincentius an
Augustinian Monk. It is a most undoubted truth, that the commentaries of the
Papists, especially of the Jesuits, do owe very much to Bucer, Mercer,
Bullinger, Lavater, Beza, Calvin. Martyr; yet these men are never mentioned,
except with censure and blame. Bishop Laud stands charged by Mr. Prynne, for
having stolen all his supposition out of Bellarmine, and that with so little
Art, that the whole school could not but take notice of it. The learned Dr.
Downham, is said by his answerer to have taken his arguments for Episcopacy out
of Bishop Bilson; Mr. Mountague indeed has told us, that the day was yet to
come, in the which he ever read word of any of Arminius his works, but his
antagonists have showed the same Testimonies and Authorities commended by one
and the other: and not to disturb the ashes of men in their graves, Mr. Bagshaw
has vontured to call Dr. Hamond, Grotius his Interpreter, how justly the Dr.
best knows; yet thus far I will venture to say, that the learned Annotator has
ploughed more with Grotius his heyfer, and made more use of his labors, then I
have done of any, or of all the men with stealing from whom Mr. P. has charged
me. Dr. Jer. Tailor is a great master of Language, and one of vast reading, and
yet he borrows sufficiently from Mr. Hales in his Preface to Liber. of
Prophe. from Episcopius he borrows almost every thing in his unhappy Tract of
Original sin; but sure, Dr. Heylin who has cast so many stones at Mr. Hickm.
for filching, is frce from that fault; nay, if ever man was guilty of that
crime, he is. I will not blot Paper with making parallels in many particulars,
take him but in his master piece, his Fides veterum his whole p. 16. and half
the 17. is almost Verbatim, transcribed out of Dr. Thom. Jackson, his Original
of unbelief; as any one may easily see who will but be at pains to compare
them; and how much he has made use of the same Author, in the Articles of our
Saviors Resurrection, Ascension, Session at the right hand, he is not
ignorant; so that if he were so willing to show his reader a Plagiary, he
needed not to have sent him so far as Mag. Col. he might have found one as near
as Seneca was wont to find a fool; the truth Meipsum invenio
is, this Dr. is Felo de se, he robs his own Preface to adorn his Book. In
the Preface to the Reader, he serves us up these words; My opinions, as they
are but opinions, so they are but mine; as opinions, I am not bound to stand to
them my self, as mine, I have no reason to obtrude them on another man, etc.
and these he brings a second time to the Table in his Book, p. 283. and yet he
thrasonically enough tells us in the Preface, That whatsoever other censure
might be laid upon his Book, that of nil dictum est, quod non dictum fuit
prius, could find no place. But we need not much trouble our selves, that what
he takes out of others, he carries, as if it were his own, seeing that he is
so unhappy when he does quote an Author: Quis nescit qualia demens AEgyptus
portenta colat, He ascribes to Lucan in his Pharsal. lib. 10. And yet I believe
there is many a boy in M. School who knows that it was Juven. and not Lucan who
in those words upbraided the Egyptians with their Idolatry.

I have sufficiently proved that if I am guilty of what Mr. P. and Dr. H.
charge me with, yet I am not the first that did offend in this kind. But I
farther plead, Not guilty to the accusation; and do here confidently aver, That
what he charge me to have borrowed from Mr. Prynne, I borrowed not from him,
but took from the books that I quote them out of: those questions and answers
in the Bible printed 1607. I saw and read before I knew there was such a Tract
in the world as Mr. Prynnes Anti-Armin. and all my Fathers house can bear me
witness, that they are in the very Bible that we constantly made use of as often
as we read Chapters in the Family. And I must now inform Dr. Heylin, That he is
much mistaken if he think (what he would feign have others think) that those
questions and answers are no older then 1607. for I my self can direct him to a
Bible printed twenty years before that time, that has them, and how many
Bibles there may be older than that, I know not: as for the Act Quest. Dr.
Wallis knows, and so did Mr. Whittingh. when alive, that I took them out of the
Congregation books; and that I had the sight of Pounols Catechism it self long
before I printed my book, Mr. Cooper Fellow of N. C. knows, for he lent it me;
Mr. Burscough of B. C. will witness that I did read that cheat of putting out
Champneys book, and that I showed him the opinion that Crowley had of that
patron of Free Will, not out of Mr. Prynne, but out of Crowley himself. I also
profess that I read Dr. John Bridges, and took not his words upon Mr. Prynnes
credit, and so I did the works of T. F. and B. Balaeus also I consulted about
our Ancient Protestant Divines, thence I had their Characters, and this as it
proves, our Library Keeper can witness, for I came to him to direct me to that
book, having searched for it among the Divinity, whereas it is placed among the
Humanity books. Now after I had taken all this pains, and trusted nothing but
my own eyes, was I bound to tell the world that such quotations might be found
in Mr. Prynne? Yet I have made use of his History of the Tr. of the A. and have
acknowledged my self so to have done; or if I had made no such acknowledgment,
yet all would have thought that I had lighted my candle at his History, no man
having written those transactions but himself: As for what he charge me to
have stolen from Dr. W. or Mr. M. or Mr. Good. I am told that they are but
sentences or Apothegmes; and truly it is hard that a man should be bound if he
have read a sentence or Apothegme twenty times to quote the last Author. Let
any one in the behalf of those Gentlemen implead me, and if it be made appear
that I have used any thing that is properly theirs, and not given them the
credit, I shall soon acknowledge my fault and cry them pardon. As for a phrase
or expression I labor not to acquit my self, knowing that it is not possible
to read an Author but that something of his style will stick upon the memory,
and ming'e it self with whatever a man shall write, till those impressions are
blotted out. I thank God that whatever I am defective in, yet I did never find
my self at any great loss for sit and apt words to express the conceptions of
my mind.

Perhaps the world may expect that I should take notice of a late Whifler who
notifieth himself by two letters, M. O. and (because else he would have been
taken to be but a mechanic) tells us, That he is a Bachelor of Arts: but his
lewd Pamphlet I did never read, nor did ever meet with that Scholar who thought
it worth my reading. All Brackley knows that I had relinquished the profits of
that place long before I came to St. Aldates in Oxon: and all Oxford knows that
St. Aldates is not worth 150 l. per annum: And there are but few in Magdalen
College who know not that Mr. P. his book did never put me into a fit of the
toothach; and all my Scholars will say, That I never forewarned any of them
from reading of Mr. P. his book: The Printer and Stationer know that the Review
was never intended to come forth in my name; yea, that it was almost off the
Press before Mr. P. his book came to Oxon. And therefore that poor Creature
has done nothing but only gratified the Devil by raising groundless calumnies;
and I heartily wish he may have time and grace to see how much he has abused
not only me, but himself in so unfortunate an attempt.

As for the following Tract, the Lord knows, and some men do know, that I send
it into the world with a very unwilling mind. For I know they are mostly my
superiors upon whose writings I have made Animadversions. I know that my
undertaking may possibly be interpreted a sounding of an Alarm to War, whereas
it becomes us to study all possible ways and means of accord and
reconciliation, that so our pens and hearts may be united against the common
adversaries of Christianity, Papists and Atheists, etc. But I consider that
wellmeaning people are drawn into opinions Diametrically opposite to the
Doctrine by Law and Authority established among us, and that by those who
esteem themselves the only obedient sons of the Church of England; and
therefore thought it not amiss to let our Countrymen understand, that the
plants they so greedily feed upon, are exotic, not planted by our first
Reformers; and that it is a sad sign their temper and constitution is altered,
if they can digest such Positions as I have manifested old Protestants would
have nauseated. All along thou hear men speaking in their own words, and
therefore certainly no wrong is done them; if their meaning be mistaken; I hope
it will teach them to express themselves more warily, and to abstain not only
from that which is Popery, but also from every thing that has the appearance
of it. If any of them will so far take notice of what I have done, as to give a
fair reconciliation of their sayings to our Artic. Homil. etc. I shall therein
rejoice, having this testimony within me, That I never desired to make
differences where I found none.

But alas! it is but too evident that some of our Canterburians ( I call them
so not to disgrace, but to distinguish them) have removed the old Landmarks
placed by our Protestant Forefathers, and are gone over into the Tents and
Camps of our adversaries. It was of old reckoned Popery to hold, That the
Virgin Mary was borbn free of Original sin; we have now one risen up among us
who holds that, and holds also that every one else is born so too: Who also
maintains, That she ever kept a dominion over her Passions, which never had
been taught to rebel beyond the mere possibilities of Natural imperfection Gr.
Ex. p. 13. cap. 19. He entitleth her, To a Faith that had no scruple: And that,
Though she was Espoused to an honest and just person of her Kindred and Family,
and so might not despair to become a Mother, yet she was a person of so rare
sanctity, and so mortified a Spirit, that for all this desponsation of her,
according to the desires of her parents, and the Custom of the Nation, she had
not set one step forward toward the consummation of her Marriage so much as in
thought, and possibly had set her self back from it by a Vow of Chastity and
holy celibate. p. 14. p. 19. We are further told, Of her being brought up in
the Temple eleven years in her childhood, p. 22. Of her body being Aerie and
Vegete, and of the burden which she bare not hindering her. And p. 26. That she
had no pain in the production, for to her alone did not the punishment of Eve
extend, That in sorrow she should bring forth: and that as He came from the
Grave with a stone and signature, and into the College of Apostles, the doors
being shut, and into the glories of his Father through the solid orbs of all
the Firmament, so he came also into the world without doing violence to the
Virginal and pure body of his Mother. He contents not himself to assert the
perpetual Virginity of Mary, which is not denied by any Protestant, but will
abuse Scripture to prove it; viz. that of Ezekiel. 44. 2. p. 27. and Ibid. He
adopts the uncertain conceit of Christ's being laid in a Manger between Sheep
and Oxen: and for this quotes Hab. 3. 4. whence no such thing is deducible. And
p. 28. he writes in favor of Vows of Poverty; for he says, That many wise men
make such Vows: whereas no wise man did ever make such a Vow, or if he did, the
making of the Vow was no part of his Wisdom. I Will not follow that Author any
further, though seeing his books are so greedily bought up by our Gentry, it
would be pains well spent if some one who abounds with leisure, would pick up
his Popish passages, that the world might see what a kind of man he is whom
they so much admire. For my part I think I could produce hundreds of Papists
that were less Popish then he; though I do not take him to be a perfect,
through-paced Tridentine Papist. Nor would I be thought to impute all his
opinions to every one with whom I deal in the ensuing Tract; they are not all
of a mind in all things: But they have all (if I mistake not) departed more or
less from the Protestant Doctrine, by which means the Papists will be hardened
in their errors, and some scandal be cast on our Reformation.

Reader, I shall finish thy trouble when I have only minded thee of two or
three things relating to the temper of those Divines whose Opinions I relate.

1. I have observed they are hugely nncharitable to those that are of a
different mind from them, though in smaller matters. It Is notorious that they
have unchurched all the Transmarine Churches for want of such an Officer as
they are not convinced that Christ did ever Institute: And it is also well known
that Mr. Montague condemns those Churches of great impiety which do not observe
Christmas.

2. They do pretend great Antiquity for their Opinions; whereas if all things
were well observed and examined, no such Antiquity could be pleaded. I had
thought to exemplisie this in Mr. Montagues Discourse about the time of Christ's
Nativity, but that is already done to my hand by Gisber. Voetius, whom if thou will consult, thou will be abundantly satisfied. Let me instance in the
observation of the Lent Fast, concerning which Dr. Heylin, Fid. Veter. p. 163.
thus declares himself, The Lent Fast was not alone of special use to the
advancement of true godliness and increase of Piety, but also of such reverend
Antiquity, that it has good right and title to be reckoned among the
Apostolical Traditions which have been recommended to the Church of God. To
prove this he alleges the Canons of the Apost. Can. 69. and Ignatius in his
Epistle to the Philippians. But he might have done well to consider that of
August. Epist. 86. ad Casul. As for the authorities he quoteth, they are both
spurious, as is proved by the most learned Usher. Tertullian also is by the
Doctor produced: But what Tertullian? not Tertullian the Orthodox Father, but
Tertullian turned Montanist, and grown to such a degree of pride, that he
ventured to call the Orthodox Psychicos: and it may well be questioned whether
his magnifying the quadragesimal Fast had not in it a spice of Montanism; for
we find in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. (...). in. That Montanus is by
Apollonius branded for an Heretic, because he was (...). Let any one who
counts it worth his labor consult Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 25, 26. Socrates,
lib. 5. cap. 21 Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 19. Nic. Calis. lib. 4. cap. 39. he will
see that the Primitive Church did not impose the observation of the forty days
Fast as a matter of necessity; yea, he will be of the mind of Cassian. Collat.
21. cap. 30. Observantiam quadragesimae quamdiu Ecclesiae illius primitivae
perfectio inviolata permansit. penitus non fuisse, etc. If any one think that
the example of Christ's fasting does oblige us to imitation, let him pause upon
that of Chris. (...) (...) In Mathae. Homil. 47.

Therefore when ever thou sindest Antiquity pleaded mark well, and by comparing
Editions enquire whether that which is brought be as ancient as is pretended,
and not something foisted into the writings of the Ancients by men of later
times. See also whether the Testimonies do prove that for which they are
produced: for it would be great weakness to think that every Father who
mentions or commends Episcopacy, does presently allow or approve of such an
Episcopacy as did here obtain in England, and as some would fain have restored.
The question is not whether Antiquity had Bishops, but whether Antiquity did
believe a Bishop to be of a superior order to a Presbyter; and if that were
proved, it would be a second question whether that superiority of order were
founded on humane or Divine institution; and if it could be proved that there
is a Divine Institution of and for a Bishop, it may still be questioned whether
that divine institution do make him so necessary and essential to Ordination,
that any Ordination which is made by mere Presbyters is in natura rei, null and
void. I am fully convinced that Imposition of hands is a Rite no way to be
omitted in Ordination; yet if any apprehending that Ceremony to have been
proper and peculiar to the Apostolical times, should omit it, I should be loath
to say that the person Ordained without it was no true Minister; there are
examples for many things in Scripture for which there is no precept; and there
may be necessitas praecepti for many things which yet are not necessary
necessitate medii: multa fieri non debuerunt quae tamen facta valuerunt. I
conclude all with an earnest desire and prayer, That such a spirit of Love may
be poured out upon us, as that whereunto we have already attained we may walk
by the same rule, and bear with one another in those lesser things in which we
differ; fer; and that we may have them in high esteem who first sealed our
Reformation with the loss of their lives, and not meddle with those who are
given to changes. Unto which ends, if what I have done may contribute any
thing, I shall account I have not labored in vain.

H. H.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 28. read Great. p. 5. l. 5. r. scrutemur. l. 16. r. tractatum. p.
10. l. 17. r. that whole narrative he that will read. p. 11. l. 27. r. hang. p.
16. l. 16. r. or. p. 17. l. 20. after controversy add, to. p. 19. l. 4. r.
Horn. l. 12. r. Smalcius. l. 14. r. docentur. l. 19. r. etiam. p. 22. l. 10. r.
verita. l. 11. r. quotidie. p. 24. l. 22. r. Manducaveritis. p. 40. l. 7. r. I
find. p. 41. l. 34. after would, add not. p. 42. l. 37. after such, add thing.
p. 67. l. 11. r. their own. l. 30. r. platted. p. 69. l. 11. dele 245. P. 74.
l. 35. r. has God. p. 77. l. 22. r. wherefore. l. ult. r. is.

Laudensium Apostasia; OR The Canterburians Apostasy from the Doctrine
Received in the Church of ENGLAND.
Pacificus. HAving found my self inclined to the work of the Ministry, and
being by my Parents thereunto designed, and having also put my hand to that
Plough, I dare not (notwithstanding the high affronts and base indignities that
are daily offered to Preachers) look back, lest I should render my self
unworthy of the Kingdom of Heaven: yet as often as I think upon that pungent
Interrogation, Who is sufficient for these things? I cannot choose but tremble
in sense of my own weakness, and humbly implore the assistance of Divine Grace,
that I may be enabled to stir up the gift that is in me, and so show my self a
skilful workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of God; and
do therefore most gladly take all opportunities of discoursing with those who
may be any way helpful to me in improving my parts; and I account it no small
happiness that I have met with you Mr. Laudensis, whom common fame has voyced
to be very able, and whom I must in charity presume to be very willing to
further me in my studies.


Laudensis. I am glad to find that you are not of the number of those who
account themselves sufficiently qualined for the work of the Ministry, as soon
as they have got a good measure of impudence, and four or five Sermon
Note-books; and shall according to the best of my skill give you some
directions; the which if you will use, your five talents may gain five other
talents: My first counsel is, That you would not address the course of your
studies to modern Epitomizers; balk if you be wise the ordinary and accustomed
bypath of Bastingius his Catechism, etc. and betake your self to Scripture,
the Rule of Faith interpreted by Antiquity, the best Expositor of Faith, and
Applyer of that Rule: for I hold it a point of discretion, to draw water as
near as a man can to the Wellhead, and to spare labor in vain in running
further off to Cisterns and Lakes. I always went to enquire, when doubt was, of
the days of old as God himself directed me, and hitherto I have not repented
me of it. I have not found any Canon, Order, Act, Direction in the Church of
England against it; for it I have found many. I never held it wisdom, to tire
my self with haling and tugging up against the stream, when with ease enough I
might, and with better discretion should secundo flumine navigare: we know, the
further the current is, the more muddy, troubled, and at length brackish the
water is, App. p. 11. 12.


Pacif. I hugely like your advice to study the Fathers, and should have far
worse thoughts of the Lutherans, Calvinists, and our English Puritans, than as
yet I have, if they did so exceedingly undervalue the authority of the Ancient
Doctors, as Canus, Lessius, Possevinus, Becanus, Grotius, Mountague charge them
to do: But the truth is, none have more aviled the Fathers than the
Remonstrants, and Papists: that in the account of the former they stand for
little more than ciphers; these speeches of theirs, Apol. cap. 2. Vanum est,
quia purior and impurior antiquitas non nisi inanes voces sunt. Puritatem and
impuritatem quisque pro arbitrio suo, and prout usu venit aestimat. and in
Dedic. f. 3. Quare nec pro dignitate, etc. Vt Declarationem Remonstrantium non
tam erroris convincerent, quam similitudinis cum iis quos errasse olim
antiquitas, and nunc communis credit opinio. Hoc eorum est qui cum causae suae
diffidant, adversarios suos speciosis autoritatibus, etc. with many others
scattered up and down their Apology and Answer to the Professors of Leyden, do
sufficiently evince. How little the same men do reverence Synods and
Assemblies, I leave to any to judge, who will but be at pains to read what
Vedelius has collected out of them, Arcan. Remon. l. 2. c 6. As for the
Papists, they do mostly speak loud in the mendation of the Fathers; but if one
examine their mind to the bottom, he shall find they call none Father but their
Pope; for they say his determination is to be followed, though contrary to the
judgment of all the Fathers. Suarez. in 3. com. 1. qu. 2. Art. 2. Disp. 42.
Sect. 1. Desinitio Pontificis omnino vera est: Etsi dictis omnium sanctorum
esset contraria, illis esset praeferenda. It is one thing to interpret the Law
as a Doctor, another thing as a Judge: of the one is required learning, of the
other authority; the opinion of the Doctors is to be followed according to
reason, but the Judges opinion is to be followed of necessity. St. Augustine
and the Fathers in their Expositions, supplied the places of Doctors, which we
may follow as we see cause; the Pope and Council supply the places of Judges,
with a Commission from God, and therefore they must be observed and followed of
necessity. To the Pope and his Cardinals, or Bell de ver. Dei lib. 3. cap. 10.
others employed by him, they allow a liberty of correcting the Fathers, and
expunging out of them such passages as suit not to the mystery of iniquity
working in that Romish Synagogue. If a Father in any thing dissent from the
Pope, and be forbidden to be read, the reading of a Father is not forbidden;
for in that case he is not Pater, but Vitricus. Grot. de jure and more prohib.
libros malos lib. 2. c. 10. Yea we are told, that when the Church reviews the
writings of her sons, and where need requires, corrects them, she does a work
of mercy. cap. 2. of the same Book. Voetius tells us out of the Summa Bullarii
seu Constitut. Pontif. p. 256. of a Constitution of Sixtus 5. appointing the
Fathers (pretending them to be in many places to be corrupted) to be put forth
in more correct Editions, but with this condition; S: graviores dubitationes
and difficultates in veterum codicum autoritate, librorum correctione and
emendatione inciderint, rebus prius in congregatione examinatis ad nos referant
ut in lectionuns varietate id quod Orthodoxae veritati maxim consonum erit, ex
speciali Dei privilegio huic sanctae sedi concesso, statuamus.


Laud. I am a little jealous that some body has done me no good office; for me
thinks your former implies, that you look upon me as Arminian or Popish; but
be it known to you, That I disclaim all aspersion of Popery, and am further
from it than any Puritan in the Kingdom. I am indeed well acquainted with such
imputation as Popish, and I know not what, the ordinary language of our precise
Professors against any man that is not as themselves More furioso Calvinista;
and having had this measure often meted out to me, from their very great zeal
and very no charity, I contemn their malice; (a Scold cannot any better be
charmed than by contempt;) As for Arminius, if he in Tenants agrees unto
Scripture plain and express: if he has agreeing unto his Opinions the
Practice, Tradition, and Consent of the Ancient Church, I embrace his opinions;
let his person, or private ends, if he had any, alone: I nor have, nor will
have confarreation therewith. If Calvin, so far in account and estimation
before Arminius, dissenteth from Antiquity and the Universal ancient Church, I
follow him not. No private man, or peculiar spirit ever did, or ever shall
tyrannize upon my belief. I yield only to God and the Church. App. p. 4, 5, 12.


Pacif. Your flings at Puritans, Precise Professors, Furious Calvinists, might
well have been spared; so might your Apology for your self as to Popery and
Arminianism, with which my discourse did not in the least charge you: I could
easily quote you sentences out of Sacred and Profane Writers, concerning such
as make defenses before they are impleaded; but being resolved not to
exasperate, I forbear any thing of that nature, and humbly take leave a little
further to explain my self, lest I should be mistaken in what before I said.

1. I make not consent of Fathers, but Scripture the Rule of my Faith.

2. Nor do I account the Fathers fit to be appealed to, in some Controversies
now a foot in Christendom. 1. Because there are some Heresies newly sprung up,
of which they took no notice in their writings, yea in the favor of which they
may seem to speak, being engaged against such as were in the contrary extreme.
That none should be pressed with the judgments of Fathers in matters that were
not thoroughly discussed till after they were dead and gone, hear not me, but
St. August. de Praed. Sanct. cap. 14. Quid igitur opus est, ut little secrutemur
opuscula, qui priusquam ista haeresis oriretur, non habuerunt necessitatem in
hac difficili ad solvendum questione versari, quod procul dubio facerent, si
respondere talibus cogerentur, unde factum est, ut de gratia Dei quid
sentirent, breviter quibus dam Scriptorum suorum locis and transeuntes
attingerent; immorarentur vero in iis quae adversus alios inimicos Ecclesiae
Disputabant. To the like purpose writes he in his Euarration on the 54. Psalm.
Nunquid enim perfect de Trinitate tractatum est antequ an eblatrarent Arriani?
nunquid perfect de poenitentia tractatum est antequam obsisterent Novatiani?
sic non perfect de Baptismate tractatus est, antequam contradicerent foris
positi rebaptizatores: nec de ipsa Christi unitate enucleate dicta sunt quae
dicta sunt, nisi posteaquam separatio illa urgene cepit fratres informos, ut
jam illi qui noverant haec tractare atque dissolvere, ne perirent infirmi
sollicitati quaestionibus impiorum, sermonibus suis and disputationibus obscura
legis in publicum deducerent: yea the very Appealer, p. 131. has these words,
That the Fathers (those before Augustine) being to deal against Fatal
Necessity, urged by Paynims, Philosophers in those days; as also against the
execrable impiety of the Manichees, extended the power of Free Will unto the
uttermost, and set it upon the tenters; especially having then no cause to fear
any enemy at home, unto the contrary, ante mota certamina Pelagiana: there
being yet no Pelagians sprung up in the world, enemies to Grace, advancers of
Nature and Natural Power, beyond degree of Power and of possibility: Yea p.
129, 130. He professes plainly, that in, and concerning this point of
Free Will, those Fathers did so far out-lavish, and speak so inlargedly, that
the very Jesuits, post mota certamina Pelagiana, fore fear of seeming to
Pelagianize, dare not say so much as they have said. 2. The Fathers of Prime
Antiquity did either write nothing at all, or but very little; and what of
theirs is come to our hands, is so interpolated, that it is extremely difficult
to find out their meaning; yea, the Editions are so various, that I know not
which to prefer. e. g. If I follow Vedelius his Edition of Ignatius, I could
not but think the Father to be of the opinion, that the making of any one a
true Christian is a work not of moral suasion, but of strength and power; for
these are his words according to him, (...) yet should I quote this passage in
the controversy about free will, I should be told, that the words do not run
so in some other Editions, and so occasion much strife of words.


Laud. You must expect nothing from the Geneva Printers, but deceits and
impostures; nor has that importune Vedelius brought any thing to fill his
Pages with, but impudence and singular ignorance. Montacutius, Apparat. 1. p.
19.


Pacif. I Am not ignorant that such a severe censure is passed upon Vedelius and
his Edition; but he has answered for hinself in his Preface to his Tract De
Deo Synagogae: And Bishop Usher, who has taken more pains about Ignatius, then
that bilious writer, speaks honorably of the Geneva Edition; yea, Dr. Hammond
prefers it to the very edition of Isaac Vossius, judged the most perfect and
incorrupt, in one particular; but this is a diversion.

3. I say thirdly, That I frequently see just occasion to prefer the
expositions of Scripture made by our later Writers, before those which are
given by the Ancient Doctors; this is acknowledged even by Romanists; Stella in
Luc. c. 10. Bishop Fisher in his confutation of the Lutheran Artic. Art. 18. We
scarce find any setting themselves to making of Homilies or Commentaries, till
about the third Century; and many of those who have commented on Scripture,
were so ignorant either of Hebrew, or Greek, or both, that they have fallen
into fad mistakes, as no Scholar conversant in their Writings can deny.

4. I have much wondered, and do still wonder how it comes to pass, that the
Systems and Models of Divinity, or Catechisms composed some by our own, some by
Transmarine Divines, are so exceedingly decryed; for I am sure heretofore they
were recommended to Tutors to read to their Pupils, as good means to keep them
Orthodox, which appears by a Decree of Convocation made Anno Domini 1579. which
I shall take the boldness to recite verbatim, because it shows what Authors
were then in credit, and may possibly provoke the present University to revive
the long neglected, but very necessary work of catechiting and examining young
Students, not only privately within the College walls, but also publicly in
the Schools; Thus runs the decree extant, Libro senioris procuratoris B. fol.
35. A.

Decretum Convocationis Anno Domini 1579. Jan. 27. ad extirpandam haeresin
quamcunque and, ad informandam juventuntem in vera pietate.

Vetus statutum contra Haereticos and perverse de Christiana fide sentientes
renovandum and in usum revocandum duximus, addita hac explanatione.

Ad extirpandam Haeresin quamcunque and ad informandam in vera pietate
juventutem Libros, hosce legendos censemus and statuimus, viz. Catechismum
Alexandri Nowelli majorem, Lat. aut Graec. Vel Catechismum Johannis Calvin.
Lat. Gr. aut Hebr. vel Elementa Christianae Religionis Andreae Hyperii: Vel
Catechesin Heidelbergensem, pro captu auditorum and arbitrio legentium.

2. His adiungi possunt Henrici Bullingeri Catechismus pro adultis, and
Institutiones Calvini, vel Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, vel articuli
Religionis in Synodo Londinensi Latin conscripti, and autoritate regia editi
cum explicatione locorum Communium and testimoniis e sacra scriptura aut
interdum e patribus desumptis. Ad primam lectionem Juniores, ad secundam
provectiores omnes nullo gradu insignitos astringi volumus.

3. Catechismos omnes sanae huic doctrinae contrarios, aliosque libros
superstitiosos and Papisticos legi and haberi penitus interdicimus.

4. Hanc legendi and interpretandi provinciam demandamus privatim Tutoribus,
public alicui Catechistae in singulis Collegiis and Aulis per praefectos
assignando.

5. Quo Decretum hoc diligenter and inviolate observetur, examen habeatur domi
per Catechistam aut etiam Praefectos, in Academia singulis anni terminis per
Procancelarium adhibitis praeleetoribus sacrae Theologiae qui a studiosis
convocatis profectus rationem exigant.

6. Si quis discentium aut docentium negligentior ant alioqui culpabilis
deprehendatur, judicio praefectorum, aut si opus sit, Procancellarii corrigatur
and puniatur.

I would fain know how it came to pass that there is no mention of this Decree
in our new Statutes, if our late Grandees did not steer a course quite
contrary to our old Protestant Divines? Nor do I know any ground that the
Articles of our Church, and Calvin's Institutions, which this Decree joined
together, should now with so much Zeal be put asunder.


Laud. Private Opinions heretofore, especially if countenanced by some eminent
Name, were looked on as the public resolution of the Anglican Church, and the
poor Church condemned for teaching those Opinions which by the Artifice of some
men had been fastened on her. Dr. Crackanthorp when he was commanded to make
answer to the Archbishop of Spalato his Consilium redeundi, chose rather to
defend those Lutheri and Calvini dogmata, which had been charged upon this
Church in the Bishops Pamphlet, then to assert this Church to her genuine
Doctrine. They that went otherwise to work, were like to speed no better in it,
or be otherwise requited for their honest Zeal, then to be presently exposed to
the public envy, and made the common subject of reproach and danger: So that I
must needs look upon it as a bold attempt, as the times then were, in Bishop
Mountague of Norwich, in his answer to the Popish Gagger, and the two
Appellants to lay the Saddle on the right Horse, to sever or discriminate the
opinions of particular men from the received and authorized Doctrines of the
Church of England; to leave the one to be maintained by their private fautors,
and only to defend and maintain the other. And certainly had he not been a man
of a mighty Spirit, and one that could easily contemn the cries and clamours
which were raised against him for so doing, he could not but have sunk
remedilesly under the burden of disgrace and the fears of ruin, which that
performance drew upon him. To such an absolute Authority were the Writings and
Names of some men advanced by their diligent followers, that not to yield
obedience to their ipse dixits, was a crime unpardonable. It is true, King
James observed the inconvenience and prescribed a remedy, sending instructions
to the Universities, bearing date, Jan. 18. 1616. wherein it was directed among
other things, That young Students in Divinity should be excited to study such
Books as were most agreeable in Doctrine and Discipline to the Church of
England, and to bestow their time in Fathers and Councils, Schoolmen, Histories
and Controversies, and not to insist too long on Compendiums and Abbreviations,
making them the ground of their study. And I conceive, That from that time
forwards the names and reputations of some leading men of the foraign Churches,
which till then did carry all before them, did begin to lessen: Divines growing
every day more willing to free themselves from that servitude and vassalage, to
which the authority of those names had enslaved their judgments: But so, that
no man had the courage to make such a general assault against the late received
opinions, as Bishop Mountague, though many when the ice was broken, followed
gladly after him. Dr. Heylin Preface to Theologia Veterum.


Pacif. You have given me a large account how, as you conceive Calvin,
Bullinger, etc. came to decrease but such as is no way satisfactory: for 1. It
is gratis dictum, that the reading of Fathers, Councils, etc. will make any one
abate his esteem of any Orthodox Cystem. 2. It is no way probable that King
James should by his instructions in An. 1616. design the hindering of the
Calvinian Doctrines, who appeared so very zealous, An. 1618. against the Tenets
of Arminius, who did contradict Calvin in those points which of all others held
by him are most liable to exception. 3. Nor is it any way probable that if any
Calvinistical or Lutheran Dogmata had been super-induced to the Articles of our
Church, which had the least seeming contrariety to them, that none should be
either acute enough to discern such superseminations or courageous enough to
pull up such tares, but only Richard Mountague, B. D. Had he only learned to
deny himself? had the spirit of courage and resolution departed from all the
English Clergy and rested upon him alone? Sure I am that Dr. Forbes of
Edinburgh leaves this Mr. Mountague under this censure, that he too much
complied with Calvinism in the point of justification, Propter puritanorum
undique strepentium clamores, nescio quomodo refugerit ad distinctionem,
Forbes. de Justif. lib. 2. c. 5. 4. It Is scarce credible, if Mr. Mountague had
only separated chafe from the wheat and distinguished only the received
Doctrines of the Church from some busy Puritans private Opinions, that he
should have been so severely censured for his Book by the Parliament, and
confuted by some Divines of great note and learning and as conformable as
himself, particularly by his Reverend and much Reverenced Diocesan. And
Archbishop Abbot, in his Narrative, which we may find exemplyfied in Mr. Rush.
Collections, from p 438. to 462. assirmeth, that he thrice complained of Mr.
Mountagues Arminian Book, but he was held up against him by the prevalence of
the Duke of Buckingham, who magnified him as a well-deserving man; that the
whole Narrative, if he that will read shall have a key put into his hand to
unlock several mysteries of our Church declining and a character of the men who
were most busy to advance the Remonstrant opinions.


Laud. The Doctrine of Praedestination is the root of Puritanism, and
Puritanism the root of all rebellious and disobedient untractableness in
Parliaments, and of all schism and sauciness in the Country, nay in the Church
it self: this has made many thousands of our people, and too great a part of
our Gentry Laytons in their hearts. Last Parliament they left their Word,
Religion and the Cause of Religion, and begun to use the name of Church, and
our Articles of the Church of England, and wounded our Church at the very heart
with her own name. Dr. Brooks his Letter to the Archbishop, extant in Can.
Doom, p. 167. there were then some who were tantum non in Episcopatu Puritani;
they saw their holy cause would not succeed by opposition, therefore they came
up and seemed to close with the Church of England in her Discipline, to use the
Cross and wear the Clothes; but for her Doctrine they wave it, preach against
it, teach contrary to what they had subscribed, that so through foraign
Doctrine, being infused secretly, and instilled cunningly, and pretended
craftily to be the Churches, at length they might wind in with foraign
Discipline also, and so filled Christendem with Popes in every Parish for the
Church, and with Popular Democracies and Democratical Anarchies in State. App.
p. 111. el. 43, 44.


Pacif. The wrathful expressions you are continually using against the Puritans
do not work the righteousness of God; and they are the more to be disliked,
because it is sufficiently known that Puritans have been as conscientious as
any that ever lived in our Church.


Laud. Puritanism had indeed a form of godliness, but See worse language than
this in the writings of Dr. Heylin and Mr. Tho. P.
denied the power; and for any thing I can discern, is as dangerous as Popery,
the only difference being, Popery is for Tyranny, Puritanism for Anarchy;
Popery is original of Superstition, Puritanism the high way to profaneness;
both alike enemies unto piety, Ap. p. 320, 321.


Pacif. Puritanism the way to profaness! How came it then to pass, that there
was so little of profaneness in Puritans, so much of it in those who gloried in
their Anti-Puritanism? but I leave this to be decided by the Judge of quick and
dead, who shall render to all according to what they have done in the flesh.
How is it that of late years you have learned to call all Puritans, who will
not say a confederacy with you in your Popish and Arminian Errors, which have
been so generally reputed contrary to the Doctrine of our Church?


Laud. What you call Error, that seems to me to be Truth; and because the
doubts hung in the Church of England, unto the Public Doctrine of the Church
of England do I appeal, contained in those two authorized, and by all
subscribed Books of the Articles and Divine Services of the Church, let that
which is against them on Gods Name be branded with Error, and as Error be
ignominiously spunged out, App. p. 9.


Pacif. What ever is against the Word of God, or contrary to any opinion which
has been maintained in the Catholic Church, by all, in all places, at all
times, I am content should be called an error; but you know I hope, that no
Church of Particular Denomination is Infallible, and therefore I shall not
grant that whatever is against the Tendries of the Church of England is
erroneous; for I know that our first Reformers and the Composers of our public
Records of Doctrine did place the Nature of Faith in Assurance, or a persuasion
that our sins are actually pardoned, which you will grant to be a mistake, but
a mistake that was scarce seen by any till of late, except Mr. John Fox, who
indeed placed the Nature of Faith in Recumbence; nevertheless, in those matters
wherein you and I differ, I am very willing to be tried by the Articles and
Lyturgy; but then I premise this, that I take the Homilies to be part of our
Churches Lyturgy; for the Rubrique in the Communion Office speaks affirmative
enough, After the Creed shall follow one of the Homilies; and the Preface to
the first Book of Homilies commands all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, etc. every
Sunday and Holyday in the year, etc. after the Gospel and Creed, in such order
and place as is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer, to read one of the said
Homilies. Evidently implying (as Mr. Lestrange notes) they were no more to be
omitted then any other part of the Service, but where the Rubrique gives a
toleration.


Laud. I willingly admit the Homilies, as containing certain godly and
wholesome exhortations to move the people to honor and worship Almighty God;
but not as the public Dogmatical resolutions confirmed by the Church of
England; the 33. Article gives them to contain godly and wholesome Doctrine and
necessary for these times, which they may do, though they have not Dogmatical
Positions, or Doctrine to be propagated and subscribed in all and every point,
as the Books of Articles and of Common Prayer have. They may seem to speak
somewhat too hardly, and stretch some sayings beyond the use and practice of
the Church of England both then and now: and yet what they speak, may receive a
fair, or at least a tolerable construction and mitigation well enough. App. 260.


Paeif. I am glad to hear you acknowledge that the Homilies do contein certain
godly and wholesome exhortations, which if all had thought, we had not been
pestered with a vain discourse pretended to be made by a Lady in defense of
Auxiliary Beauty or Artificial handsomeness, the which are so expressly
condemned by the Homily against excess in Apparel. But I am sorry to find you
saying that the Homilies are not the avowed Doctrine of the Church, for the
Preface tells us, they were set forth for the expelling of erroneous and
poisonous Doctrines; and more fully the Orders of K. James, The Homiles are set
forth by authority in the Church of England, not only for a help of
nonpreaching, but withal, as it were a pattern for preaching-ministers. I have
read among the Romanists, that there is fides temporum, a Faith that follows
the Times. It is no marvel (says Cusanus) though the practice of the Church
expound the Scripture at one time one way and at another time another way; for
the understanding or sense of the Scripture runs with the practice, and that
sense so agreeing with the practice is the quickening Spirit; and therefore the
Scriptures follow the Church, but contrariwise the Church follows not the
Scriptures. ad Bohem. Epist. 7. But God forbid our Church should have any
Doctrines good and wholesome for some times and not for others.


Laud. If there be any difference betwixt us about the sense and meaning of any
Clause or Period in Articles, Lyturgy, Homilies, how shall that difference be
decided?


Pacif. It is scarce to be supposed that our Church in her public Records of
Doctrine should use any so great obscurity as that we should if we are
unprejudiced need an Interpreter; but if there be any need of an Interpreter,
who fitter then such Martyrs as had an hand in composing of the Articles in
King Edw. the 6th. his Time, or elselived then, and were well acquainted with
the mind and judgment of the Composers, and such Divines as lived and were
famous in the beginning of Q Eliz. when the Articles were confirmed; and let me
tell you, it will be a strong presumption, that a Doctrine is contrary to the
Church, if it be contrary to the professed tenants of all, or most of those
eminent Divines, by whose help she did at first recover her self out of Popish
darkness.


Laud. How little our old Martyrs did favor the Calvinians in the five points,
appears plainly by a Book entitled, An Historical Narration, composed by one
who was famous in K. Edw. days, and Q. Eli. and a voluntary exile for
Religion, in the reign of Q. Mary.


Partif. Are you not ashamed to call him a famous Divine, who created such
disturbances in the reign of Q. Eliz. and K. Ed. whose Book is put into the
Catalogue of Popish Pamphlets by Dr. Fulke in his answer to Bristow; of the
reprinting of which A. Laud was so much ashamed, that at his trial he durst not
own it, but averred that he had put his Chaplain out of his place, for putting
such a cheat on the world; I might rather infer that the English Martyrs were
no favorers of Arminianisme, because in the late A. Bishops Time, the
Professor of Mathematics in Gresham was troubled for but permitting an
Almanac in which some Popish canonized Saints names were expunged, and the
names of some of our own English Martyrs that were Saints indeed put in their
room; and because by Dr. Bray, Pochlintons Altar Christianum was licenced, in
which how bitter a passage is used against our old Martyrs and Confessors, may
be seen in the Recantation imposed upon that Doctor.


Laud. It may be, the passage might refer to John Wickliffe, and such as he,
and if so, I know no reason why it should be recanted; for though he held many
points against those of Rome, yet had his Field more Tares then Wheat, his
Books more Heterodoxies then sound Catholic Doctrines; for they who have
consulted the Works of Thomas Waldensis, or the Historia Wicklesiana, writ by
Harpssield, will tell us that Wickliffe among many other errors maintained
these that follow. 1. That the Sacrament of the Altar is nothing else but a
piece of bread. 2. That Priest have no more authority to minister Sacraments
then Laymen have. 3. That all things ought to be common. 4. That it is as
lawfulito christen a Child in a Tub of Water at home, or in a Ditch by the way,
as in a Fontstone in the Church. 5. That it is as lawful at all times to
confess unto a Layman, as to a Priest. 6. That it is not necessary or
profitable to have any Church or Chapel to pray in, or to do any divine
Service in. 7. That buryings in Churchyards be unprofitable and vain. 8. That
Holy Days ordained and instituted by the Church are not to be observed and
kept in reverence, in as much as all days are alike. 9. That it is sufficient
to believe, though a man do no good works. 10. That no humane Laws or
Constitutions do oblige a Christian; and finally, That God never gave grace or
knowledge to a great Person, or rich man, and that they in no wise follow the
same. Dr. Heyl. Cert. Epist. p. 151.


Pacif. Whether these things are collected out of Wald. and Harpssield, I
neither know nor have leisure now to examine. I find the same things charged,
and charged in the very same words, upon those who endeavored reformation in
King H. the 8th. his days about Anno. 1536. as may be seen in Mr. Tho.
Fuller's History, lib. 5. p. 209. 210. 211. I believe those were then
slandered, and so I think is Wick. if Wald. and Harps. have charged all those
things upon him; for the proof of this, let what Dr. James has collected in
his Wick. Conformity be consulted, for that industrious Scholar has made it
appear out of the Writings of Dr. Wickly, that he held no community of goods,
but what all good Christians hold by a Christian Charity; not as touching the
right Title and possession, as the Anabaptists now and a certain bald Priest in
his time did hold: And so far was he from holding, that good Faith alone would
save a man without good Works, that he is charged by Walden to have held the
Doctrine of merits, though very falsely, as appears by many passages in his
Commentaries upon the Psalms. He held vocal confession to a Priest, not to be
necessary in case a man were truly contrite and sorrowful for his sin, with
full purpose of amendment unless the party offending do find himself very much
grieved, in which case he counsels him to repair unto a Priest that has
cunning and good living. But let us join issue on the terms formerly
propounded; What think you of the Church of Rome?


Laud. It may be you account it a piece of Popery to call the Church of Rome a
true Church.


Pacif. I account it no Popery to call the Church of Rome a true Church, for it
was so esteemed by Dr. John Reynolds, Chamier, Junius, Gisbertus Voetius,
Ludovicus Capellus, and his fellow Professor Amyraldus, all very learned men
and far enough from doting either upon Ceremonies or Prelacy; indeed they will
much disadvantage themselves in dealing with the Papist about the visibility of
the Church, who shall affirm that Rome is not a true Church; but you know the
Pope is made by Romanists to be the Church. The Pope ought to tell it to the
Church, that is, to himself (says Bellarmine;) Do you judge this Pope to be the
Antichrist?


Laud. Some Protestant Divines at home and abroad I grant, have thought so,
wrote so, disputed so; in good zeal, no doubt against that insolent and
insufferable and outrageous Tyranny and Pride of the Bishops of Rome, and their
infinite enormities in the Church, and out of that affection have been too
violently forward, out of conjectures and probabilities to pronounce, the Pope
is that Man of Sin and Son of Perdition. The Synod of Gapp in France made it a
Point of their belief and concluded it peremptorily to be so; but who can find
it to be the Doctrine of the Church of England! what Synod resolved it?
Convocation assented to it? what Parliament, Law, Proclamation or Edict did
ever command it to be professed, or have imposed penalty upon repugnants, of
non-consentients unto it? Ap. p. 143. There is no such Doctrine concerning
Antichrist in the Book of Articles, or in any other public Monument or Record
of the Church of England, but the contrary rather; and this appears by a
prayer at the end of the 2d. Homily for Whitsunday, viz. That by the mighty
power of the H.G. the comfortable Doctrine of Christ may be truly preached,
truly received and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of sin,
Death the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist. Dr. Pet. Heylin.
Res. Pet. p. 133.


Pacif. There Is scarce any opinion more generally received and owned by Divines
that wish well to our reformation then this, that the Pope is the Antichrist;
but I Will not contend by their testimonies, but by passages which I have
excerpted out of the Homilies. Tom. 1. p. 17. edit. 1623. Justification is not
the office of man, but of God, or man cannot make himself righteous by his own
works, neither in part, nor in whole, for that were the greatest arrogance and
presumption of man that Antichrist could set up against God, p. 38. Honor be
to God who did put light in the heart of his true faithful Minister of most
famous memory, K. H. 8th. and gave him the knowledge of his word and an earnest
affection to seek his Glory, and to put away all such superstitious and
Pharisaical Sects by Antichrist invented, p. 70. For our Savior Christ and St.
Peter teach most earnestly obedience to Kings, but the Bishop of Rome teaches
that they are under him, are free from all burdens and charges of the
Commonwealth, and obedience toward their Prince, most clearly against Christ's
Doctrine and St. Peter's. He ought therefore rather to be called, Antichrist and
the successor, etc. See more of the like nature and purport collected by Dr.
Bernard. See also the Prayer made for the Fifth of November.


Laud. If a Controversy were referred by the Church, or an Heresy to be
corrected in the Church, which touched the case of the Catholic Church, it
could not be put over more fitly to any one man by the Church representative in
a Council, then unto the Pope, first Bishop of Christendom, of greatest, not of
absolute power among Bishops. Answ. to Gagg p. 29.


Pacif. Never did the Church of England call the Pope first Bishop of
Christendom; nay, she censures him for his bold usurpation of such a title,
Part. 2. Hom. p. 214, 215. And he that thinks the Pope to be the fittest to
refer a controversy, he must bring us to such a Pope as I think did never sit
in the Sea of Rome. But it may be you and I have not the same thoughts of the
dangerousness of Popery.


Laud. It is a hard case that we shall think all Papists and Anabaptists and
Sacramentaries to be fools and wicked persons; certainly among all these Sects
there are very many wise men and good men as well as erring; and although some
zeals are so hot, and their eyes so inflamed with their ardors, that they do
not think their adversaries look like other men, yet certainly we find by the
results of their discourses, that they are men that speak and make Syllogisms,
and use Reason, and read Scripture; and although they do no more understand all
of it then we do, yet they endeavor to understand as much as concerns them,
even all they can, even all that concerns repentance from dead works and faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ. Dr. Tailor, Epist. Dedic. to Liberty of Pro. p. 9, 10.


Pacif. A little charity will serve a man to think there are wise men and good
men among Sacramentaries, and Anabaptists; but I do not like your joining
together of Papists, Anabaptists, Sacramentaries: nor do I think that the
learned Papists (such are all they that can speak and make Syllogisms) do
endeavor to understand as much as concerns them, or all that they can; for an
easy endeavor will inform them, That their Church has been and is mistaken
in many points of great concernment; and if she has been mistaken she is not
infallible.


Laud. We have no other help in the midst of our distractions and dis unions,
but all of us to be united in that common term, which as it does constitute the
Church in its being such, so it is the medium of the Communion of the Saints,
and that is the Creed of the Apostles, and in all other things an honest
endeavor to find out what truths we can, and a charitable and mutual
permission to others that disagree from us and our opinions. Ibid. p. 33.


Pacif. I like it well that the Apostles Creed should be had in reverence, but
sure there are Articles necessary to salvation that are not (...) contained in
that Symbol.


Laud. None of those who hold the Creed entire can perish for want of necessary
Faith; neither are we obliged to make our Articles more particular and minute
then the Creed; for since the Apostles, and indeed our Blessed Lord himself,
promised Heaven to them who believed him to be the Christ that was to come into
the world, and that he who believes in him, should be partaker of the
Resurrection and Life Eternal, he will be as good as his word; yet because this
Article was very general, and a Complexion rather then a Proposition, the
Apostles and others our Fathers in Christ did make it more explicit; and
though they have said no more then what lay entire and ready formed in the
bosom of the great Article, yet they made their extracts to great purpose and
absolute sufficiency, and therefore there needs no more deductions or remoter
consequences from the great Article than the Creed of the Apostles. Liber.
Prop. p. 12.


Pacif. In this you must allow me to differ from you, and so do all that wish
well to the reformed Protestant Religion; the secinians such a wretched sort of
men that Grotius (before Crellius had tampered with him) counted not worth the
name of Heretics, would fain be called and received as Christians, because
they receive and embrace the Apostles Creed. Vid. Jonam. Schlict. apud. Hora.
Sosci. confut. p. 255, 256. and yet they deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
they deny his satisfaction to Divine Justice for the sins of his people; they
deny the Holy Ghost to be a Person, or else they make him to be but a finite
created Person. Hear Smalius contra. Frantz. Disp. 119. De Ecclesia p. 280.
Apage istam puerilem tractandi homines pios and cordatos rationem. In Symbolo
ait, docenter tres personae Trinitatis. In quonam? Si aliud ostendat quam
Apostolicum, quod vocant, tanquam humanum Commentum ridebo illud and respuam;
si Apostolicum nego in eo doceri tres Trinitatis Personas. Docetur quidam in
eo, patrem esse, and Filium and Spiritum Sanctum, and in eos ( ut hoc concedam)
credendum etium esse. Sed Filium Personam esse Trinitatis, Spiritum vero
Sunctum Personam esse simpliciter, nec verbis nec sensu ibi exprimitur. He that
will obviate many Heretical abominations now abroad in the world by any words
in the Creed, not drawing consequences from them, shall but loose his labor.


Laud. In the first three hundred years there was no sign of persecuting any
man for his opinion, though at that time there were very horrid opinions
commenced, and such which were exemplary and parallel enough to determine this
question; for they were then assaulted by new Sects which destroyed the common
principles of Nature, of Christianity, of Innocence and public Society; and
they who used all the means, Christian and Spiritual for their disimprovement
and conviction, thought not of using corporal force, otherwise then by blaming
such proceedings; and therefore I do not only urge their not doing it as an
argument of the unlawfulness of such proceeding, but their defying it and
speaking against such practices, as unreasonable and destructive of
Christianity; for so Tertullian is express ad Scap. Humani juris and naturalis
potestatis, unicuique quod putaverit colere, sed nec Religionis est cogere
Religionem, quae suscipi debet sponte non vi. Epis. Dedic. p 19.


Pacif. It Is strange that it should be destructive of Christianity to use
corporal force against the broachers of Tenants which destroy the common
principles of Nature, of Christianity, of Innocence and public Society; all
understanding men will grant with Lactantius, Instit. lib. 5. c. 14. That
Religion cannot be compelled, nor can justice, mercy, or love to our neighbors
be complelled; all such good dispositions or habits must be persuaded by the
Word, and wrought by the Spirit. Christians ought not to compel Jews to be of
their Religion, but the Sword is a means to punish acts of false worship in
those that are under the Christian Magistrate, and profess Christian Religion,
in so far as these acts come out to the eyes of men, and are destructive to the
souls of those in a Christian Society: But if you will not allow the Magistrate
to punish the blaspheming seducing Heretic with death, yet you will allow him
to discourage any false Teacher.


Laud. If men must be permitted in their opinions, and that Christians must not
persecute Christians, I have also as much reason to reprove all those oblique
Arts which are not direct persecutions of men's persons, but they are indirect
proceedings, ungentle and unchristian, servants of faction and interest,
provocations to zeal and animosity, and destructive of learning and ingenuity;
and these are suppressing all the monuments of their adversaries, forcing them
to recant, and burning their Books: all such Arts show that we either distrust
God for the maintenance of his Truth, or that we distrust the cause, or
distrust our selves and our abilities, Epist. Ded. p. 34, 36.


Pacif. The Arts you so condemn have been used in England both by the Secular
and Ecclesiastical Authority; and therefore you who call your self an obedient
son to both, do forget your self to censure such proceedings so severely;
especially seeing such courses have been followed by none more then by the
Brethren of your own persuasion and interest. But what makes you so very
favorable to men who differ from us in matters not fundamental, as you call
them? is it because the Scripture does not plainly speak against them?


Laud. God who disposes of all things sweetly, and according to the nature and
capacity of things and persons, has made those only necessary, which he has
taken care should be sufficiently propounded to all persons of whom he required
explicit belief, and therefore all the Articles of Faith are clearly and
plainly set down in Scripture, no man can be ignorant of the foundation without
his o un apparent fault; and God has done more, for many things which are only
profitable, are also set down so plainly, that as Austin, Nemo inde haurire non
possit, si modo ad hauriendum devote acpie accedat; but of such things there is
no question commenced in Christendom. Liber. of Prop. p. 59.


Pacif. Sir, you astonish me; Are there no questions commenced in Christendom
about things necessary to be believed, nor yet of things that are hugely
profitable? If not, it would be the best counsel could be given to Christian
Magistrates to burn all Controversy Books; but sure, That our natures are
corrupted with sin; that Christ made satisfaction to Divine Justice; that our
good works are not meritorious; that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father; that Sacraments and Ministry are to continue in the Church, are matters
necessary, or at least very profitable to be believed. But whence arises the
difficulty and uncertainty of Arguments drawn from Scripture, in questions that
you call not simply necessary, not literally determined?


Laud. There are so many thousands of copies that were writ by persons of
several interests and persuasions, such different understandings and tempers,
such distinct abilities and weaknesses, that it is no wonder there is so great
variety of readings both in the Old Testament and in the New. This variety of
reading is not of small consideration; for though it be demonstrably true, that
all things necessary to faith and good manners are preserved from alteration
and corruption, because they are of things necessary, yet in other things which
God has not obliged himself punctually to preserve in these things since
variety of readingsis crept in, every reading takes away a degree of certainty
from any proposition derivative from those places so read. And if some copies
(especially if they be public and notable) omit a verse or title, every
argument from such a title or verse loses much of its strength and reputation.
Liber. of Proph. p. 61, 63, 64.


Pacif. I am glad to find it acknowledged, that all things nenecessary to faith
and good manners are preserved from alteration and corruption; but you are not
ignorant, and your own examples prove it, that there is variety of readings in
things necessary to faith and good manners, as well as in matters that are not
of such necessity; but in such variety of readings, we are not left without
that which may direct us what reading to prefe: Thus Austin has answered
Faust. who was wont when he had nothing else left that he could reply, to say,
Libros N. Test. salsatos fuisse. Thus Simeon de Muis in his Assertio Hebraicae
veriti. p. 31. Nemo tibi negat in quaedam exemplaria potuisse, ac posse
quotidia mendas irrepere, etc. Dr. Edw. Kellet, no Puritan, in his Miscellanies
of Divinity, denies not but that some Copies are corrupted; but says, that if
in any one Point or Article we should affirm a corruption to be got into all
Copies, it will be impossible to prove any part or word of the New Testament to
be incorrupt. Lib. 2. c. 8.


Laud. There are very many senses and designs of expounding Scripture; and when
the Grammatical sense is found out, we are many times never the nearer, nor is
it that which was intended; for there is in many Scriptures a double sense, a
literal and spiritual (for the Scripture is a Book written without and within,
Apoc. 5.) and both these senses are subdivided, for the literal sense is either
natural or figurative, and the spiritual is sometimes Allegorical, sometimes
Anagogical. Lib. Prop. p. 64.


Pacif. You rather use the language of Ashdod then Canaan, whereas I count it a
thing commendable rather to express our selves so as reformed Divines have been
wont, then as the Popish, but I Will not quarrel at any thing which is capable of
a good construction; yet let me have leave to say, 1. That the place, Apoc. 5.
has quite another sense then that to which you apply it. 2. That I understand
not how this consideration, if admitted makes any thing to the proof of that
for which you produce it, that there should be a toleration of all who own the
Apostles Creed.


Laud. There being such variety of senses in Scripture, and but few places so
marked out as not to be capable of diverse senses, if men will write
Commentaries, as Herod made Orations (...), what infallible (...) will be left
whereby to judge of the certain Dogmatical resolute sense of such places which
have been the matter of question? Lib. Proph. p. 65.


Pacif. That if men will write Commentaries (...), no certain (...) will be
left, is beyond dispute; but it is as much beyond dispute, that if men will
proceed with sobriety, not leaning on their own understanding, but humbly
begging the Spirits illumination, they shall not want an infallible (...) to
find out the certain Dogmatical sense of such places which have been the matter
of question; nor is there any truth in that assertion, that there are but few
places so marked out, as not to be capable of diverse senses. I undertake to
produce veny clear places of Scripture against the errors of Popery,
Socinianism, etc.


Laud. There are diverse places of Scripture containing in them mysteries and
questions of great concernment, and yet the fabric and constitution is such,
that there is no certain mark to determine whether the sense of them should be
literal or figurative, nothing in the nature of the thing to determine the
sense and meaning, but it must be got out as it can; and therefore it is
unreasonable, that what is in it self ambiguous should be understood in its own
prime sense and intention, under the pain of either a sin or Anathema: I
instance in that place, Hoc est corpus meum, the words are plain and apt to be
understood in a literal sense, which yet does violence to reason; but if you
expound these words figuratively, besides that you contest against a world of
prejudices, you give your self the liberty, which if others should take, when
they have either a reason or necessity so to do, they may perhaps turn all into
Allegory, and so may evacuate any precept, and elude any Argument. Lib. Prop.
p. 67, 68, 69.


Pacif. Do these words become one who wishes well to the Protestant
reformation? Have our Martyrs always understood those words, Hoe est corpus
meum, in a figurative sense, and have they upon that account ventured the loss
of life and all things that were dear unto them? and must the World now be
told, that in such an interpretation they gave rhemselves the liberty, which if
others should take, all Scripture would be turned into an Allegory? Irascor
referens, and I pray you, how is it possible to quiet weak and tender
consciences, if some places of Scripture do contain mysteries of great
concernment, and yet there is no certain mark to determine whether the sense of
them be figurative or literal? Is the merciful God wont to set his poor
creatures on the rack? to bring them into labyrinths? to set down things which
are apt to breed scruples in their minds, and to leave no certain rule by which
they may determine in what sense the words in which such things are
comprehended are to be taken? Absit, absit.


Laud. There are some places of Scripture that have the self-same expressions,
the same preceptive words, the same reason and account in all appearance, and
yet either must be expounded to quite different senses, or else we must
renounce the Communion, and the charities of a great part of Christendom. And
yet there is absolutely nothing in the thing, or in its circumstances, or in
its adjuncts that can determine it to different purposes. I instance in these
great exclusive negatives for the necessity of both Sacraments, Nisi quis
renatus fuerit ex aqua, etc. Nisi mandua caveritis carnem filii hominis, etc.
Liber. Prophes. p. 69.


Pacif. A prodigious assertion! must I renounce the Communion and Charities of
a great part of Christendom, unless I will expound places of Scripture to a
quite different sense, that have the self-same expressions, and that though
there be absolutely nothing in the thing, or in its circumstances, or in its
adjuncts, that can determine them to different purposes? if so, then farewell
the Communions and Charities of Christendom; for to take such a course would
be to do violence to my judgment, reason, and every thing by which I am
denominated a man. As for the two places you instance in, the sense of them is
quite mistaken by the Papists, as our reformed Divines undeniably prove; and me
thinks the Romanists should easily yield they are mistaken, or else they must
needs leave themselves under horrible doubts about their eternal salvation; for
if they that dye unbaptised go to some part of Hell, and none are baptized but
those whom the Priest had an intention of baptizing when he sprinkled them
with, or dipped them in water, how many of them must lose the joys of Heaven on
that account? And if those words are to be understood literally; Except ye eat
the flesh, and drink the blood, etc. What will become of their Laity who are
not permitted to drink of the consecrated Wine? their device of concomitantia
will not sure make eating only to be eating and drinking. It is a good sport to
a Scholar, who has wear ed himself with other studies to observe how the
Popish Writers are put to it to excuse their Church for not administering the
Eucharist to Infants; and I cannot but wonder what moved the Papists to such a
practice, seeing they give so much to the Sacrament, viz. to confer grace by
the work done, and to fortify the soul against Satan. But what think you of
the fullness and perspicuity of the holy Scriptures?


Laud. There are some points of good concernment, which if any man should
question in an high manner, they would prove indeterminable by Scripture, or
sufficient reason. Liber. Prop. p. 89.


Pacif. Points of good concernment not determinable by Scriptures, nor yet by
Reason! How contrary is this to what is quoted out of Chrysostom and
Fulgentius, in the Homlly Exhorting to the reading of the holy Scripture? p. 2.
Besides, such an assertion does very much tend to discourage men from making
enquiry into Truth; for if such points are not determinable by either Scripture
or Reason, how shall they be determined? If by the Church, I say the Church in
her determinations must be guided by Scripture and Reason, or else her members
are not obliged to regard her determinations.


Laud. I must negatively conclude, that all things necessary to the Salvation
of all are not of themselves clear in the Scripture to all understandings;
whereby I say not, that all such things are not contained in the Scriptures, as
if some things necessary to the salvation of all were to be received by
Tradition alone: Nor, that being in the Scriptures they are not clear and
discernable to the understandings of those that are furnished with means
requisite to discern the meaning of Scripture: But that which I stand upon, is,
that it is not, nor ought to be a presumption, that this or that is not
necessary to Salvation, because it is not clear in the Scriptures: which if it
were admitted, whosoever were able to make such an argument against any Article
of Faith, as all understandings interessed in salvation could not dissolve,
should have gained this, that, though it may be true, yet it cannot be an
Article of Faith. Principles of Christian Truth. p. 25.


Pacif. It is beyond all dispute, that all things contained in Scripture are
not clear to all understandings, there are some understandings to which nothing
is clear: it is also past dispute, that they who understand Scriptures, must be
first furnished with all means necessarily requisite for the understanding of
Scriptures, and which is more, they must make use of those means, and pray to
God for a blessing upon them; but this is said by Protestants against Papists,
that God has made nothing necessary for the Salvation of all men, Necessitate
praecepti and medii, but such things as are so clearly laid down in the Word,
that all who will make use of the abilities God has vouchsafed, may find them
out, and that men may safely conclude that is not a necessary Article of
Religion which is not clear in some place or other of Scripture; clear I say,
with such a clearness as may satisfy the conscience, though not with such as
may satisfy curiosity.


Laud. The holy Scriptures in the first time of the Christian Church were not
communicated to all men all at once; for the Primitive Fathers wisely
considered how extremely perilous it might be to expose the whole Scripture
unto ignorant men's use and judgment, or indeed abuse rather and want of
judgment: surely more dangerous and pernicious it might prove unto men's souls,
then to leave a whole Apothecaries shop open to a diseased person, who might as
well choose and take deadly poison to his destruction, as a Sovereign medicine
to the recovery of his health. Had the souls of men been so carefully watched
over by their Governors, and such portions of Scripture wisely and fatherly
dispensed unto them, as might, with such holy reservedness, have met with men's
proficiency, surely such prodigious Monsters had not been counterfeited out of
the Word of God by the spirit of Opinion, as in these later days we have seen
and lament to see. Dr. Gell. Preface to his Essay about the amendment of our
English. Translation.


Pacif. That by the free reading of the Holy Scriptures some very dangerous
Opinions have been occasioned accidentally, is no question; but that therefore
any part of the Scripture should be locked up in an unknown Tongue from the
Vulgar, is no stronger an inference, then if one should argue, because some
have burned their fingers and houses with candle and fire, therefore the free
use of those creatures is not to be vouchsafed in a Commonwealth. And as I
think the conclusion to be absurd; so I am sure, It Is quite contrary to the
whole scope and design of the Homilies called an Information of them that take
offense at certain places of Holy Scripture.


Laud. The further we proceed in the survey of the Scripture, the Translation
is the more faulty, as the Hagiographa more then the Historical Scripture, and
the Prophets more then the Hagiographa, and the Apocrypha most of all, and
generally the New Testament more then the Old. Idem near the end of his Preface.


Pacif. Such a censure might have been born from the pen of the Rhemish and
Doway Divines; but who can bear it from one pretending to be an English
Protestant? the Translation is Vsque ad invidiam aliarum gentium elaborata
Translatio. It was sufficiently defended in the parts that you find most fault
with, by Dr. Fulk and Cartwright, against the Cavils of the Rhemists, and may
more easily be defended against the exceptions taken to it by you: But there is
another thing that offends me in your former words, viz. That you seem to make
the Apocrypha part of the Scripture, which word when it is taken absolutely and
without addition, should suppose only for Canonical Scripture; and I do the
more doubt that you advance the Apocrypha higher then do our Reformed Divines,
because I find you ascribing the Book of Wisdom to Solomon, p. 51. whereas that
Book was sure written by one of a spirit far inferior to that which acted
Solomon in his writings.


Laud. Such is the boldness and ignorance of some, that they have left out of
their impressions, the Apocryphal Scriptures, whereby they have gotten this
whereof to glory, that they have done that which no wise or honest man has
done before them, (so far as I have yet known) or I hope, will adventure to do
after them. Dr. Gell Pref.


Pacif. To divest all those who had an hand in leaving the Apocrypha out of our
English Bibles, of all wisdom and honesty, is very hard; for what if those
Apocryphal writings be of some good use, yet there is nothing in them should
make it necessary or expedient to bind them up with the Canon; why may they not
be kept in a Volume by themselves? or indeed how can they be read by private
Christians at all without apparent hazard and scandal, seeing some of them
contain notorious lies, some of them justify such things as God Law and the
Law of Nature too do condemn? But before we proceed any further, suffer me to
know your mind about Reason and Councils.


Laud. All Controversies are reducible to two heads, Goodness, or Truth; so
that the question is, Whether right reason can infallibly judge what is good or
bad, true or false; for a thing to be morally good (for Metaphysical Goodness
is all one with Truth) depends by sure connection from that Eternal Justice
which is primarily in God. Now this being one of the attributes of God which
are called communicable; it is truly affirmed, That that Justice which is in
God, is the very same in substance communicated to men, though in a lower
degree. Reason of Christian Religion, p. 24


Pacif. As it is seems a Paradox to me, that Metaphysical Goodness is all one
with Truth (Goodness and Truth being by all that I have met with, made distinct
affections of Ens) so it is to me also, at least propositio male sonans, that
the Justice which is in God, is the very same in substance communicated to men,
though in a lower degree: for the Justice which is in God, is the same with his
Infinite Essence, so is not the finite justice in the creature the same with
his finite essence, but really distinct from it. Now that thing which is
substantially just, and that whose justice is but an accident, seem to differ
more than gradually: But I pray you proceed, and it may be I shall be better
able to find out your mind.


Laud. For a thing to be true, i. e. to have a being either potential or
actual, depends partly on Gods power, partly on his will; in respect of its
potential being, it depends on his power; in respect of its actual, on his
will. Now Gods power, though it may in some sense be said communicable to the
creature, because all ability in the creature is a gleam of infinite ability in
God, yet is not this so communicated as his Justice or Goodness was said to be;
for goodness in the creature is a kind of image truly resembling the goodness
in God, and that a kind of natural image, as is the face in the glass; not a
voluntary one, which has its being from the variable will of the Artificer.
But power in the creature, is not thus a natural image of Gods power, but as
reflection of a thing, which voluntarily and variously casts its beams:
Voluntarily, I say, because the dispensing of his power, either in manner or
measure, is a free act of his will; and variously, because he does it, first
unequally, and secondly not so to any, but that he can (and sometimes does)
withdraw or suspend it, when it is bestowed, so that I cannot say, that as that
which is just in God to be done, is just to be done by the creature; so what is
possible to be done by God, is possible to be done by the creature; the reason
of the not communicating of Gods power to the creature as well as his justice,
may be this because it conduced not to the end of the creatures creation, as
the other did: for though God intended to make a creature truly good and just,
yet he did not truly powerful. Reas. Christ. Relig p. 25.


Pacif. Here are sundry things which I cannot digest 1 I do not see, but that
the creature is truly powerful as well as truly just or good; if that power
which is in the creature be true power, then it denominates the creature truly
powerful. 2 Nor secondly, Do I see but that goodness is as the reflection of a
thing which voluntarily and variously casts its beams, as well as power; for
does not God communicate his goodness unequally as well as his power? 3. I dare
not say, that what is just in God to be done, is just to to be done by the
creature; To let a creature starve, whom it was in my power to relieve, it
would not be just in me, but it is just in God, he being not so bound to the
creature as I am. And 4. I must from all conclude, that as the reason of the
creature apprehends many things to be impossible, which yet are possible; so it
may also apprehend sundry things not to be just which yet are just; as the
Stulta Dei sunt credenda, so the Impia Dei sunt facienda; that which our reason
counts folly, is to be believed; that which it counts wicked, to be done.


Laud. The Church Representative cannot err in points of Faith, Gagg. p. 48.
The Decision of the Catholic Church we receive as the dictate of the Holy
Spirit. Gagg. p. 19.


Pacif. This had need to be well and warily understood, or else it will
contradict the 21. Article. General Councils, when they be gathered together
(for as much as they are an Assembly of men, whereof all be not governed by the
Word and Spirit of God) they may err, and sometimes have erred even in things
pertaining to God; wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation,
have neither strength nor authority, unless they may be declared that they be
taken out of the Holy Scriptures.


Laud. Many things appertain unto God, which are not of necessity to salvation,
both in practice and speculation: in these happily General Councils have erred,
in the other none can. Appeal. p. 124.


Pacif. This does not satisfy. Those words (things ordained of them as
necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless) do suppose
that it is not impossible for a General Council to determine those points to be
necessary to salvation which are not; and if so, why not also those not to be
necessary which are? Besides, the reason assigned is, because they are an
assembly of men, whereof all are not governed by the Spirit and Word of God.
Now I would argue thus; May a General Council consist of men not guided by the
Spirit, or may it not? If you say it may not, I ask, what assurance have you
that there shall never be an Assembly made up of such men? If you say it may,
why then I ask, why such may not as well err in Fundamentals as in
Non-Fundamentals? Do you think an elect person may not err fundamentally? I
wish you did; but I know you do not: If one single elect person may err, why
may not an Assembly, or the major part of an Assembly consisting of such? But
let us now proceed to the consideration of the several estates of mankind.


Laud. That Adam was made mortal in his nature, is infinitely certain, and
proved by his very eating and drinking, his sleep and recreation, by ingestion
and egestion, by breathing and generating his like, which immortal substances
never do; and by the very tree of life, which had not been needful, if he
should have had no need of it to repair his decaying strength and health. D. J.
T. Fur. Explic. of Orig. sin. p. 453. Death came not in by any new sentence or
change of nature, for man was created mortal, and if Adam had not sinned, he
should have been immortal by grace; i. e. by the use of the Tree of Life. To
die is a punishment to some, to others not; it was a punishment to all that
sinned before Moses and since; upon the first it fell as a consequent of Gods
anger upon Adam; upon the later it fell as a consequent of that anger which was
threatened in Moses Law; but to those who sinned not at all, as Infants and
Idiots, it was merely a condition of their nature, and no more a punishment
then to be a child is. Unum Necess. p. 371, 372.


Pacif. This is such Divinity as I should never have expected to hear from any
but a Socinian; for though in a sense Adam might be said before his fall to be
mortal, in regard he was compounded of matter, the princeiple and root of
corruption; yet that power of corruption was so remote, and God gave him such
an excellent temper of body, that the remote power could never be brought into
a proxime and immediate disposition, much less into actual death; that death
could enter any other way then by sin, or that ever any one dyed without some
respect to sin, is so strange, that none who reads the Scripture without
prejudice, can bear it, or count it worth confuting.


Laud. We cannot guess at what degree of knowledge Adam had before the fall;
certainly if he had had so great a knowledge, it is not likely he would so
cheaply have sold himself and all his hopes out of a greedy appetite to get
some knowledge. Unum Necess. p. 372.


Pacif. That man though now become like to the beasts that perish, was at first
made for knowledge little inferior to the Angels, is easily proved: his being
tempted through a desire to get more knowledge, does not argue him to have been
created with little knowledge, but with much; for who more desirous to gain
knowledge than they who have a great deal already.


Laud. If man had not before the fall had a rebellious appetite and an
inclination to forbidden things, by what could he have been tempted, and how
could it have come to pass that he should sin? Unum Necessar. 373. An evil
there is upon us, and that is concupiscence, this also is natural; but it was
actual before the fall, it was in Adam and tempted him. p. 374.


Pacif. To say there was a rebellious appetite in man before the fall, or an
inclination to forbidden things, is too bold a reflection on the most holy and
wise Creator of man; nor can there a Protestant be instanced in, that has so
spoken, except we call the Remonstrants Protestants, who make the rebellion of
the sensitive appetite to the rational to arise from the very constitution of
man, insomuch that one of them is not afraid to say, that it was in Christ
himself because a man: Nothing is more easy to conceive then that these
inclinations, though diverse, yet are not contrary, unless it be where sin has
made an ataxy: The Angels did fall, though there was in them no sensitive
appetite at all; and therefore sure it is not impossible that the creature
should fall, though there be no rebellion in the inferior appetite to the
superior. But it may be you and I agree not about the nature and effects of
Original sin.


Laud. The evil of death descending upon Adams posterity, for his sake, went no
further then till Moses. Unum Necess. p. 367


Pacif Would you have me think that what you say is agreeable to those words in
the second Sermon of the Passion, p. 184. Is not sin think you a grievous thing
in Gods sight, seeing for the trausgression of his precept in eating of one
Apple he condemned all the world to perpetual death, and would not be pacified
but only with the blood of his own Son?


Land. Original sin is not an inherent evil; not a sin properly, but
metonymically; i. e. it is the effect of one sin and the cause of many; a
stain, but no sin. 2. It does not destroy our liberty which we had naturally.
3. It does not introduce a natural necessity of sinning. 4. It does not damn
any Infant to the eternal pains of Hell. Fur. p. 475. In Scripture there is no
signification of any corruption or depravation of our souls by Adams sin. Un.
Necess. p. 392.


Pacif. Either I understand not Grammar, or this is expressly contradictory to
the 9th Article. Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, as the
Pelagians do vainly talk, but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of
every man that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man
is very far gone from original righteousness, and is inclined to evil, so that
the flesh lusts against the spirit, and therefore in every person born into
the world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation; and this infection of nature
does remain, yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the flesh
called (...), which some do expound, the wisdom, some, the sensuality; some,
the affections; some, the desire of the flesh, is not subject to the Law of
God. And although there is no condemnation for them that believe and are
baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that concupiscence and lust has of it
self the nature of sin. And I pray you Sir, do you not think, seeing you say
that Original sin is not properly a sin, that a man is under no obligation to
repent of it?


Laud. Our share of Adams sin, either being in us no sin at all, or else not to
be avoided or amended, it cannot be the matter of repentance. As Adam was not
bound to repent of the sins of all his posterity, so neither are we tied to
repent of his sins: Neither did I ever see in any ancient Office or Form of
Prayer, public or private, any Prayer of Humiliation prescribed for Original
sin; they might deprecate the evil consequent, but never confess themselves
guilty of the formal sin. Unum. Necess. p. 425, 426. No man ever imposed
penance for it: So God himself in Nature never did for it afflict or affright
the Conscience, and yet the Conscience never spares any man that is guilty of a
known sin; and why the Conscience should be for ever at so much peace for this
sin, that a man shall never give one groan for his share of guilt in Adams sin,
unless some or other scare him with an impertinent proposition; Why (I say) the
Conscience should not naturally be afflicted for it, nor so much as naturally
know it? I confess I cannot yet make any probable conjecture, save this only,
That it is not Properly a sin, but Metonymically and Improperly. Deus Justis.
p. 128, 129.


Pacif. That no Form of Lyturgy takes notice of Original sin, so as to confess
it, or be humbled for it, you will never persuade him who has the
Administration of Baptism in our own Common Prayer Book; and is it not great
pride or uncharitableness, or both, to say, that no man's Conscience did ever
afflict him for Original sin? never any groaned for it, or under it? Have all
those eminent Protestant Divines, that have so often in their Prayers before
their Sermons, bewailed the corruption that we brought into the world with us,
been scared with impertinent propositions? or did they play the Hypocrites so
as to groan where they felt no burden? But if you really think, that all the
Disputations and Questions about Natural Sin and Corruption be de non cute,
What account will you, or can you give us of the Universal wickedness of
mankind?


Laud. One cause of the Universal Iniquity of the world is, because our Nature
is so hard put to it in many instances: not because Nature is originally
corrupted, but because Gods Laws command such things which are a restraint to
the indifferent and otherwise lawful inclinations of nature. I instance in the
matters of Temperance, Abstinence, Patience, Humility, Self-denial and
Mortification. But more particularly thus; A man is naturally inclined to
desire the company of a woman, whom he fancies, this is naturally no sin; for
the natural desire was put into us by God and therefore could not be evil. But
then God as an instance and trial of our obedience, put fetters upon the
indefinite desire and determined us to one woman; which provision was enough to
satisfy our need but not all our possibility: This therefore he left as a
reserve, that by obeying God in the so reasonable restraint of our natural
desire, we might give him something of our own. But then it is to be
considered, that our unwillingness to obey in this instance, or in any of the
other, cannot be attributed to Original sin, or natural disability derived as a
punishment from Adam, because the particular instances were postnate a long
time to the fall of man; and it was for a long time lawful to do some things
which now are unlawful: But our unwillingness and aversness came by occasion of
the Law coming cross upon our nature, not because our nature is contrary to
God, but because God was pleased to super-induce some Commandments contrary to
our nature: For if God had commanded us to eat the best meats and drink the
richest Wines as long as they could please us and were to be had; I suppose, it
will not be thought, that Original sin would hinder us from obedience. But
because we are forbidden to do some things which naturally we desire to do and
love, therefore our nature is hard put to it; and this is the true state of the
difficulty. Unum. Necess. p. 415, 416.


Pacif. I am neither taken with the Logic nor Divinity of this discourse: not
with the Logic; for whereas you should have given us an account of the
Universal wickedness of mankind, you only give us an account of some carnal
wickednesses; whereas you cannot but know, that men do universally defile
themselves with the pollutions of the spirit as well as of the flesh; men are
prone to hypocrisy and lying, etc. How comes this about? Is it because Gods
Law lays restraint in these instances on the natural and lawful inclinations
of men? But I am somewhat more displeased with the Divinity of your discourse;
for you seem to me all along to excuse men's corruption, and lay all the blame
of their wickedness on the Laws of God, which certainly are holy, just and
good. There Is no question, but the nature of fallen man would readily enough
obey such a law as should command to eat the best meat, and drink the richest
Wines as long as they could please us and were to be had; but such a law would
be a wicked law: The query is, seeing the matter of Gods Law does consist
mostly of things that are good, before commanded, why the men of the world do
not close with them? Could this be, if there were not a contrariety in our
natures to any thing that good is. I hope extra aestum disputandi, you do not
think that the laws of Temperance, Patience, Humility, do command such things
as are a restraint to the indifferent and otherwise lawful inclination of
nature; or that it was any part of the nature which God put into us, to desire
the company of a woman whom we fancy; for what if that woman be another man's
wife? what if she be ones own mother, is it lawful to desire her company? A man
would almost think, that you do strike in with those who hold no rations boni
and mali aeternas and indispensabiles, but think that all moral good and evil
depends wholly on the free and arbitrary volition and constitution of God; so
that there is no action so intrinsecally good, but it might have been made evil;
no action so intrinsecally evil, but it might have been made good if God had so
pleased: which opinion if you should hold, you would thereby destroy the
certainty of all Christian Religion; for if God may, if he so please, will the
deceiving of the creature, how know I but he has? And what is then become of
all my faith and hope in reference to Eternity?


Laud. Another great cause of Universal impiety is, that at first, God had made
no promises of Heaven; he had not propounded any glorious rewards, to be as an
argument to support the superior faculty against the inferior, i. e. To make
the will choose the best and leave the worst, and to be as a reward for
suffering contradiction. Unum Necess. p. 413.


Pacif. Why, when you are to give us an account of the Universal Impiety of
mankind, do you suggest such a reason to us as was proper and peculiar to those
who lived before the flood? but I do not not think that that age of the world,
which had in it Preachers of Righteousness, was without promises of rewards in
another world; sure I am, there was at that time the Prophecy of Enoch, which
does speak plain enough of judgment to come: But of this more hereafter, when
we come to discourse about the Covenants of Works and Grace, the Old and New
Covenant. I pray what think you of the Covenant of Works?


Laud. The Covenant of Works was not impossible because it consisted of
impossible Commandments; for every Commandment was kept by some or other and
all at sometimes: but therefore it was impossible to be kept, because at
sometime or other, men would be impotent, or ignorant, or surprised, and for
this no abatement was made in that Covenant. Unum Necess. p. 53.


Pacif. That no abatement was made in the Covenant of Works, for the failings
of men is therefore certain, because in it there was no Mediator to make
satisfaction to Divine Justice for any transgression; but that it consisted of
such Commandments, as are impossible to be kept by fallen man, of such
Commandments as the grace we attain unto in this world cannot enable us fully
to observe, I affirm, so do all Protestant Divines.


Laud. The Law of Moses was a part of the Covenant of Works, some little it had
of Repentance; Sacrifice and Expiations were appointed for small sins; but
nothing at all for greater. Every great sin brought death infallibly. Vnum
Necess. p. 3.


Pacif. That the Law as delivered by Moses on Mount Sinai, was not a Covenant
of Works, but a Covenant of Grace, is abundantly proved by some Neotericks, who
have made it their business to search into the nature of the Covenants: And as
for that notion, that Sacrifice and Expiations were appointed for small sins,
but none for great ones; it is a notion borrowed from the Socinians, but has
nothing of truth in it; forif we look into Levit. 6. 1, 2, etc. We shall find a
trepass offering appointed for sins done wittingly; for a man's lying, in that
which was delivered to him to keep, and swearing falsely, which sure are not
small sins: And in the Feast of Expiation, of which mention is made Levit. 16.
we find very general terms used, v. 16, 21, 30, 34. and therefore God
promising to his people the remission of their sins that were very grievous,
Isai. 1. 18. uses a metaphor say the Rabbis, taken from that which happened in
the Feast of Expiation, when the thread by which the Scapegoat was led into
the Wilderness did miraculously change its color and become white. Every great
sin, say you, brought death infalibly. What death do you mean? temporal or
eternal. All men were not cut off by death temporal who did fall into soul
gross sin, much less did they all suffer the vengeance of eternal death,
witness David, who escaped notwithstanding adultery and murder: whereas
Volkelius says, this was not by virtue and efficacy of Sacrifices, but by the
singular mercy of God: he is well answered by Maresius among others; that he
makes a faulty opposition betwixt that pardon which was by the typical efficacy
of Sacrifices, and that which proceeded out of the singular mercy of God;
whereas that pardon of sin which was obtained by any Expiatory Sacrifice
whether typical or real, was ever to be ascribed to the special mercy of God;
and indeed seeing it cannot be denied, but that some very enormous crimes were
pardoned under the Law; it seems very irrational to deny, that such pardon was
signified to those who were guilty by some Sacrifices, if not particular, yet
common and universal, especially seeing David himself being about to ask the
pardon of his sin, expresses himself in terms taken from Ceremonies and legal
Sacrifices, Psalm. 51.4, 5, 7. Purge me with hysop. But I pray you tell us more
of your mind about Moses his Law.


Laud. As it had a little image of Repentance, so it had something of Promises,
to be as a grace and auxiliary to set forward Obedience. But this would not do
it, the Promises were temporal, and that could not secure Obedience in great
instances; and there being for them no remedy appointed by Repentance, the Law
could not justify, it did not promise life Eternal, nor give sufficient
security against the temporal, only it was brought in as a paedagogy for the
present necessity. Unum. Necess. p. 3.


Pacif. How to make sense of those words, the Law did not promise life Eternal,
nor give sufficient security against the temporal, I know not: but I suppose
your meaning in the whole that you said, is this; That under the Law the
Promises were temporal, not of matters Spiritual or Eternal: Now if you mean,
that the Law considered barely as a law, had no promises of Eternal life, I
cannot gainsay; but in that sense neither had it any promises temporal; for a
law, as a law, promises nothing, but only declares what is to be done or
avoided; but if you should mean, that God under Mos s his Law did not encourage
his people to Obedience by promises of Eternal life as well as of a Temporal,
our Divines against the Socinians and Papists have said enough to confute you,
and you plainly contradict the 7th Article of our Church, in which the words
are these; The Old Testament is not contrary to the New; for both in the O d
and New Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by Jesus Christ, who
is the only Mediator between God and Man, being both God and Man: wherefore
they are not be heard, which fain, that the old Fathers did look only for
transitory promises.


Laud. At first there were no promises at all of any good, nothing but a
threatening of evil to the transgressors: and after a long time they were
entertained but with the promise of good things temporal, which to some men
were performed by the pleasures and rewards of sin, and then there being a
great imperfection in the nature of man, it could not be that man should remain
innocent: and for Repentance, in this Covenant there was no regard or
provisions made. Unum Neces. p. 2.


Pacif. Either I understand you not, or this is uncouth Divinity; you say at
first there were no promises at all of any good, nothing but a threatening of
evil: what mean you by at first? if while Adam was innocent, Can any one think
that the most holy and merciful Creator should threaten death to Adam upon his
disobedience, and not promise him life and happiness on condition of obedience?
if by the first you mean, that time in which the world consisted of Adam and
Eve, Abel and Cain, and some few other, sure you cannot think, that in that
period of time there was no promise of good things: there was the promise of
the seed of the woman; and God tells it Cain, as a thing well known to him,
that if he did well he should be accepted; the Hebrew word there used comes
from (...) a root, says Pagnin, of very vast and comprehensive signification,
if any other in all the Hebrew tongue: it may carry these three significations
in that place, 1. If thou do well, shall thou not be pardoned? 2. Shall thou
not lift up thy count nance, i. e. have access to God with boldness? 3. Shall
thou not receive, i. e. receive the things thou ask and stand in need of?
How any of these were or could be performed to any by the pleasures and rewards
of sin, I wot not. But what may one think of the faith of them who lived before
Christ's Incarnation?


Laud. That both the Patriarchs and the Jews did rely on God for the
accomplishment of his promise touching their salvation, I do nothing doubt but
that they were acquainted with the means and method which God did purpose to
make use of in so great a work, or did rely on Christ to come for their
justification; as the Scripture no where says it, for ought find, so is there
no reason to believe it, for ought I can see. Dr. Hey. Fid. Apost. p. 96. after
a long discourse to that purpose.


Pacif. The Writers of our Homilies seem to be of another mind, for Part. 1. p.
25. we find these words: All these Fathers, Martyrs and other holy men had
their faith surely fixed in God, when all the world was against them, they did
not only know God to be the Lord, Maker and Governor of all men in the world,
but also they had a special confidence and trust, that he was and would be
their God, their Comforter, Aider, Helper, Maintainer and Defender; This is the
Christian Faith which these holy men had and we also ought to have: And
although they were not named Christian men, yet was it a Christion Faith they
had; for they looked for all benefits of God the Father through the merits of
his Son Jesus Christ, as we now do. This difference is betwixt them and us,
that they looked when Christ should come, and we be in the time when he is
come; therefore says St. Augustine, the time is altered and changed, but not
the faith: The same Doctrine is delivered, Part. 2. p. 187. Of this judgment
also was Ignatius, if I understand him, Epist. ad Antiochenos. (...). etc. and
in the Epistle ad Philadelph. Sed and Prophetas diligamus propter and ipsos in
Evangelium annunciasse, and in Christum sperare, and ipsum expectare in quo and
credentes salvati sunt in unitate Jesu Christi existentes. And I should thank
any one that would tell me, if the Types and Ceremonies of the Law did not
represent Christ to come, and were not thought by Saints then so to do, why God
did institute that Ceremonial Paedagogy?


Laud. That God instructed our first Father Adam in the duty of Sacrifice I
shall easily grant; and I shall grant as easily, that God proposed some other
end of them in that institution, then to receive them as a quit-rent from the
hands of men, in testimony that they held their estates from him as the Supreme
Landlord; for though this may be held as to Sacrifices Eucharistical, yet there
was another sort which we may call Expiatory, ordained by God himself as the
Types and Figures of that one only real and propitiatory Sacrifice, which was
to be performed in the death of Christ; yet were they not bare Types and
Figures that had no efficacy in themselves, but such efficacy as they had was
not natural to them, but either in reference to the Sacrifice to be made of
Christ, or else extrinsecal by the Divine Ordinance and Institution of Almighty
God; and that they might be so in this last respect, there want not very
pregnant reasons in the Word of God; for whereas God, considered as the Supreme
Lawgiver, had imposed a Commandment on man under pain of death, although it
stood not with his wisdom to reverse the Law, which with such infinite wisdom
had bin first ordained, yet it seemed very suitable to his grace and goodness to
commute the punishment and satisfy himself with the death of Beasts, offered
in Sacrifice unto him by that sinful creature. Id p. 93. and p. 95. for ought
appears to the contrary, the Sacrifices both before and under the Law, had in
themselves a power of Propitiation by virtue of the Ordination and Institution
of Almighty God, and not a relative virtue only in reference to the
All-sufficient Sacrifice of our Savior Christ.


Pacif. I think as you, that neither the only nor the chief end of Gods
instituting Sacrifices, was this, that he might receive a quit-rent from his
creatures; I grant also that the Sacrifices had an efficacy in them as to the
taking away of sin; but the Law being made, He that sins shall die, I see
not any ground, to think that God would dispense with his Law without a
valueable consideration, and that the death of a Beast is not. The government
of Israel was a Theocracy, and God who would have any other laws made with
cruelty, would not make his own laws without merciful condescension to the
infirmity of men: therefore as he would not let those sins go unpunished for
which Sacrifices were appointed, so he would not have all offenders cut off by
the hand of justice, but mercifully appointed a commutation, that not the
sinner, but the Beast should be slain, and the slaying of the Beast did procure
a man immunity from that death temporal, which else would have been inflicted
on the offender in that Commonwealth; but that God ever made any Institution
or Ordination, that upon the offering of a Sacrifice, without respect to Christ
the Antitype, sin should be forgiven in the Court of Conscience or of Heaven,
that (with the common consent of Divines) I deny; you that say he did, must
show us where any such Ordination or Institution is recorded.


Laud. When God brought Israel out of Egypt, he began to make a Covenant with
them, with some compliance to their infirmities: for because little things
could not be avoided, Sacrifices were appointed for their Expiation, but for
great sins there was no Sacrifice appointed, no repentance ministered. And
therefore still we were in the ministration of death, for this mercy was not
sufficient, as yet it was not possible to be justified by the Law, it did not
promise Eternal life, it ministered no grace, but fear and temporal hope; it was
written in Tables of stone, not in their heart, that is, the material parts of
the Law of Moses was not consonant to natural and essential reason, but
arbitrary impositions; they were not perfective of man, but very often
destructive. Unum Necess. p. 39.


Pacif. There are many passages at which just exception may be taken; you say,
God when he brought Israel out of Egypt, began to make a Covenant with some
compliance to their infirmities. But I pray you had he not begun till then? you
say as yet, it was not possible for a man to be justified by the law; was it
ever since possible? you say the Law was written in Tables of stone, not in
their hearts? But you do not sure hope to persuade us that the Law Moral was
not then written in every good man's heart, and no other laws were ever written
in Tables of stone? when you say, That is, the material parts of the Law of
Moses was not consonant to natural and essential reason, but arbitrary
impositions; they were not persective of a man, but often destructive. I
understand you not; that is, what is? Did the writing of the Law on the Tables
import any such as that which follows; and why say you, that the material parts
of the Law of Moses were not consonant to natural and essential reason; are not
the ten Commandments material parts of the Law of Moses, yet sure they are
consonant to natural essential reason; but if you will call only the Ceremonial
Law the material part of the Law of Moses (the reason of which appellation I
cannot guess) yet how this was ofen destructive of man and not perfective, will
be very difficult to apprehend.


Laud. If we consider the particular of Moses Law, it was such a burden which
the Jews themselves were loath to part with, because it was in the Moral part of
it, but a Law of abstinence from evil. Unum Neces. p. 20. and p. 21. the
righteousness of the Law was in abstinence from evil, the righteousness of the
Gospel in thatand in the doing of all the affirmative Commandments of Christ.


Pacif. Was the Law in the Moral part of it, but a law of abstinence from evil?
What make you of the fourth and fifth Commandment? the other eight indeed are
expressed in a Negative form, but that where any sin is forbidden, there the
contrary duty is enjoined, is a rule given and allowed by all the Expositors of
the Decalogue, nor can you instance in any one Moral affirmative Precept of the
Gospel, which was not Obligatory to believers under the Old Covenant.


Laud. The Affirmative Precepts of the Gospel being propounded in general
terms, and with indefinite proportions, for the measures are left under our
choice and liberty to signify our great love to God: whatsoever is over and
above the Commandments, that shall have a great reward. God sorbids
unmercifulness; he that is not unmerciful, keeps the Commandment; but he that
besides his abstinence from unmercifulness according to the Commandment, shall
open his hand and his heart and give plentifully to the poor, this man shall
have a reward; he is among those servants whom his Lord will make to sit down
and himself will serve him: when God in the Commandment forbids uncleanness and
fornication, he that is not unchaste and does not pollute himself, keeps the
Commandment; but if to preserve his chastity he uses fasting and prayer, if he
mortifieth his body, if he deny himself the pleasures of this world, if he
uses the easiest or the hardest remedies, according to the proportion of his
love and industry, especially if he be prudent, so shall his greater reward be:
To follow Christ is all our duty, but if that we may follow Christ with greater
advances, we quit all the possessions of the world, this is the more
acceptable, because it is a doing of the Commandment with greater love. We must
so order things, that the Commandment be not broken; but the difference is in
finding out the better ways, and doing the duty with the more affections, Unum
Necess. 48, 49.


Pacif. All this goes quite against the hair with me; I do not think that the
Affirmative Precepts of the Gospel for the measure, are left under our liberty
and choice to signify our greater love: Whatever the Law of the Gospel
requires us to do, it requires that we do it cum omni valde, in the highest
degree and measure: Nor does he keep the Commandment that is not unmerciful,
for the very Commandment is, that a man open his hand and heart and give
plentifully to the poor; he that sows plentifully shall reap more plentifully
than he that sows but sparingly, not because he does more then the Commandment
requires, but because that merciful God who has promised to reward the least
grace with Heaven, has yet promised to reserve higher Mansions in Heaven for
those that outstrip their fellow Christians in zeal; nor is it acceptable to
God that a man should quit the possessions of the world to follow Christ,
except it so happen that a man cannot follow Christ and keep the possessions of
the world too, and if such a case happen, I trow the Law of the Gospel
requires that a man should rather forsake the world then not follow Christ; if
a man do not follow Christ to the forsaking all he has, when he is by
providence called so to do, he performs not all his duty; if you gainsay
this, you introduce counsels of perfection and works of supererogation, quite
contrary to the Articles of our Church. Artic. 14. Voluntary works besides over
and above Gods Commandments, which they call works of supererogation, cannot be
taught without arrogance and impiety; for by them men do declare, that they do
not only render unto God as much as they are bound to do do, but that they do
more for his sake than of bounden duty is required, whereas Christ says
plainly; when ye have done all that are commanded you, say, we be unprofitable
servants.


Laud. They are highly mistaken, that think any thing of this nature is a work
of supererogation; for all this is nothing but a pursuance of the Commandment:
but some Commandments are propounded as to friends, some as to servants, some
under the threatening of horrible pains, others not so, but with the proposition
and under the invitation by glorious rewards; it was commanded by St. Paul to
preach the Gospel, if he had not obeyed he should have perished, he was bound
to do it, but he had another Commandment also to love God, as much as was
possible, to love his neighbor; which Precepts were infinite and of an
unlimitted signification, and therefore were left to every servants choice to
do them with his several measures of zeal and love. p. 49. Unum Neces.


Pacif. You are well aware thar Protestant ears cannot hear of works of
supererogation, and therefore you abstain from those terms, but in vain is it
to disclaim and renounce the name so long as you own the thing. What Reformed
Divine ever said that there are Commandments which are not propounded under the
threatening of horrible pains to those that disobeyed them and repented not of
that disobedience? Is not the transgression of every commandment a sin? and
does not every sin deserve eternal death? had not Paul perished if he had not
loved his neighbor as well as if he had not preached the Gospel? Are there not
several measures of affection and zeal in preaching the Gospel as well as in
loving God or our neighbors? or how are the Precepts of loving God and our
neighbor left more to every servants choice as to the degree, than the
Preaching of the Gospel is? But as to this matter I refer my self to what is
written by Papists and Protestants about Councils. What think you of the
possibility of performing the Law in this life?


Laud. To every Christian it is enjoined that they be perfect; i. e. according
to the measure of every one; which perfection consists in doing our endeavor.
He that does not do that, must never hope to be accepted, because he refuses
to serve God by something that is in his power. But he that does that, is sure
that God will not refuse it, because we cannot be dealt withal upon any other
account, but by the measures of what is in our power; and for what is not, we
cannot take care. Unum Necess. 43. The highest severity of the Gospel is to
love God with all our soul, i. e. to love him as much as we can love him, and
that is certain we can do: Every man can do as much as he can, and God requires
no more. Unum Necess. p. 20.


Pacif. That the perfection which God has promised to accept of, lies in
doing our endeavor and stirring up the grace of God which is in us, I deny
not; but I deny that we cannot be dealt with upon any other account but by the
measures of what is in our power, or that we cannot take care for what is not
in our power. God may deal with us upon the account of what was once in our
power. God in the Gospel does require more than we can do, for his Law is
regula officii, not mensura facultatis, it shows what we ought to do, not what
we can do; but yet such is his graciousness, that he will accept of what we can
do, and what we cannot do that he will set on the score of Christ. But let me
hear you speak plainly, Whether a man can keep the Law and be without sin?


Land. There are, who, I hope out of ignorance, teach the people such doctrine,
as, not accidentally and occasionally, but directly and per se, causes them to
sin; such is that Catechetical doctrine, that no man is able either by himself
or by any grace received in this life, perfectly to keep the Commandments of
God, but does daily break them in thought, word and deed. Dr. Gell. p. 247.


Pacif. What then, do you think a man may be without sin?


Laud. They are justly to be reproved who plead for their spots and stains, and
allege for themselves that they must be defiled with them while they live
here; but when shall they be cleansed from them? cleansed they must be; they
say they shall be purified at the end of this life, yea when they can sin no
more, then they shall be cleansed from their spots; what Scripture can they
allege for this? Sure I am, there is none in the whole Word of God; besides,
they attribute more to their own natural death, then they do the death of
Christ and our conformity thereunto: If therefore the spots cannot be washed
out in this life nor at the end of this life, it must then follow, that there
must be a time after this life, and before we enter into the holy City, when
these spots be washed out, and when and where must that be but in Purgatory?
Mark now, Beloved, whither this unclean doctrine, of necessity, leads the
Authors of it, they who are great enemies to Popery, are by this their Tenent
the greatest Patrons of Purgatory. Id. p. 750.


Pacif. What then think you of those places, Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just
man upon earth that does good and sins not, and 1 John 1. 8. If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us?


Laud. Solomon speaks of such a just man as is under the first dispensation,
that of the Father, which is the fear of God. p. 768. But those children of the
Father, who have their sins forgiven them through his Name, and are now brought
unto the Son, and grown so strong in him that they overcome the Evil one; these
at length attain to the old age in the Spirit, and experimentally know him who
is from the beginning. This is that state (...), that is, without sin; such an
estate is possible and attainable through the grace of God and his Holy Spirit,
that men may be without sin. p. 790.


Pacif. I shall hereafter know whence some of our Quakers and Antinominans get
their canting language: But does not this discourse of yours quite pull down
what was laid by our first Reformers. Artic. 15. Sin was not in him; i. e.
Christ, but all we the rest, although baptized and born again in Christ, yet
offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us. If you think this Doctrine be false, no better way for
confuting it, then by bringing out some of your Saints that have attained the
full age of the Spirit, and so live without sin; such a one could I never meet
with, never hear of; yea I have observed, that those who have made the greatest
pretensions to perfection, have been so far from perfection of grace, that they
have discovered themselves to have no Religion at all. But I have heard of
certain new Precepts by which Christ did perfect the Moral Law, concerning the
perfection of which I have always had high thoughts.


Laud. Christ has perfected the Law, and set it higher then any the most
studied Doctor did think himself obliged by it formerly. Prac. Catec. 2. Ed. p.
93. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1. 5. This is to be
understood of Gods Law and Commandment that they had before some mixture of
imperfection, but now have none; had before some vacuities in them, which are
now filled up by Christ, p. 94. Of this the same Author may be seen in his
Letters to Dr. Cheynell.


Pacif. That our Savior in the 5 of Matthew does but expound the Law and clear
it from the absurd glosses and interpretations of the Scribes and Pharisees
seems to be plainly resolved by our Church in the Homilies, p. 41. and p. 79.
Part. 1. Edit. Land. 1623. (which Edition I all along follow) and had Christ
acted the part of a new Lawgiver and not of an Interpreter only, it is not
like he would have said, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, but except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of Moses and the Prophets, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Maldonate indeed tells us, that Christ does all along tacitly oppose
himself to Moses, by that form of speech, but I say unto you, only ad
declinandam invidiam, he names him not; but who can think our Lord opposes
himself to a servant that was faithful in all his house? but whether Christ did
intend to fill up the vacuities of the Moral Law by adding new Precepts, will
best appear by examination of particulars, and showing that the Moral duties
which are supposed to be de novo enjoined in that chapter were duties enjoined
to Israelites as well as us; to some Precepts no addition is pretended to be
made, but yet because there is Controversy made and raised about them all, it
may not be amiss to take all into consideration; you know the Church of Rome is
commonly charged with Idolatry and made to transgress both first and second
Commandment, the first by worshipping the Bread in the Eucharist, the second by
making Images of the the true God, etc. what think you of these matters?


Laud. Idolatry is a forsaking the true God and giving divine worship to a
creature or Idol, that is, to an imaginary god, who has no foundation in
essence or existence. Libert. Prop. p. 258.


Pacif. You seem already to forsake the Doctrine of our Church, as also does
Mr. Mountague, who says in his Gagge that Ido's and Images may be two things;
whereas the Homily says expressly, Part. 2. p. 12. That the Scriptures use the
words Images and Idols indifferently for one thng always, and in the said Homily
it is further asserted that there may be Idolatry in worshipping the true God
in an undue manner.


Laud. It is evident that the object of the Papists Adoration in the blessed
Sacrament, is the only the Eternal God, hypostatically joined with his holy
humanity, which humanity they believe actually present under the veil of the
Sacramental signs: and if they thought him not present, they are so far from
worshipping the Bread in this case, that themselves profess it to be Idolatry
to do so, which is a demonstration that their soul has nothing in it that is
Idolatrical; if their confidence and fancyful opinion has engaged them upon so
great mistake, yet the will has nothing in it but what is a great enemy to
Idolatry, Et-nihil ardet in inferno niso propria voluntas. Liber. Prop. p 258.


Pacif. Belike then if any man can make a shift to be so ignorant as to think
that the Sun is God, and so give Divine Adoration to the Sun, he shall be no
Idolater. I think that the will of the Papists has something in it that is no
great enemy to Idolatry, and had they not been wilful in so absurd an opinion,
so much reason has been offered against it, that they must needs before this
time have recanted such a senseless Tenent


Laud. Although they have done violence to all Philosophy and the reason of
man, and undone and cancelled the Principles of two or three Sciences, to bring
in this Article, yet they have a Divine Revelation whose Literal and
Grammatical sense if that were intended, would warrant them to do violence to
all the Sciences in the Circle; and indeed that Transubstantiation is openly
and violently against Natural Reason, is no argument to make them disbelieve
who believe the Mystery of the Trinity in all those niceties of Explication
which are in the School (and which now a days pass for the Doctrine of the
Church) with as much violence to the principles of Natural and Supernatural
Philosophy, as can be imagined to be in the point of Transubstantiation. Liber.
Prop. p. 258


Pacif. Here Is as fair quarter for the Socinians as could be wished, that the
niceties of the School (as you are pleased to call them) about the Trinity, are
as contrary to the principles of natural and supernatural Philosophy as
Transubstantiation: Prove this and our New Arians will thank you; prove it and
I Will never more believe the Mystery of the Trinity: For I am sure God the first
Truth did never command or oblige any one to believe that which offers violence
to the principles of natural and supernatural Philosophy; but I confess I have
a long time been offended at some passages that I have met with in sundry
Divines who call themselves Protestants. Dr. Laurence in his Sermon before the
King, lets us know That as he does not like those who say, Christ is bodily,
present in the Sacrament; so he likes not those who say his body is not there,
because Christ says it is there, and St. Paul says it is there, and the Church
of God say ever it is there, and that truly and substanlially and essentially:
These words though I think they may be expounded to a good sense, yet they do
male sonare and should not be used, nor know I what made men so much delight to
call our Sacrament a Sacrifice, or the Communion Table, an Altar, or our
Ministers, Priests, especially seeing Dr. Heylin has told us, that it is no
improper Sacrifice, no improper Altar. Sure I am, our Church never took
pleasure in calling it an Altar, never made any injunction the Table should be
placed Altarwise; nay Queen Elizabeth's injunctions made the first year of her
reign do appoint, That the holy Table in every Church be decently made, and set
in the place where the Altar stood and so to stand, saving when the Communion
of the Sacrament is to be distributed, at which time the same shall be so
placed in good sort within the Chancel, as whereby the Minister may be more
conveniently heard of the Communicants in his Prayer and Ministration, and the
Communicants also more conveniently and in more number communicate with the
said Minister. And after the Communion done, from time to time the same holy
Table to be placed, where it stood before: And Bishop Jewel does peremptorily
maintain, That the Communion Table ought to stand in the middle of the Church
among the people and not Altarwise against the wall. Reply to Harding. And as I
could never satisfy my self about placing the Table Altarwise; so neither
could I ever satisfy my self about bowing to the Altar: why should we more bow
toward the empty Table or Altar more then toward the empty Pulpit from whence
the word is wont to be preached to us, or toward the Bible, or toward the
Font?


Laud. The Altar is the greatest place of Gods residence upon earth, I say the
greatest, yea greater than the Pulpit; for there it is hoc est Corpus meum, but
in the Pulpit it is at most but hoc est Verbum meum, and a greater reverence no
doubt is due to the Body then to the Word of our Lord, and so in relation
answerable to the Throne where his Body is usually present, then to the Seat
where his Word uses to be proclaimed, and God keep it there at his Word; for
as too many use the matter, it is hoc est verbum Diaboli in too many places,
witness Sedition and the like to it. A. Laud. his Speech in the Star Chamber.


Pacif. If this be all you can say, I shall never be troubled that bowing
toward the Altar is disused; for when you say, that in the Altar it is hoc est
Corpus meum, either you mean that it is the Body of Christ in a gross carnal
way or in a spiritual Sacramental way; if in a gross carnal way, you shall
excuse me if I cannot swallow that opinion, in defiance and detestation of
which our Martyrs in Queen Mary's days did lose their lives: If you mean only
in a Sacramental way; is not the blood of Christ and whole Christ, and so by
consequence his Body exhibited and represented to us in Baptism as well as in
the Supper? Why then were men enjoined rather to worship toward the Table or
the Eucharistical Bread, then toward the Baptismal water or the Baptistery?
Besides, when there was no Sacrament, there was upon the Table or Altar neither
the Body of Christ nor any sacred Symbol of Christ; nay if there were a
Sacrament, yet I hope the Bread was not in any sense the Body of Christ till it
was consecrated by the Word and Prayer; but as I take it, we were bound to bow
toward the Table, not only when there was a Sacrament, and after the
consecration of the Elements, but at all times. And when the Sacrament was
administered in private houses, might not it be said, that there it was hoc est
Corpus meum? and yet I trow men were not under obligation to bow toward that
Table upon which the Bread did stand when it was consecrated? This sufficiently
invalidateth your argument, and therefore I need not further ask whether that
honor which you expressed by bowing toward the Altar were civil or divine and
religious, though which soever part you should choose, you would run into most
grievous absurdities and inconveniences. What are your thoughts of Invocation
of Angels and Saints departed this life?


Laud. Perhaps there is no such great impiety in saying St. Laurence pray for
me. Gagg. p. 200. It Is most probable there are Angel keepers, if thus my self
resolved, do infer, Holy Angel-keeper pray for me, I see no reason to be taxed
with point of Popery or Superstition, much less of absurdity or impiety.
Invocation of Saints, p. 99. in principio. Save all other labor in this point;
prove but only this, their knowledge of any thing ordinarily, I promise you
straight, I will say, Holy St. Mary pray for me. Answ. to Gagg. p. 229.


Pacif. Here are sundry things, wherein you seem to me to depart from our
Church and from Scripture which is worse; for to pray, St. Laurence pray for
me, in such a sense as the Papists do, must needs be great impiety, no less
than Idolatry, because they do ascribe that unto the creature which is only
proper unto the Creator. I judge it also absurd and impious to pray to the
Angel Guardian to pray for us, for it is not possible that any one without a
Revelation from Heaven, should attain to any certainty that there are any Angel
Gardians, and to go upon opinion and probability in my prayers is impiety; but
I do not in the least think, that if it were proved that the Saints departed
had knowledge ordinarily of what we do and are, that therefore we might
presently pray to them to pray for us: If you ask me, why not as well as to the
Saints on the earth? the Homily will answer for me. Part. 2. p. 116. Christ our
only Mediator is sufficient in Heaven, and needs no others to help him: Why
then do we pray one for another in this life, some men may perhaps here demand?
Forsooth we are willed so to do, by the express Commandment both of Christ and
his Disciples, to declare as well the Faith that we have in Christ toward God;
as also the mutual charity that we bear one toward another, in that we pity
our brothers case, and make our Petition to God for him. But that we should
pray unto Saints, neither have we any Commandment in Scipture, nor yet example
which we may safely follow; so that being done without authority of Gods Word,
it lacks the ground of Faith, and theresore cannot be acceptable to God; For
what soever is not of faith is sin: And the Apostle says, That faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: Yet thou will object further, That the
Saints in Heaven pray for us, and that their prayer proceeds of an earnest
charity that they have toward their Brethren on earth. Whereto it may well be
answered; First, that no man knows whether they do pray for us or no. And if
any man will go about to prove it by the nature of charity, concluding, that
because they did pray for men on earth, therefore they do much more now in
heaven: then may it be said by the same reason, that as often as we do weep on
earth, they do also weep in Heaven, because while they lived in this world, it
is most certain and sure they did so. And whereas some of late have much
endeavored to re-introduce into our Church the antiquated custom of praying
for the dead. I shall only say at present, there is nothing in any of our
Articles, Homilies, Lyturgies, enjoining, or so much as approving or commending
Prayer for the dead, there is rather something that makes against any such kind
of prayer. Part. 2. of Homil. p. 116. The like I say about Canonical hours of
Prayer, no mention made of them by our Church, therefore no obligation upon us
to observe, and yet 1637. there was a Sermon printed with License by one Mr
Wats, who would needs persuade us, That King David observed all Canonical
hours, for these are his words upon that speech of the Royal Psalmist, Psalm.
119. 62. At midnight will I arise to give thanks unto thee. Mark here, that he
praised not God lying, but used to rise to do it: at other hours the Saints may
sing aloud on their beds -- but when a Canonical hours comes (of which
midnight was one) David will rise to his Devotion -- the morning watch was
another Canonical hour; And this David was so careful to observe, that he
oft-times waked before it, Psalm. 149. 5. Were this true, I should think it were
a fault not to appoint some one to awake me at midnight, that I might rise up
out of my bed to put up some prayers unto my Creator, but till there be some
proofs of such Canonical hours, I shall bless God for undisturbed rest and
sleep.


Laud. It seems by Clement (Epis. ad Corin. p. 52, 53. edit. Junia.) that no
small part of that (...), or good order required by St. Paul, (whose mind he
might best know as one of his Disciples) 1 Cor. 14. 40. does consist in the due
observing of those times and hours limited and prescribed by authority for our
prayers and devotions. The use of Daily Public Prayers, printed 1641. p. 5.


Pacif. How much the scope of this place is mistaken might easily be shown, but
I refer any learned man to the Observations of Mr. William Burton upon that
Epistle, p 77, 78. I think the main that Christians are now to look after is,
that when they pray, they pray for things agreeable to Gods Word, and with
fervency.


Laud. There is but one thing in the world that God hates besides sin, that is,
indifferency and lukewarmness; which although it has not in it the direct
nature of sin, yet it has this testimony from God; that it is loathsome and
abominable, and excepting this thing alone, God never said so of any thing in
the New Testament, but what was a direct breach of a Commandment. Dr. Tail.
Ret. of Prayer. p 61.


Pacif. I am glad to hear you say, that luke-warmness and indifferency in
Religion are loathsome to God; but wonder to find you averring, that these have
not in them the direct nature of sin, or that they are not a direct breach of a
Commandment, for does not the Commandment require that we serve God with all
our might, strength and power? Are we not commanded to be fervent in spirit
serving the Lord? nor do I think that God would hate these tempers, if they
were not directly sinful and direct breaches of his Law.


Laud. Christians, consider that God forbad to the Jews the very having and
making images and representments, not only of the true God, or of the false and
imaginary Deities, but of visible Creatures; which because it was but of
temporary reason and relative consideration of their aptness to superstition,
and their conversing with Idolatrous Nations, was a command proper to that
Nation, part of their Covenant, not of eternal indispensable reason, not of
that which we usually call the Law of Nature. Grand. exem. part. 2. p. 111.


Pacif. I do not think that God ever forbad to the Jews all images or
representments of Creatures, but as Vasquez says, Omnem imaginem seu effigiem
modo accommodato adorationi erectam aut constitutam; modus autem aecomodatus
adorationi est, cum imago depicta aut sculpta est per se, non veluti appendix,
and additamentum alterius rei, in ornatum illius rei Beware lest thou make to
thy self i. e. to any religious use, any graven image. Homily. Peril of Idol.
p. 42.


Laud. The examples of the Seraphims and Brazen Serpent tell us, that to make
pictures or statues of creatures is not against a natural reason, and that they
may have uses, which are profitable, as well as be abused to danger and
superstition. Now although the nature of that people was apt to the abuse, yet
Christianity has so far removed that danger, that our blessed Lawgiver
thought it not necessary to remove us from superstition by a prohibition of the
use of images and pictures; and for the matter of images we have no other rule
left us in the New Testament; the rules of reason and nature, and the other
parts of the Institution are abundantly sufficient for our security. And
possibly St. Paul might relate to this, when he affirmed concerning the fifth,
that it was the first Commandment with a promise; for the second Commandment
had a promise of showing mercy to thousand generations; but because the body of
this Commandment was not transcribed into the Christian Law, the first of the
Decalogue which we retain, and in which a promise is inserted is the fifth
Commandment. G. E. part. 2. p. 111, 112.


Pacif. Do you then think that the second Commandment is not retained by us
Christians? I never thought but that it was, if not natural, yet moral, of
universal and perpetual obligation, of this judgment were the Ancients, Irene.
lib. 4. cap. 31. August. lib. 19. contra Faus. cap. 18 and Epis 119. cap. 12
Not to speak of Clem Alex. who in his Adhortatory Oration to the Gentiles,
plainly says, that the Commandment obliges us as well as the Jews, though he
seem to be mistaken in giving the sense of it; this way also go all
Protestants, though indeed the Papists do make this law but temporary. In a
word, God allowed the Jews a civil use of Images, and other he allows not to
us under the Gospel who are not so much out of danger of Idolatry and
superstition as you seem to imply.


Laud. Images have three uses assigned by the Popish Schools, instruction of
the rude, commonefaction of History and stirring up of devotion: they and we
also give unto them. Gagg. p. 300. The pictures of Christ, the blessed Virgins
and Saints may be made, had in houses, set up in Churches, respect and honor
may be given to them; the Protestants do it and use them for helps of Piety in
rememoration and more effectual representing of the Prototipe. Ans. to Gagg. p.
818.


Pacif. The Church of England teaches her children quite another lesson. Hom.
against the peril of Idol. Part 3. p. 42. It is unlawful that the Image of
Christ should be made, or that the Image of any Saint should be made,
especially to be set up in Temples, to the great and unavoidable danger of
Idolatry; we grant Images used for no Religion or Superstition, rather (we mean
Images of none worshipped or in danger to be worshipped) may be suffered: but
Images placed publicly in Temples cannot possibly be without danger of
Idolatry; many such passages may be picked out of that Homily which are the
more considerable, because of all our Homilies it seems to be penned with
most exactness.


Laud. It is the Consecration that makes Churches holy, and makes God esteem
them so, which though they be not capable of grace, yet by their consecration
they receive a spiritual power, whereby they are made fit for Divine Service,
and being consecrated there is no danger in ascribing holiness unto them.
Tedder his Visit. Sermon, licensed by Dr. Baker. an. 1637.


Pacif. That Churches do by Consecration receive any spiritual power, whereby
they are made more fit for Divine Service than other places, or that the same
company meeting in a private house, and praying by the same Spirit, should not
be as acceptable to God as in the Church is Superstition to affirm; nor did the
Church of England ever teach any such Doctrine, yet I easily grant that in
peaceable times and under Christian Princes the people of God ought to have
their (...), and that it is a broach of civil decency to employ these places
set a part for Gods Worship to any common uses ordinarily.


Laud. We use signing with the sign of the Cross both in the forehead and
elsewhere, witness that solemn Form in our Baptism, for which we are so
quarrelled by our factions: the flesh is signed that the soul may be fortified,
says! Tertullian, and so do we. Ans. to Gagg. p. 320.


Pacif. If any one besides the Minister uses signing with the Cross, or if he
use it at any time but in Baptism, or on any place but on the forehead, it is
done without any warrant at all from the Church of England, and our Church
retained the sign of the Cross in Baptism only as an outward Ceremony and
honorable Badge; but it does not ascribe any efficacy unto it of fortifying the
soul, and declares the child to be perfectly baptized before it be signed with
the sign of the Cross, as plainly appears from the Book of Canons agreed upon
1603. Chapter. Of the lawful use of the Cross.


Laud. Baptism of Infants is most certainly a holy and charitable Ordinance and
of ordinary necessity to all that ever dyed, and yet the Church has founded
this Rite on the Tradition of the Apostles; and wise men do easily observe that
the Anabaptists can by the same probability of Scripture enforce a necessity of
communicating Infants upon us as we do of Baptizing Infants upon them, if we
speak of an immediate Divine Institution, or of practice Apostolical recorded
in Scripture; and therefore a great Master of Geneva in a Book he writ against
Anabaptists was faign to fly to Apostolical Traditive Ordination, and therefore
the Institution of Bishops must be served first, as having fairer plea and
clearer evidence in Scripture then the baptizing of Infants, and yet they that
deny this are by the just Anathema of the Church Catholic condemned for
Heretics. Dr. Tail. Episc. Asser. p. 100, 101.


Pacif. It Is gratis dictum that the Institution of Bishops has fairer plea and
clearer evidence in Scripture then the baptizing of Infants, nor can you prove
that they who deny the Baptism of Infants are under the just Anathema of the
Church Catholic, much less that they who deny the Institution of Bishops
superior in order to Presbyters are under the just Anathema of the Church
Catholic: Has a whole Book been written to prove that none are to be
anathematized who consent to the Articles of the Apostles Creed? and must it
now be worthy an Anathema to deny Infant Baptism? who but a Papist ever said,
that the Church founded the Rite of baptizing Infants upon the Tradition of the
Apostles? or what wise men that ever sided with the Reformation, ever observed
that the Anabaptists can by the same probability of Scripture enforce a
necessity of communicating Infants upon us, as we do of baptizing Infants upon
them? Cardinal Perron indeed being about to prove the insufficiency of the
written Word, and to establish the necessity of unwritten Traditions, brings
among other things Infant Baptism, as an instance of a point that may be proved
by Tradition and not by Scripture. Adv. Reg. Mag. Brit. p. 571. but Bellar.
lib. 1. de Sacram. Bapt. cap. 9. disputes for Paedobaptism, and that by such
arguments as are taken out of Scripture, which he says Nulla ratione solvi,
nulla art eludi possunt.


Laud. To the Baptism of children I add the Communion of women. Id. ibid.


Pacif. Do you then think that the Communion of women cannot be proved out of
Scripture as well as out of Tradition? I believe there is no express instance
of a woman receiving the Sacrament; but we have reasons grounded on Scripture
that make it the duty of women as well as men, and it would be perverseness
seeing (...) signifies a woman as well as a man, to affirm that both sexes are
not included: But let us to the Controversy of Episcopacy; Are all Ordinations
invalid which are done by mere Presbyters without a Bishop? what think you of
the Reformed Churches?


Laud. For my part I know not what to think; the question has been so often
asked with so much violence and prejudice; and we are so bound by public
interest to approve all they do, that we have disabled our selves to justify
our own. Episcop. asser. p. 190. Supposing that Ordination by a Bishop is
necessary for the Vocation of Priests and Deacons, and therefore for the
founding and perpetuating of a Church, either God has given to all Churches
opportunity and possibility of such Ordinations, and then necessity of the
contrary is but mockery; or if he has not given such possibility, then there
is no Church there to be either built or continued, but the Candlestick is
presently removed. Id. p. 193.


Pacif. Our Church did always retain Episcopacy, and so she might have done
still had not Bishops been more faulty then ever Episcopacy was: But that
Ordinations by mere Presbyters were not valid, was never affirmed by our Church
or any of her eminent members, but rather the contrary; which will appear, if
we consider that the transmarine Churches have always been acknowledged as true
Chnrches, and their Ordinations justified and maintained to be valid against
the oppugners of them by our English Controversy Writers and Professors, Dr.
Holland, Dr. Willet, Dr. Field, Dr. Downham, Mr. Mason. If at any time any
ordained by mere Presbyters were made Bishops in our Church, their Ordination
by Presbyters was supposed to be valid and was not renewed, at least not till
of late years; but what think you of Bishops being made Lords and taking
secular employment?


Laud. It was not in natura rei unlawful for Bishops to receive an Office of
secular employment. St. Paul's tent making was as much against the calling of an
Apostle, as sitting in a secular Tribunal is against the Office of a Bishop.
Episc. Asserted. p. 352. The same Author in sundry following pages much
endeavors to prove that Bishops may take upon them the affairs of Secular
Interest.


Pacif. Bishops taking upon them secular affairs, has been always exclaimed
against by our Divines as well Prelates as others, that have been sensible of
the charge of souls committed to them; this it will not be amiss to exemplify
in several ages, John Wickliffe in the reign of Edw. 3. taught That Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops might not Civiliter Dominari absque mortali peceato; and
that no Prelate ought to have any Prison to punish offenders, and that no King
should impose upon any Bishop or Curate any secular matter, for then both the
King and Clerk should be Proditor Jesu Christi. Walls. in R. 2. p. 205. William
Swinderby also a Professor in Rich. 2. time, held, That the more Lordship a
Priest has, the nearer he is to Antichrist, and that the Priests of the old
Law were forbidden Lordship, and that Christ himself refused and forbad his
Priests Lordship, saying, Reges Gentium, etc. the Kings of the Heathen bear
rule, etc. but you shall not so do. Acts and Mon. p. 451, 453. Tindall in his
works, p. 124. writes, That it was a shame of all shames and a monstrous thing,
that Bishops should deal in civil causes: and p. 140. What names have they? My
Lord Bb. my Lord Archbishop, if it please your Lordship, if it please your
Grace. Bishop Hooper in his Comment on the Commandments has these words, p.
184, 185. Edit. 1548. look upon the Apostles chiefly, and upon all their
Successors for the space of 400. years, and then thou shall see good Bishops,
and such as diligently applied that painful office ofa Bishop to the glory of
God and honor of the Realms they dwelt in; though they had not so much upon
their heads as our Bishops have, yet had they more within their heads, as the
Scriptures and Histories testify, for they applied all the wit they had unto
the Vocation and Ministry of the Church whereunto they were called; our Bishops
have so much wit, they can rule and serve as they say in both States, of the
Church and also in the civil Policy, when one of them is more then any man is
able to satisfy, let him do always his best diligence: If he be so necessary
for the Court, that in Civil Causes and giving of good counsel he cannot be
spared, let him use that Vocation and leave the other, for it is not possible
he should do both well. And a great oversight it is of the Princes and higher
Powers of the earth thus to charge them with two burdens, when none of them is
able to bear the least of them both; they be the Kings Subjects, and meet for
his Majesty to choose the best for his Court that be of the Realm, but then
they must be kept in their Vocation to preach only the Word of God, and not to
put themselves, or be appointed by others to do things that belong not to a
Bishops Vocation. I will not now relate the speeches of old holy Father
Latimer, to the same purpose though far exceeding any that have been yet
mentioned, because they are many and may be easily seen in his Sermon of the
Plough. But now that we are on the business of Church Government: What think
you of the persons commonly called Lay Elders?


Laud. Lay Judges of Causes Ecclesiastical as they are unheard of in Antiquity,
so they are neither named in Scripture, nor receive from thence any
instructions for their deportment in their imaginary office, and therefore may
be remanded to the place from whence they came, even the lake of Gehenna, and
so to the place of the nearest Denomination. Epis. Asser. p. 379.


Pacif. Your wit lying in the affinity of sound betwixt Geenna and Geneva, is
much like that of Campian Elizabeth and Jezabel. But as for Lay Elders I am not
much solicitous about them, thinking the Church may be well enough without
them, only I cannot think they are so destitute of all Antiquity and Scripture
as you imagine; that of 1 Timothy 5. 17. has more for Lay Elders than many places
in Scripture urged by our Bishops have for Episcopacy. Dr. Whitgist is said to
have these words, That he knows that the Primitive Church had in every Church
certain Seniors, to whom the Government of the Congregation was committed; and
in a Book against Mar-Prelate, subscribed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of Winchester, Lincoln and London, it is affirmed That the Government by
Elders was used under the Law, and practiced under the Gospel by the Apostles,
though not fit for our times. Though afterward repenting this plain
Confession, they caused certain words importing the contrary to be printed in a
sheet of Paper, which paper was pasted in all the books of the first
impression, to cover and conceal the former assertion. This I take on the
Testimony of an Author, who so printed in Queen Elizabeth's time in a Tract
called A Petition directed to her most Excellent Majesty; but Mr. Nowel is
plain in his Catechism in Latin, p. 155. Edit. 1570. Grotius also
acknowledges that Geneva did not first institute these Officers, but only
restored them; nor may it be amiss for the learned Reader to consult about this
point of Elders. Bodins Method. cap. 6. p. 245. Lets on to the third
Commandment.


Land. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. This our
blessed Savior repeating, expresses it thus, It has been said to them of
old, Thou shall not forswear thy self, to which Christ adds out of Numb. 30. 2.
But thou shall perform thy Oaths unto the Lord; the meaning of the onewe are
taught by the other: We must not Invocate the Name of God in any promise in
vain, i. e. with a lie; this is to take the Name of God, i. e. to useit, to
take it into our mouths for vanity, i. e. according to the perpetual style of
Scripture for a lie, and this is to be understood only in promises, for so
Christ explains it out of the Law, Thou shall perform thy Oaths: for lying in
judgment, which is also with an Oath, or taking Gods Name for a witness, is
forbidden in the ninth Commandment. Grand. Exemp part. 2. p. 114.


Pacif. At this rate indeed write Maldonate and the Composer of the Racovian
Catechism; but without any reason, for it is gratis dictum that our Lord does
repeat or give the sense of the third Commandment, Exodus 20. 7. It is more
probable that he intends those words, Levit. 19. 12. As for the words in the
third Commandment, they have always been so interpreted by Protestant
Commentators, as to forbid not only false swearing, but vain swearing, yea all
irreverent use of the Name of God, whether with an Oath or without an Oath: So
the Catechism in King Edward the 6ths reign, so Bishop Hooper in his Exposition
of the Decalogae, so the Common Church Catechism, so the Homily, part. 1. p.
45, 46. No one that has but a smattering skill will deny (...) sometime to
signify mendacium or falsum, but it does also signify gratis in vanum as
often, if not more often. The LXX Exodus 20. 7. render (...), Aquila (...). Yet
I can more easily excuse this, if you will but acknowledge that vain and
unnecessary Oaths were unlawful to the Jews as well as us.


Laud. By the Natural Law it was not unlawful to swear by an oath that employed
not Idolatry, or the belief of a false God, (I say) any grave or prudent oath
when they spoke a grave truth. And it was lawful for the Jews, in ordinary
intercourse, to swear by God, so they did not swear to a lie, (to which also
swearing to an impertinence might be reduced by a proportion of reason) for
they that swear by him shall be commended, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 63. 11.
And swearing to the Lord of hosts is called speaking the Language of Canaan,
Isa. 19. 18. Great Exem. part. 2. p. 114.


Pacif. This is Theology that a sober Heathen would startle at. How do you
prove that by the Natural Law it was not unlawful to swear an Oath when they
spoke a grave truth? Does any Scripture say so? Do the more sage sort of
profane Writers say so? or do not all rather say, who have not blinded Natural
Conscience, That it is not lawful to swear in the gravest matter, if a man may
be credited without an oath, or if his oath be not like to be an end of strife?
Or what man who knows that God was always tender of his Name and Glory, canthink
that it was lawful for the Jews to swear by God in ordinary intercourse? They
did ordinarily swear, but it was not lawful so to do. The son of Sirach
reproves it, Heathens condemn it: it is indeed said, They that swear by him
shall glory, Psalm. 63. 11. but it is not said, They that swear by him in
ordinary intercourse shall glory, if they should, they would glory in their
shame. As for the place, Isa. 19. 18. it proves not that swearing to the Lord
in ordinary intercourse is speaking the Language of Canaan, but it is a
Prophecy only of the calling of Egypt, that sundry of that Nation should make
the same Profession and Confession of Faith that Gods people did, and that they
should by solemn Oath engage themselves to depend on the living Lord alone. How
does this prove that it was lawful for the Jews to swear by God in ordinary
intercourse, or that their ordinary communication ought not to be yea, yea, and
nay, nay, as well as ours? Pass we on to the fourth Law of the Decalogue.


Laud. There was nothing Moral in it, but that we do Honor to God for the
Creation, and to that and all other purposes of Religion, separate and hallow
some portion of our time. Great Exem. part. 2. p. 119.


Pacif. Surely this is the way to rob us of one of the laws of the Decalogue;
for either the fourth Commandment is moral for a determinate time, or for
nothing at all, some time being moral by the other Commandments, and it would
be strange that the Church of England should appoint this fourth Commandment to
be publicly read, and teach her members to pray Lord have mercy upon us and
incline our hearts to keep this Law, and yet think it had only that latent
morality you speak of; if the fourth Commandment be not in force in the words
of it, according Vide C. and P. Part. 1.
to their literal and Grammatical sense, it is not in force at all, for both
Lawyers say, and reason it self shows that a law is no longer in force then the
words of it are in force, at least those that contain the substance of it.


Laud. The Primitive Church kept both the Sabbath and the Lords day till the
time of the Laodicaean Council, about 300 years after Christ's Nativity, and
almost in every thing made them equal, and therefore did not esteem the Lords
day to be substituted in the place of the obliterated Sabbath, but a Feast
celebrated by great reason and perpetual consent without Precept or necessary
Divine injunction. Gr. Ex. part. 2. p. 119.


Pacif. There are in the few words by you uttered certain things that you must
pardon me if I cannot presently close with. 1. You say that the Primitive
Church till the Laodicaean Council kept both the Sabbath and the Lords Day.
Quanta est haec propositio? Do you mean that the whole Primitive Church did so?
that will be hard, if not impossible to prove, for the Books that are come to
our hands have neither declared nor do they pretend to declare what all the
Churches of Christ did; nay it appears from Socrates, that the Roman and
Alexandrian Church kept not the Saturday at all, as I think is acknowledged by
Dr. Heylin himself, Part. 2. But dato sed non concesso that there had been such
an universal custom of observing both days, how does it hence follow, that the
Lords Day was not substituted in the place of the obliterated Sabbath? Would
you argue that Baptism came not in the place of Circumcision, because to gain
over the weak Jews they used Circumcision for some season? They might use the
Saturday as a meeting day, that by complying with the Jews and Proselytes they
might obtain familiar access, and gain opportunity to instruct them in the
Christian Faith, by reason that the people had been accustomed to meet together
on that day.


Laud. Ignatius would have both days observed; the Sabbath first, though not
as would the Ebionites, in a Jewish sort: and after that the Lords Day, which
he so much magnifieth, the better to abate that high esteem which some had cast
on the Sabbath. Hist. of Sab. Part. 2. p. 41.


Pacif. I know the place you intend, though you refer us not to any Epistle:
but you are not ignorant that Ignatius his Epistles are much corrupted, and
have been so accounted by all great Scholars, who have impartially spent their
judgment upon them; this place particularly which you quote out of this
Epistle to the Magnesi. is depraved; and if you will take the pains to consult
either the old Latin Manuscript of Ignatius published by the Right Reverend
Archbishop Usher, or the Greek Edition published by Isaac Vossius, (which
undoubtedly are the truest that ever were printed) you will find no such thing
can be drawn out of Ignatius as is by you inferred; yea rather it will appear,
that Ignatius is against the keeping of the Saturday Sabbath at all.


Laud. It Is true, that in some tract of time the Church in honor of Christ's
Resurrection, did set a part that day on which he arose, to holy exercises: But
this upon their own authority and without warrant from above, that we can hear
of, more then the General warrant which God gave his Church, that all things in
it be done decently and in comely order. Hist. Sab. Part. 2. p. 7.


Pacif. Our Homily says it plainly appears, that Gods Will and Commandment is
to have a solemn time and standing day in the week, wherein the people should
come together, and have in rememberance his wonderful benefits. Part. 2. p.
125. And that the Apostolical Church would not change the day from the seventh
to the first without authority and Commission from Christ so to do, is certain
enough: It Is to me sufficient, that the Lords Day is of Divine Institution,
whether immediate by Christ, or mediate by his Apostles; and that it is of
Divine Institution one of these ways, is, I take it, easily proved by
Antiquity and Reason: The Homily entitled De Semente, has these plain words,
(...). This testimony is made use of by Archbishop Usher, for the purpose to
which I bring it.


Laud. Neither the Author whom he cites, nor the authority by him cited will
evince the point: 1. The Author will not do it, the Homily being supposed by
the Learned not to have been writ by Athanasius, but put into his Works by some
that had a mind to entitle him to it. 2. The authority or words cited will not
do it, though at first fight they seem to come home to make proof of it; for
the words (...) are to be understood, not as if the Translation of the day were
made by his commandment, but on his occasion; the Resurrection of our Lord upon
that day being the principal motive, which did induce his Church to make choice
thereof for a day of Worship. Res. Pet.


Pacif. Do you make this gloss upon the words in jest or earnest? Do you really
think that the meaning of of (...) is this, that the Church did translate the
day with relation to Christ's Resurrection?


Laud. Yes, for otherwise the false Athanasius, whosoever he was, must cress
and contradict the true, who having told us that it was commanded at the first,
that the Sabbath should be observed ((...)) in memory of the accomplishmrnt of
the Worlds Creation; ascribes the Institution of the Lords Day to the voluntary
usage of the Church of God, without any Commandment from our Savior, (...)
etc. We celebrate, says he, the Lords Day as a memorial of the beginning of
the new Creation, which is plain enough. Resp. Pet. p. 7.


Pacif. The words you refer to, I acknowledge to be found in Athanasius de
Circum. and Sabbatho, and confess them to be plain enough, but neither plain
enough nor plain at all for the evincing of that for which you produce them;
for how does it follow, that if Athanasius say (...), that he must mean, we
celebrate the Lords Day by the voluntary usage of the Church, without any
Commandment from our Savior? may we not (...), though there be a Divine
Institution of the day? But for satisfaction in these points Irefer any
indifferent person to what is said by Mr. P. and Caw. in Sabbat. Rediv. fourth
Part.


Laud. What shall we think of Knox and whittingham, and their fellows, who in
their Letter to Calvin depart from the Constitution, Ordinance and Practice of
the Apostles and Apostolic men, and call not this day the Lords Day or Sunday,
but with the Piety of Jeroboam, make such a day of it as they have devised in
own their hearts to serve their own turn, and Anabaptizing of it after the mind
of some Jew, hired to be their Godfather, call it the Sabbath: This name
Sabbath is not a bare name, or like a spot in their foreheads, to know Labans
sheep from Jacobs, but indeed it is a mystery of iniquity intended against the
Church: Others also for the plots sake must uphold the name of Sabbath, that
stalking behind it, they may shoot against the Services appointed for the Lords
Day. Hence it is that some for want of wit, too much adore the Sabbath as an
Image dropped down from Jupiter, and cry before it as they did before the Golden
Calf, This is an holy day to the Lord, whereas indeed it is the Great Diana of
the Ephesians as they use it; whereby the minds of their Proselytes are so
perplexed and bewitched, that they cannot resolve whether the sin be greater to
bowl, shoot or dance on their Sabbath, then to commit murder, etc. All which
doubts would soon be dissolved by plucking off the Vizzard of the Sabbath from
the face of the Lords Day, which does as well and truly become it, as the Crown
of Thorns did the Lord himself. This was plotted to expose him to damnable
derision, and that was plotted to impose on it detestable Superstition, yet
they will call it a Sabbath, presuming in their zealous ignorance, guiltful
zeal, to be thought to speak the Scripture phrase, when indeed the dregs of
Asded flow from their mouth. With us the Sabbath is Saturday and no day else.
No ancient Father, nay no learned man, Heathen or Christian took it otherwise
from the beginning of the world to the beginning of their Schism in 1554. Dr.
Pocklington Sunday no Sabbath. p. 7. 13, 21, 22. compared.


Pacif. Here Is bitterness enough, and though it be expressly directed against
none but Puritans, yet must it needs redound on the Church of England, who in
her Homilies gives the Lords Day the name of Sabbath as also sundry of her most
eminent sons have done: But whereas you say so confidently, thatno learned man
till 1554 ever called any other day but Saturday by the name of Sabbath; you
must give me leave to question whether your reading be so great, that you have
perused all learned men since the beginning of the world till 1554. For I can
in my little reading produce a considerable Author, who lived in the 4th
Century, and another who lived in the beginning of the 12th Century, who both
call the Lords Day a Sabbath, and how many others have done so, neither you nor
I, without more search then such a thing is worth, shall be able to say: but it
is to little purpose to contend about a name or word, provided we be agreed in
the thing, and this I am sure of, that our Church in the Homily for the time
and place of worship commends and enjoins the Lords Day to be kept as a Sabbath
with rest from all weekday and worldly labors, and to be spent wholly in the
service of God, and of this I think none can doubt who comes to the reading of
that Homily unprejudiced.


Laud. In that Homily it is thus Doctrinally resolved: Albeit this Commandment
of God does not bind Christian people so straightly to observe and keep the
other Ceremonies of the Sabbath day, as it was given unto the Jews, as touching
the forbearing of work or labor in time of great necessity, and as touching
the precise keeping of the seventh day after the manner of the Jews, yet
notwithstanding whatsoever is found in the Commandment appertaining to the Law
of Nature, as a thing most godly, most just and needful to the setting forth of
Gods glory, it ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. Dr.
Heyl. Res. Pet.


Pacif. These words do indeed occur in that Homily, but mark the words that
follow; therefore by this Commandment we ought to have a time as one day in the
week wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works: Does not
the Church here resolve that by virtue of the fourth Commandment Christians
ought to observe one day in seven, and that with cessation from lawful and
needful works? and this is, if not the all, yet the most that Puritans contend
for.


Laud. It is here said that there is no more of the fourth Commandment to be
retained and kept of good Christian people then whatsoever is found in it
appertaining to the Law of Nature; but there is nothing in the fourth
Commandment, but that sometime be set apart for Gods public Service; the
Precept so far forth, as it enjoins one day in seven or the seventh day
precisely from the Worlds Creation, being avowed for ceremonial by all kind of
Writers. Dr. Heyl. 245. Hist. Sabba. p. 2. p. 245.


Pacif. It is not said, that there is no more to be retained and kept of good
Christians, but what is required of the Law of Nature; this only is said, that
whatever is of the Law of Nature that is to be retained, etc. Now Logic tells
us that these Propositions are heavenly wide, and the Homily sufficiently
implies that the Precept so far as it enjoyneth one day in seven was not an
utter Ceremony; for it says that we by virtue of that Precept are bound to
have a time as one day in seven.


Laud. It Is not said that we should spend the day wholly in heavenly exercises;
for then there were no time allowed us to eat and drink, which are mere natural
employments: but that we give our selves wholly, that is, our whole selves body
and soul, to the performance of those heavenly exercises which are required of
us in the way of true Religion and Gods Public Service. Sab. Hist. Part. 2. p.
247.


Pacif. What a strange gloss is this? you say it was Ceremonial that one day of
seven be spent wholly. Why do you not also argue, that there was not any such
Law given to the Jews, because then there would no time have been allowed for
eating and drinking? Works of natural necessity do consist and always did
consist with the Sanctification of the Day of Rest; and whereas you say the
Homily does only require that for the time appointed to Gods Public Worship,
we wholly sequester our selves from all worldly business, I believe you do not
think that is all the meaning of the Homily, for are not the words plain, Gods
obedient people should use the Sunday holily and rest from their common and
daily business, and also give themselves, etc. The Sunday not a part of it
should be used holily and with rest from common daily business: But what do I
trouble my self about this, had the Homily said just the whole day, you would
also have found out some evasion as you do, for St. Chrysostomes (...), and his
(...). Part. 2. p. 80. We will proceed to the Commandments of the 2d Table, the
sum of which is comprised in those words, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self.


Laud. It is evident by infinite Texts of the Law, that a man's neighbor in
this Precept extends no further then to Israelites, whether by birth or
Religion, that is to say, those that are engraffed into the Covenant by being
circumcised: E. G. let me ask, How the Law could forbid the Israelites to seek
the good of the Moabites and Ammonites, and yet to love all men under the
quality of neighbors, as themselves; let me demand of any man, how Mordecai
was tied, not to do that honor to Haman that his Sovereign commanded to be
done? How could he in conscience disobey his Prince in a matter of
indifference, had it not been prohibited by the Law of God? H. T. Principles of
Christian Truth. p. 86.


Pacif. So far is it from being evident by infinite Texts of Scripture, that by
a man's neighbor is meant only an Israelite, that I never yet could meet with
one Scripture to that purpose, nor I believe ever shall. To love all men as our
selves is as natural a Law, as for a Father to seek the life and welfare of his
children, or for a man not to steal the goods of another; these are all natural
laws necessary and indispensable; if God command Abraham to Sacrifice his
child, the Israelites to take away the goods of the Egyptians, the same
Israelites to take away the lives of the Ammonites, etc. God in such cases does
not dispense with his Law, but only there is, as the Schools call it, immutat o
materiae, which immutation is made by God, say they, not as a Legislator, but
as Dominus; it is not doubted, but that we Christians are bound to love others
of whatsoever Nation as our selves, yet it may fall out and sometime does so
fall out, that we are under command not to seek the good or preserve the life
of some who have by rebellion forfeited their lives and fortunes. The Jews had
a particular command to root out the Canaanites, (at least if they did not
submit themselves) had they not had that particular command, they had been as
much bound to seek their good as I am bound to seek the welfare of any one of a
different Religion from the people of God.


Laud. When our Savior says, Be not angry without cause, he forbids not
the first motions, the twincklings of the eye as the Philosopher calls them;
the propassions and sudden irresistible alterations; for it is impossible to
prevent them, unless we could give our selves a new nature, any more then we
can refuse to wink with our eye, when a sudden blow is offered at it, or refuse
to yawn when I see a sleepy yawning person; but by frequent and habitual
mortification, by continual watchfulness and standing in readiness against all
inadvertencies, we shall lessen the inclinations, and account fewer sudden
irreptions. Dr. J. T. Part. 2. G. E. p. 122.


Pacif. You are not sure ignorant, that the Protestants do generally hold
against Papists, that the motus primo-primi to any thing that is evil are
forbidden; the Law forbids not only that which is possible for us to avoid, but
also that which it ever was in our power to avoid; and sure if frequent and
habitual mortification will lessen the inclination, before the fall we had no
inclination, and if those inclinations and first stirrings are not forbidden,
it is to no purpose that a man should take any pains to mortify them; if those
propassions be not forbidden, how is a man more holy when he accounts fewer
sudden irreptions than when more? what is not forbidden defiles not.


Laud. The holy Jesus forbids to Christians all revenge of injuries, which was
a perfection and endeerment of duty beyond what either most of the old
Philosophers, or the laws of the Nation or of Moses ever practiced or enjoined;
for revenge was esteemed, to unhallowed, unsanctified nature as sweet as life,
a satisfaction of injuries, and the only cure of maladies and affronts. Only,
laws of the wisest Commonwealths, commanded that revenge should be taken by
the Judge, a few cases being excepted. But Christ commanded his Disciples
rather then to take revenge, to expose themselves to a second injury, rather to
offer the other cheek then to be avenged for a blow on this; for vengeance
belongs to God. Gr. Ex. P. 2. p. 30.


Pacif. If you speak of private revenge, that is forbidden by the law of
Nations, and by Moses his law, and condemned by many of the old Philosophers;
for though Tully say. justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui noceas, nisi
lacessitus injuria, which made Lactantius write of him, that simplicem,
veramque sententiam duorum verborum adjectione corrupit; yet with Seneca,
immane verbum est ultio, and qui ulsciscitur excusatius peccat. So Moses,
Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall not avenge or bear any grudge against the Children of
thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And Solomon, Prove.
24. 29. Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me: I will render to the
man according to his works: If you speak of public revenge, prove that more
unlawful under the Gospel then under the Law. Prove that Christ when he says,
If any man strike thee on the one cheek, gives rule to Magistrates and not to
private Christians, or that vengeance did not belong to the Lord under the Old
as well as under the New Testament. But what think you, Is it lawful to kill
rather than to be killed?


Laud. Although we find this nowhere forbidden, yet it is very consonant to the
excellent mercy of the Gospel and greatly laudable, if we choose rather to
loose our life in imitation of Chist, then save it by the loss of another in
pursuance of the permissions of nature: When Nature only gives leave and no
Lawgiver gives command to defend our lives, and the excellency of Christianity
highly commends dying for our enemies, and propounds to our imitation the
greatest example that ever could be in the world, it is a very great
imperfection, if we choose not rather to obey an insinuation of the holy Jesus
then with greediness and appetite pursue the bare permission of nature Great.
Ex. part. 2. p. 131.


Pacif. I grant it would be not only a great imperfection, but a very great
sin, with greediness and appetite to pursue the permission of nature; he that
kills another, though unavoidably put upon it for his own necessary defense,
must do it with a bleeding heart, so must also the Judge upon the Bench justis
suppliciis illachrymare, and ingemiscere, but that when I am assaulted, no law
should command me to defend my life, or that, if I should suffer him who
without any warrant or authority assaults me by the Highway side, to take away
my life, rather then take his, I should in such a case loose my life in
imitation of Christ, is Divinity unheard of in the Protestant Schools. How can
Christ's laying down his life as a satisfaction to Divine Justice thereby to
make way for man's Redemption, be any secret insinuation to me that I must
rather surfer a boisterous wretch to sheath his Sword in my bowels, then sheath
mine in his, if I have no other probable way to secure my own person then by
dispatching his. Christianity is indeed a law of highest charity, but charity
not only may, but also must begin at home.


Laud. Those words, If a man will sue thee at the law, and take thy cloak, let
him have thy coat also, are a particular instance in pursuit of the general
Precept; resist not or avenge not evil; the Primitive Christians were sometimes
severe in observation of the letter, not subtly distinguishing Counsels from
Precepts, but swallowing all the words of Christ without chewing or
discrimination. They abstained from tribunals unless they were forced thither
by persecutors, but went not thither to repeat their goods. Id. part. 2. p. 135.


Pacif. The reason why the Primitive Christians went not to the Tribunals to
repeat their goods, might be because the Tribunals were then occupied by
Heathen Judges, the appearing before whom might be a snare to them; but
undoubtedly the words of our Savior are a precept, not a counsel; For 1. the
word (...) need not to be understood of a legal impleading a Brother in a Court
of Judicature, both Beza and Grotius (which is strange) agree, that it may mean
any contentious striving, or quarrelling, or fighting, which a man must not
allow himself for a greater matter cloak. This Exposition is confirmed by St.
Luke, who uses a word that plainly denotes and implies force and violence.
2. Let the word (...) be taken in the sense that our Translators retain, yet
questionable it is, whether it be not unlawful to go to law for so small and
slight a matter as a coat; (...) was the Vestis interior and minoris pretii,
says Causabon.


Laud. To go to law for revenge we are simply forbidden, i. e. to return evil
for evil, and therefore all those suits which are for vindictive sentences, not
for reparative, are directly criminal: To follow a thief to death for spoiling
my goods, is extremely unreasonable and uncharitable; for as there is no
proportion between my goods and his life so the putting him to death repairs
not my estate; the first makes it in me to be unjust, the later declares me
malicious and revengeful. Id. Ibid.


Pacif. If all suits that are for vindictive sentences are directly criminal,
then is it also directly criminal for the Judge to give such sentences as are
vindictive: And does it become an English Divine, without prefacing an Apology,
or adding any one reason, to call the prosecuting of a thief to death for
spoiling my goods extremely unreasonable and uncharitable, when as it is not
only allowed but also enjoined by our English Law. I perceive you and I hit it
not at all in the Exposition of the Commandments; Pray you let me hear your
mind about Repentance and the three commonly assigned parts of it, Confession,
Contrition, Satisfaction; Justification or Pardon of Sin promised to those who
repent, etc.


Laud. The New Covenant is then consigned to us, when we first come to Christ,
when we first profess our selves his Disciples and his Servants; Disciples of
his Doctrine, and Servants of his Institution: i. e. in Baptism, in which
Christ who dyed sor our sins makes us partakers of his death; and then it is
that God pours forth together with the Sacramental waters, a Salutary and holy
Fountain of Grace to wash the soul from all its stains and impure adherencies.
G.E part. 2. p. 61.


Pacif. Either you would be understood of the Baptism of Infants, or of the
Baptism of persons adult; if of the Baptism of Infants, I desire to know; 1.
How a salutary and holy fountain of grace is poured out to wash them from all
stains and impure adherencies, when as you told us before, that the souls of
such have no impure adherencies? where God has promised that when a child is
baptized he will pour out such a salutary and holy fountain of grace? If he do
at any time give grace at baptism, sure I am baptism can be no either physical
or moral instrument of such a change; if you speak of the baptism of adult
persons, they are supposed before they are baptized to have repented and
believed, and so to have been made partakers of grace before they are baptized.


Laud. This first access to Christ is in the style of Scripture called
Regeneration, the new Birth, Redemption, Renovation, Expiation or Atonement
with God, and Justification; and these words in the New Testament relate
principally and properly to the abolition of sins committed before baptism. Id.
ibid.


Pacif. Throughout all the Scripture I dare boldly say, our first access to
Christ is never called either atonement with God or Justification; nor do these
words relate either more properly or principally to sins committed before
baptism, then to sins committed after baptism: When sins committed after
baptism are pardoned, are we not then justified freely by the grace of God
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation to declare his righteousness, etc.


Laud. After we are once reconciled in Baptism, and put entirely into Gods
favor, when we have once been redeemed, if we then fall away into sin, we must
expect Gods dealing with us in another manner and to other purposes. Never must
we expect to be so again justified, and upon such terms as formerly: The best
days of our repentance are interrupted; not that God will never forgive them
that sin after baptism and recover by repentance, but that restitution by
repentance after baptism is another thing then the first redemption. No such
entire, clear and integral determinate and presential effects of repentance,
but an imperfect, little, growing, uncertain and hazardous reconciliation. A
repentance, that is always in production, a renovation by parts, a pardon that
is revocable, a salvation to be wrought by fear and trembling; all our remanent
life must be in bitterness, our hopes allayed with fears, our meat attempered
with Colloquintida, and death is in the pot; as our best actions are imperfect,
so our greatest graces are but possibilities and aptnesses to reconcilement,
and all our life we are working our selves into that condition we had in
baptism, and lost by our relapse. G. E. part. 2. p. 64, 65.


Pacif. Strange doctrine, for which you can neither produce Scripture, nor yet
the authority of any one Protestant Writer; we are not justified upon other
terms before baptism and after, nor is our reconciliation after baptism more
uncertain or hazardous then before, nor our pardon more revocable. God
promises pardon to adult persons only upon the condition of Faith, Repentance;
where these are, a man is justified, though he have not as yet had an
opportunity of being baptized; where these are not, baptism is but the washing
away of the filth of the flesh. It is not Baptism but Gods Covenant of grace
that gives the first right and title to Justification, Adoption, Salvation, and
that Covenant gives them on the like terms to all; upon our first unfeigned
repentance all past sins are pardoned, upon the renewal of our repentance after
relapses they also are pardoned and the guilt of them presently done away, and
this pardon God did never recall, never will he recall.


Laud. God who knows the weaknesses on our part, and yet the strictness and
necessity of conferring Baptismal Grace, by the Covenant Evangelical has
appointed the auxiliaries of the Holy Spirit to be ministered to all baptized
people in the holy rite of confirmation, that it might be made possible to be
done by Divine aids, which is necessary to be done by the Divine Commandments;
and this might not improperly be said to be the meaning of those words of our
Blessed Savior, He that speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall be
forgiven him, but he that speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, i. e. those sins which were committed in infidelity, before we
become Disciples of the holy Jesus, are to be remitted in Baptism and our first
profession of the Religion: but the sins committed after Baptism and
Confirmation in which we receive the Holy Ghost, and by which we grieve the
Holy Ghost, are to be accounted for, with more severity. Id. part. 2. p. 64.


Pacif. The holy rite of Confirmation has been but too much disused by us in
England, were it but practiced in such a way as learned Chemnitius has
described, it would undoubtedly much tend to the settling and reforming our
Churches; but you speak a little too like the adversary, when you say, that God
has by the Covenant Evangelical appointed auxiliaries of the HolySpirit to be
ministered to all baptized people in the holy rite of Confirmation; as also when
you say, that in Confirmation we receive the Holy Ghost; for if you speak of
adult persons, they are at least supposed to have received the Holy Ghost
before Baptism or Confirmation, yea the very miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost
came upon men before Baptism, as is plain, Acts 10. 44. But as for your
Explication of the place of the Evangelist concerning the sin or word against
the Holy Ghost, that the meaning should be only this, that the sins we commit
after Baptism and Confirmation must be accounted for with more severity then
those committed by us in infidelity, it is both singular and hugely uncouth;
the Articles of the Church as now we have them, mention nothing of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, but in that old Copy I have of them as they were agreed
upon in the days of King Edward, I find that which is now our 16th Article
thus worded and entitled


Of Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is not sin against the
Holy Ghost and unpardonable, where the place for Penitents is not to be denied,
to such as fall into sin after Baptism; after we have received the Holy Ghost,
we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the grace of God we
may rise again and amend our lives; and therefore they are to be condemned, who
say, they can no more sin, as long as they live hear, or deny the place for
penitents to such as truly repent and amend their lives. Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost.

Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is, when a man of malice and stubbornness of
mind does rail upon the Truth of Gods Word, manifestly perceived, and being
enemy thereunto, persecutoth the same, and because such be guilty of Gods curse
they entangle themselves with a most grievous and heinous crime: whereupon this
kind of sin is called and affirmed of the Lord unpardonable.

Laud. That the duty of Repentance if of such extent and burden, that it cannot
be finished and performed by dying persons after a vicious life, is evident;
and therefore if we make dying men's accounts upon the stock of Gods usual
dealing, and open revelation, their case is desperate. Unum. Neces p. 332.


Pacif. If Repentance be such a work as cannot possibly be done on a death bed,
how then can dying persons be called upon to repent? It is in vain to repent,
if it be impossible to hope; but if it be possible to do the work of repentance
on our death bed, but only that it is very difficult, there is in this
affirmative no great matter. Every one confesses that, and all evil men will
put it to the venture.


Laud. Whatsoever is known or revealed, is against these persons and does
certainly condemn them: Why then are they bidden to hope and repent? I answer
once for all, it is upon something that we know not, and if they be saved, we
know not how; they cannot expect to be saved by any thing that is revealed in
their particular. When St. Peter had declared to Simon Magus that he was in the
gall of bitterness, and yet made him pray, if peradventure the thought of his
heart may be forgiven him; he did not by any thing that was revealed know that
he should be pardoned; but by something that he did not know there might be
hope. It is at no hand to be dissembledout of tenderness and pity to such
persons, but to be affirmed openly; there is not revealed any thing to them
that may bid them be in any measure confident. Unnum Neces. p. 333. and 4.


Pacif. This is in my opinion not only uncomfortable doctrine, but also very
unsound; Is it not plainly revealed that nothing is required to pardon and
salvation, but only repentance true and unfeigned? and is not faith and
repenrance such, though wrought but at the last? Our Martyr of blessed memory,
Mr. Bilney. Acts Mon. Vol. 2. p. 271. thus expresses himself; I dare be bold
to say, that as many as I have heard of late to preach, have preached such
repentance, that if I had heard such repentance in times past, I should utterly
have been in despair; and to speak of one of those famous men, after he had
sharply inveighed against vice, he concluded; Behold thou has lien rotten in
thy own lusts by the space of 60 years, and will thou presume in one year to go
forward toward heaven, and that in thine age, as much as thou wentest backward
from heaven toward hell in 60 years? Is not this think you a goodly argument?
Is this the preaching of Repentance in the Name of Jesus? or rather to tread
down Christ with Antichrists Doctrine? for what other thing did he speak in
effect, than that Christ dyed in vain for thee? he will not be thy Jesus or
Savior, thou must make satisfaction for thy self or perish eternally. As for
our Homilies, they plainly declare that there is a revealed Word for the pardon
of late Penitents, and they answer the objections of the despairing, as well as
of the presumptuous, concluding at last thus; God which has promised his mercy
to them that be truly repentant ( although it be at the later end) has not
promised to the presumptuous sinner, either that he shall have long life, or
that he shall have true repentance at the last exd. And I pray you, why may not
God work the habit of saving grace, and give the Holy Ghost to those who are
ready to give up the ghost? are not such habits infused?


Laud. We may as well say, there can be a habit born with us, as infused in to
us; for as a natural habit supposes a frequency of actions by him who has
natural abilities; so does an infused habit (if there were any such:) it is a
result and consequent of a frequent doing the works: so that to say, that God
in an instant infuseth into us an habit (of chastity) is to say, that he has
in an instant infused into us to have done the acts of that grace frequently.
Un. Necess. p. 272.


Pacif. I see not any absurdity in saying, a habit may be born with us.
Original righteousness is thought to have the nature of an habit, yet had not
the Protoplast lapsed, it had been born with us, and been natural to us; and me
thinks it is no strange thing, that there should be habits in the soul which
are not the result and consequence of frequent actions; for what think you of
the gratiae gratis datae are not they habits? and yet were they not
instantaneously produced in the souls of Prophets and Apostles? it would be
strange, that there should be from a natural man any supernatural action, were
not the natural faculty first elevated by some supernatural habit infused into
us, we being only the recipients.


Laud This device of infused habits, is a fancy without ground and without
sense, without authority or any just grounds of confidence, and it has in it
very bad effects; for it destroys all necessity of our care and labor in the
ways of godliness, all cautions of an holy life; it is apt to minister
pretenses and excuses for a perpetually wicked life till the last of our days,
making men to trust to a late repentance; it puts men upon vain confidences,
and makes them rely for salvation upon dreams and empty notions; it destroys
all the duty of man, and cuts off all intercourse of reward and obedience. Unum
Necess. 273.


Pacif. This is high language, especially seeing it must needs concern almost
the whole Protestant Church, whose suffrage certainly will gain an opinion,
some credit and esteem among sober modest persons; verily why there should be
more nonsense in infused habits then in acquired habits, I know not, and cannot
reject a distinction generally received without some very pregnant reason; as
for what you pretend, that the doctrine of infused habits does produce sad
effects, destroying all necessity of care and labor, etc. it moves me not; you
hold I suppose that the soul is not ex traduce, but by immediate creation,
Creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur; yet none ever thought on this
account, that marriage and due benevolence among married people is needless;
the new creature is the workmanship of God, but yet there are certain
antecedaneous preparatory works wrought by attendance on Ordinances, whereby
the soul is qualified and made a fit and meet receptacle for supernatural
grace: if we resist these, we make a bloody adventure upon the patience,
forbearance and long sufferance of God. But this conceit of destroying labor
and endeavor, of making Exhortations needless and useless, is an old stale
objection of the Pelagians and Massilians, the grand adversaries of divine
grace, confuted by Austin, Prosper, Fulgentius.


Laud. A special confession unto a Priest of all our sins committed after
Baptism so far forth as we remember, is necessary unto salvation in the
judgment of Fathers, Schoolmen, and almost all Andquitie, not only Necessitate
praecepti, but also necessitate medii; so that according to the ordinary, or
revealed means appointed by Christ, there can be no salvation without the
foresaid Confession. Mr. Adams referente Pryn. in Canterbury's Doom. p. 192.


Pacif. I shall now know what to think of those who cry all Fathers, Schoolmen,
Antiquity, that they do but boast of things that they never examined; for he
that is any way conversant in the writings of the Fathers cannot but know that
no such doctrine is generally delivered by them, nor do all the Schoolmen
deliver any such Doctrine; sure I am, the Church of England has imposed no
such burden on her sons and members; nay she has most clearly determined
against the necessity of this Confession in her Homilies, Part. 2. Of the
Sermon of Repentance, p. 266, 267. And in her Lyturgy she only advises it
where a man's conscience is so perplexed, that he cannot extricate himself
without calling in the assistance of another.


Laud. Men are taught that they must pass through the terrors of the Law before
they can receive the mercies of the Gospel: The Law was a Schoolmaster to bring
the Synagogue to Christ, it was so to them who were under the Law, but cannot
be so to us who are not under the Law but under Grace; for if they mean the Law
of Works, or that imposition which was the first intercourse with man, they
lose their title to the mercies of the Gospel; if they mean the Law of Moses,
then they do not stand fast in the liberty by which Christ has made them free:
but whatsoever the meaning be, neither of them can concern Christians. Unum
Neces. p. 42.


Pacif. Do you then think that the Law is of no use to us Christians?


Laud The use that we Christians are to make of the Law, is only to magnify
the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, who has freed us from so severe a
Covenant, who does not judge us by the measures of an Angel, but by the span of
a man's hand. But we are not to subject our selves so much as by fiction of Law,
or fancy to the curse and threatenings of the Covenant of Works, or of Moses his
Law though it was of more instances and less severity, by reason of the
allowance of Sacrifices for Expiation. Un. Neces. p. 41.


Pacif. I judge with all Divines that we are to make another use of the Law
then that you mention; we are to use it as a regula officii to show us our
duty, how much we owe to God, and how much God may justly require of us, and so
it will be a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, for whilst we see how much
short we fall of our duty, we shall see a necessity of closing with Christ upon
the terms and conditions of the Gospel; we are as much under the Law of Moses
the moral part of it as ever were the Jews, and the Jews were as much under
grace as we, aeque I say, though not aequaliter.


Laud. Every Christian man sinning, is to consider the horrible threatenings of
the Gospel, the severe intermination of eternal pains, the goodnese of God
leading to repentance, the severity of his justice in exacting great
punishments of criminals, the reasonableness of this justice punishing such
persons intolerably, who would not use so great a grace in so pleasing a
service, for the purchase of so glorious a reward. The terrors of the Law did
end in temporal death, they could affright no further; but in the Gospel Heaven
and Hell were opened, and laid before all mankind: and therefore by these
measures a sinner is to enter into the sorrows of contrition and the care of
his amendment. And it is so vain a thing to think every sinner must in his
Repentance pass under the terrors of the Law, that this is a very destruction
of that reason for which they are fallen upon the opinion; the Law is not
enough to affright sinners, and the terrors of the Gospel are far more to
persevering impenitent sinners, then the terrors of the Law were to the
breakers of it; the cause of the mistake is this: The Law was more terrible
then the Gospel is, because it allowed no mercy to the sinner in great
instances; but the Gospel does. But then, if we compare the state of these men
who fell under the evils of the Law, with those who fall under the evils
threatened in the Gospel, we shall find these to be in a worse condition then
those by far, as much as Hell is worse then being stoned to death or thrust
through with a sword. Un. Neces. p. 41.


Pacif. All men will grant that Heaven and Hell are more clearly opened under
the New than under the Old Testament: But this I cannot digest, That the
terrors of the Law did end in Temporal death, and could affright no further, or
that the Law is not enough to affright sinners. For what mean you by the Law,
the Covenant of Works, or the Law administered by Moses? either of them sure is
enough to affright sinners; or else God had been wanting, not threatening terror
sufficient to affright people from wickedness. Christ freeth us from the wrath
to come, and yet he freeth us but from that wrath which as transgressors of the
Law we have incurred. What think you of those sinners who never heard of the
Gospel? shall they die only a Temporal death? If so, Hell will be more empty
then is generally believed. If they dye an Eternal death, then the Law
threatens more then Temporal death, for they can suffer only as transgressors
and offenders of the Law. But I pray you what do you think of Satisfaction, is
not that made only by Christ?


Laud. He that is ready to be cast away upon the Sea may well be taught to pray
Be pleased to unite my death to the death of thy Son, and to accept it so
united as a punishment for all my sins, that thou may forget all thine
anger, and blot my sins out of thy book. Rules and exercis. of Holy Live. p.
393, 394.


Pacif. This is sure Popery if any thing in the world be Popery: For it plainly
tends to bring those Papal satisfactions which are so abundantly proved by
our Protestant Controversy writers to be derogatory to the worth and value of
that perfect Satisfaction made by Christ on the Cross for all the sins of the
whole world, both Original and Actual. Vid. Art. 31. Why should I pray to God
to unite my death to the death of Christ? Is not Christ's death sufficient to
expiate the guilt of all my sins? How can I think that my being cast away at
Sea, should be accepted by God as a punishment for all my sins? What am I to
think of Justification, not unmeetly called by Luther, Articulus stantis aut
cadentis Ecclesiae.


Laud. A sinner is then justified, when he is made Just, i. e. Translated from
state of Nature, to state of Grace. Ans. to Gag. p. 142. Justification
consists in forgiveness of sins primarily, and grace infused secondarily;
both the acts of Gods Spirit in man. Id. p. 143. To Justify has a threefold
extent 1. To make just and righteous. 2. To make more just and righteous. 3. To
declare and pronounce just. Justification properly is in the first acception: a
sinner is then justified when he is made just; i. e. transformed in mind,
renewed in soul, regenerate by grace. Id. p. 140. 142, 141. compared.


Pacif. That we are not justified before we are changed, is certain enough, and
proved by many Scriptures and reasons: but that Justification does primarily in
Scripture signify the making of us just, that is the error of the Church of
Rome, and directly contrary to the Church of England, which places it in
forgiveness of sins alone, Artic. 11. and makes it to signify the declaring or
pronouncing of us just, for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us. And I
pray you tell me what is it, according to your Principles, that procures our
acceptance with God?


Laud. What else but doing well? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
Psa. 15. Isa. 1. 16, -- 20. Ezekiel. 18. 1. 9. Dan 4. 27. Mic. 6. 6, 7, 8. If this
be well considered, it will cause us to set a price and value upon well doing,
and upon good works, which of late have been undervalued and decryed under the
names of Popery and Arminianism, etc. Are they not the end of our Creation?
Ephesians. 2. 10. Are they not the end of our Redemption? Tit. 2. 14. Dr. Gell. p.
33.


Pacif. What else procures acceptance with God himself but well-doing? The
death of Christ does it, for we are accepted in the Well-beloved: He being the
Well-beloved in whom God is well-pleased. Our well-doing does not procure our
acceptance with God, but it is only conditio sine qua non, it is but causa
dispositiva: had we done never so well, without the suffering of Christ, there
had been no acceptance with God since the Fall. I know none who call good
works Popery or Arminianism: but they who press good works so as to make them
the sole procurers of our Justification, are deservedly concluded to be Popish.
We are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has ordained that we should walk in them. And yet his meaning is not by
these words to induce us to have any affiance, or to put any confidence in our
works, as by the merit and deserving of them, to purchase to our selves and
others the remission of our sins, and so consequently everlasting life: for
that were mere Blasphemy against Gods mercy, and great derogation to the
bloodshedding of our Savior Jesus Christ. Homil. Part. 2. p. 81. We have not
much agreed in matters of Doctrine hitherto, I hope we may better agree about
the State of Souls after death, and the condition of the wicked after the
general Judgment.


Laud. Let it be so, That the souls of the Fathers were not in Heaven before
our Savior, I deny it necessary that they were therefore in Hell: that Region
I call Abraham's Bosom, which though it be not Heaven, yet is it higher then
Hell. Gagg. 281.


Pacif. The souls of the godly, separated from the body, do, and always did go
immediately into Heaven. Our Homilies, as you cannot but know, make but two
places after this life. Homily of Prayer. p. 122.


Laud. It appears from S. August. de civ. Dei. lib. 20. cap. 15. that it was
then an opinion generally received in the Christian Church, and such as might
well be believed (as himself acknowledges) without any absurdity, that the
Patriarchs and others of the Saints of the Old Testament were detained in some
lower places amongst the inferi, but without any sense of those infinite
torments which were endured by the wicked; and that they were detained there
till the coming of Christ, till he by his descent thither did release them
thence. This makes me to consider it as a matter questionable only; I shall not
dare to say it is false or impious. Dr. Heyl. Fid. vet. p. 221.


Pacif. You may, if you will, choose whether you will say that opinion is false;
but the Church of England has plainly expressed her self in the third part of
the Sermon of the fear of death, The holy Fathers of the Old Law, and all
faithful and righteous men which departed before our Savior Christ's ascension
into heaven, did by death depart from troubles unto rest; from the hands of
their enemies, into the hands of God; from sorrows and sicknesses, unto joyful
refreshingin Abraham's bosom, a place of all comfort and consolation; as the
Scriptures do plainly by manifold words testify.


Laud. The opinion carries no impiety with it, nothing derogatory to the
Gospel or Kingdom of Christ, but rather seems to add much luster to our
Saviors person, and much conduces to the honor of the Faith and Gospel. For
what can be more honorable to the person of Christ, then that the Patriarchs
and other holy men of God who dyed under the Law, were kept from being admitted
into a participation of the joys of heaven, till he by his divine power took
them by the hand, conducted them into the blessed gates of Paradise? What could
add more to the dignity and reputation of the Gospel of Christ, then that all
such as faithfully believe the same, and frame themselves to live thereafter,
should have a greater privilege then their Father Abraham, and all the rest
who dyed before in the fear of God before the coming of our Savior, and be
admitted presently into the joys of Paradise? Id. ibid.


Pacif. It is strange if the opinion tend so much to the honor of Christ and
the glory of the Gospel, that the Church of England should give her children no
notice of it, but rather express her self against it. And seeing you have
labored to make it appear that both the Greek Hades and the Latin Inferi,
signify Hell and the place of Torments; how can the Patriarchs and other holy
men of God, be said to be in or amongst the inferi, and not participate of the
Torments of that wretched place?


Laud. In answer to this it may be replied, That there might be some part or
region of the inferi, wherein the greatest, or rather the only punishment was
poena damni, a want of those Celeftian comforts which were reserved for them in
the land of Paradise; which to a soul that longed for the sight of God could be
no small infelicity. 2. It may be said, That though the inferi in it self were
a place of punishment, yet God was able to command the fire that it should not
burn them, and the torments of the pit that they should not touch them. Nor is
this all that may be said in justification and defense of those ancient
writers, etc. Id. ibid. and p. 222.


Pacif. It is well this is not all that may be brought in defense of them, if
it were, I should venture to say, That just nothing could be alleged in their
justification. But what can be said else?


Laud. Possibly they might mean no more by those expressions of bringing back
the souls of the just from Hades, then that by the descent of Christ into Hell,
all the claim and challenge which the devil could pretend unto them were made
void and of none effect. Id. ibid.


Pacif. Very good: Then it seems till Christ descended into Hell the claim of
the Devil to the souls of the just, was not made void and of none effect: but I
had thought that the death of Christ, though he had never descended into Hell,
had been sufficient to have vacated all the claim that the Devil could make to
the souls of those who dyed in the fear of God. And this death of Christ had
its effects and operations upon those who dyed before Christ, as well as upon
those who dyed since he actually offered himself upon the Cross. But the truth
is, all this discourse of Christ's bringing of the souls of the Fathers out of
Hades, does depend upon that which is hugely uncertain and inevident; viz that
Christ did descend into Hell. Now this I humbly conceive can neither be proved
from Scripture, nor yet from the Apostles Creed, nor yet from any Article of
our Church.


Laud. If we search into the public Monuments and Records of the Church, we
shall find thisDoctine of Christ's local descent into Hell, to have been
retained and established amongst many other Catholic verities ever since the
first beginning of her Reformation. Fid. vet. p. 223.


Pacif. That this was the mind of the major part of those who met together for
the composing of the Articles in 1552. is certain; but it is as certain that
there were then men of eminent parts, and in all probability men employed in
that Synod, of a contrary mind: I instance only in Bishop Hooper, who in his
Exposition on the Creed does most expressly and in terminis write against the
Local descent of Christ into Hell. As for the Articles of 1562. they are so
worded as to leave to all their liberty to opine in this matter, as in their
own minds they shall be persuaded; and so much is asserted by Mr. Rogers in his
Exposition of the Articles. As for the Apostles Creed it is, and that most
deservedly, of great credit and esteem in all the Churches of Christ throught
the whole world: but then it must be considered, that the Symbol of the
Apostles has not been always the same; particularly, Ruffinus assures us,
that this additament, descendit ad inferos is neither found in the Creed used
by the Roman Church, nor yet in the Creeds of the Eastern Church. Vid. Mr.
Peirs. on the Creed. p. 456. Amyraldus also has observed, that in some Creeds
where these words He descended into Hell are found, there is no mention of
Christ's Burial; nay, the Learned observe, That in the very Aquileian Creed,
where this Article was first expressed, there was no mention of Christ's Burial,
which is at least a very probable argument that the first intention of putting
these words into the Creed, was only to express the Burial of our Savior. This
Aquileian Creed in which we first find the words was not till above 300 years
after Christ.


Laud. Long before this time Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, the most famous City
of the East, repeated it as a part of the Creed, Id. p. 226.


Pacif. Ignatius repeateth it not as an Article of the Apostles Creed, nor is
there in Ignatius any Collection of the Creed; that place unto which you refer
in the Epistle ad Trallianos, being foisted into him, and not found in the best
and most emendate Editions; but if you will follow the usual and commonly
received Edition of Ignatius, then consult the Epistle ad Magnesianos, and
there you will find no notice taken of Christ's descending into Hell. As for
what is urged either from Scripture or from the Analogy of Faith to prove
Christ's descent into Hell, I refer any impartial reader to what is judiciously
determined by M. Amyraldus. These. Salm. De decensu Christi ad inferos; where I
think there is more said against this Doctrine then will easily be answered. I
freely assent to that of Augustine that none but an Infidel will deny Christ's
descent into Hell: but the question is in what sense he descended into Hell:
Nor do I think there is any demonstrative argument from which it can be proved
that Christ descended into Hell, in your sense.


Laud. The most clear and pregnant place of Scripture for proof of Christ's
descent into Hell, is that of Act. 2. where the Apostle citing those words of
David, Psalm. 16. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy One
to see corruption, applies it thus unto our Savior, that David seeing this
before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in
hell. Id.


Pacif. (...) eo loci sepulcrum est, quod est in Scriptura solenne, says
Amyrald. As for (...), that may either denote the whole person by a Synecdoche,
or else by a Metonymie, the dead body it self, which is not unusual in
Scripture, says the same Author. Nor can any one deny but (...) in Hebrew, and
(...) in Greek, do signify a dead body: And (...) the Hebr. word, and (...)
the Greek word do both signify sometimes no more then the grave.


Laud. It is a strange consideration to suppose an eternal torment to those to
whom it was never threatened; to those who never heard of Christ; to those that
lived probably well; to Heathens of good lives; to ignorants and untaught
people; to people surprised in a single crime; to men that dye young in their
natural follies and foolish lusts; to them that fall in a sudden gayety and
excessive joy; to all alike; to all infinite and eternal, even to unwarned
people; and that this should be inflicted by God, who infinitely loves his
Creatures, who dyed for them, who pardons easily and pittieth readily, and
excuses much, and delights in our being saved, and would not have us dye, and
takes little things in exchange for great. It is certain that Gods mercies are
infinite, and it is also certain, that the matter of eternal torments cannot
truly be understood; and when the Schoolmen go about to reconcile the divine
Justice to that severity, and consider why God punishes eternally a temporal
sin or state of evil, they speak variously, and uncertainly, and
unsatisfyingly. Dr. Tail. 2. part. of Ser. p. 40, 41.


Pacif. The justice of God does manifest it self in such a way as is strange,
but yet such as shall be manifested to be according to righteousness: but you
jumble so many things together, that I know not what to make of what you have
said. What people are they surprised only in a single crime that are adjudged
to eternal vengeance? How can one that lives to years of discretion be guilty
only of a single crime? Wherefore do you in general say, That what is brought
by the Schools to vindicate Gods justice in punishing a temporal sin with
eternal punishment is unsatisfying, without attempting to refute their
Arguments? No question they bring some answers to that objection which will not
hold water; but questionless they also bring other some which will never be
answered while the world does stand. However, I hope you think that the pains
of the damned in Hell shall be eternal.


Laud. That in this question I may separate the certain from the uncertain; 1.
It is certain that the Torments of Hell shall certainly last as long as the
soul lasts. 2. The generality of Christians have been taught to believe worse
things yet concerning them. 3. Yet if God should deal with man hereafter more
mercifully and proportionably to his weak nature then he does to Angels, and as
he admits him to repentance here, so in hell also to a period of smart, even
when he keeps the Angels in pains for ever, yet he will never admit him to
favor, he shall be tormented beyond all the measure of humane ages, and be
destroyed for ever and for ever. Id. ibid. and p. 42.


Pacif. So then, it seems it is only certain that torments shall last as long
as the soul lasts; but that the soul shall live for ever, that is not certain;
only the generality have been taught so to believe. Do Protestant Doctors use
to teach their hearers (...) in a matter of so high and huge concernment in
reference to the practice of godliness?


Laud. All this while we have said nothing directly as touching the judgment of
the Church in the five points so much controverted.


Pacif. Nor need any thing be said about them; for surely it has been
sufficiently proved by more Authors then one, That the Church has all along
expressed her dislike to the full of all Arminian notions, and has made use of
all her authority to censure and impose recantation upon as many as have
ventured to broach them.


Laud. So indeed it has been printed with much confidence by some of the
Puritanical faction, but how falsely, the Learned Dr. Heylin has largely
showed in his late Historia quinque articulorum.


Pacif. Dr. Heylin does so much mingle his Passion with all that he writes,
that he marreth every cause he medleth with; and I have been told by a Master
of Arts and Fellow of a College, That Dr. H. Hammond walking with him once in
Magdalen College Cloister did confess so much.


Laud. But Dr. H. H. denies that ever he so said; and we are told by one who
writes himself M. O. B. of A. that the Doctor is a great admirer of Dr. Heylins
labors.


Pacif. I have told you upon what authority T. C. printed what he did in this
matter: and if Dr. Ham. who so much decryeth any thing that has but the
appearance of bitterness in others, can not only brook, but also admire the
writings of Dr. Heylin, notwithstanding all the bitterness that is in them, I
must needs say, that Ployden is not the only man with whom the case does alter:
for sure the tartness which he blames in Dr. Owen is not comparable to that
which runs through all the veins of Dr. Heylins books. But I must not count
my self engaged to believe any thing of this nature till I see something
testified under Dr. Ham. his own hand; then the world shall know who told the
story.


Laud. But the Doctor hops he has made it appear that Calvinism was not the
Native and Original doctrine of the Church of England, though in a short time
it overspread a great part thereof. Pres. to His. Quin. Artic.


Pacif. He may hope where no hope is; and that he does so in this particular
Theophilus Churchman has evinced in his Review of the Certam. Epistolare which
was bnt an Epitome of this Historia quin. Artic. the Doctor all along using the
very same shifts, and almost the very same words in one book that he does in
the other; and herein he does but antiquum obtinere; for so in his Resp. Pet.
he tells the very same tale that he did in the History of the Sab. not
vouchsafing to take any notice that two learned men had in print many years
before answered all his Subterfuges. And he that can thus bring an old book
upon the Stage under a new Title, and rob his former writings to fill up the
bulk of his latter, does but declare that he has got an itch of scribbling
which I am not so good a Physician as to be able to cure. As for the
indignities that he has offered to the Belgic Churches, I leave him to be
chastized by the pens of some of their owm Members, who will easily manifest
that the Synod of Dort was not so ugly a creature as he has made it, and that
the proceedings against the Remonstrants were neither unjust nor yet rigorous:
Mean while I refer the reader to what Hornebeck has said in his Summa Contr. I
must only take leave to say something in vindication of T. C. in throwing
reproaches upon whom, the Doctor is so very not only liberal but also profuse.
He tells us that the gentleman whom he did strive to prefer to Mag. was none of
his blood; T. C. never said that he was: and that he was a singular good
Scholar; T. C. never denied it. As for Mr. Hickman, he was one of the means of
procuring him an exhibition of fifteen pound per annum to help toward his
subsistence in the Universitie till he should be able to provide himself of
some such place as might alone suffice to keep him. But sure Dr. Heylin when he
sought to bring in this his friend (a friend I hope is relatum) did not take
the College to be a nest of Cuckoos; he would not sure have took a courtesy
from Mr. Praesi if he had not judged him to have power sufficient to bestow it:
And had his friend been made Fellow of the College, he would sure for his sake
have been so civil as not to have used so ugly a similitude. Indeed if singing
always the same note and tune make a Cuckoo, all the Cuckoos do not lodge at Mag.
College. Next the Doctor labors to prove that it was no slander to say, That
the new Sabbath speculations of Dr. Bound had been more passionately embraced
of late, then any one Article of Religion here by Law established. But this he
proves by such an argument as I persuade my self he himself takes not to have
any color of truth in it. Because impunity is indulged by them to all,
Anabaptists, Familists, Ranters. By them! whom means the Doctor? if he mean
by any that deserve the name of Calvinists, his Conscience cannot but fly in
his face: if by them he mean the Soldiers whose violence prevailed so far as
to seclude the Members of that Parliament, which was, if any, the Presbyterian
Parliament, then his Argument must run thus; The Soldiers, many of whom are
Anabaptists and Arminians, all of them Anticalvinists, have procured impunity
to Familists, Ranters, Quakers, and yet not for those who transgress the Laws
about the Sabbath, therefore the Calvinists are more zealous about the Sabbath
speculations then about any one Article of Religion by Law established. If the
world will be cheated with such arguments, let it be cheated: yet dare not I
imitate the Doctor in despising of authority or speaking evil of dignities; I
dare not leave it in print, That the Justice used cursed rigor who made a
Victualler pay ten shillings for selling a halfpenny loaf to a poor man in
time of Sermon. I rather think it was cursed rigor to Excommunicate Mr. Paul
Bains for withdrawing to drink a little Wine or Beer after he had spent himself
in Preaching a Sermon: yet this I find practiced.

The Doctor next proceeds to make some Apology for his calling himself, His
Majesty's Creature, and the workmanship of his hands: One while he seems to say
no such thing dropped from his Pen; another while, that if it had, the
expression might have been justified. He has been told where and by whom it
was averred that he did use those expressions; I only now tell him, The
Gentleman was fasting when he so said, and that M. C. Bursery is not a place in
which men are, or I hope ever were suffered to inflame themselves with wine and
strong drink, so as to make them talk that which they would be ashamed to own
afterward. As to the expression it self, I had well hoped, that if a Courtier
could have stooped so low in flattery, yet no Divine, whose work is to be Kings
remembrancer; that they are but Mortal Creatures and Creeping Dust, durst have
used any such language: if the Doctor dare, he shall pardon me if I do not take
him to be the tenderest Conscienced Theologue in Christendom. As for what
concerns Dr. Barlow, I say but this, That both Mr. John Martin Fellow of C.
C. C. Ox. and also Dr. Henry Wilkinson will witness that Mr. Sparks did assert
all that to be truth which T. C. has published; and that Mr. Sparks was both a
learned man and a good man, all the University will witness: but as for the
aged person who related this to Mr. Sparks, he either is, or very lately was
alive. In a word, the book written by T. C. never was answered, never will be
answered, except by such an Animal as M. O. whose eyes Mr. P. and Dr. Heylin
have put out that he might the more easily grind in their mill. The book was
made by one whom the Vic. of Oxon loves and respects, and that a sheet or two
were printed ar London was by the Authors own consent, merely to avoid that
clamor which else the Dr. might have raised upon the Vice. who loves not to
meddle with those Salamanders that are never in their Element but when they are
in the fire of contention. The Doctor complains much of ribaldry, obscenity,
etc. but let him first pull out the beam that is in his own eye, Loripedem
rectus derideat, AEthiopem Albus. There Is a pretty story of a Cardinal and the
Abbot of Fulda, traveling together toward Ulma, either of them attended with
30. horsemen completely armed; My Lord, says the Cardinal, do you think St.
Bennet, who was the Author of your Order went thus attended? The Abbot
presently replied upon him, and demanded, If St. Peter ever rode in that state
as his Fatherhood did. If Dr. Heylin blame T. C. for one unseemly passage, and
that is all he can charge him with (which had been expunged also, had not the
Impression been so suddenly took off the Stationers hand) T. C. will not be at
a loss to find one as bad, or far worse to lay in the Doctors dish. I must
spare neither, and therefore say, They both have so worded matters now and
then, that they have reason to beg the charity of men to excuse them, and the
mercy of God to pardon them; and that the world may learn by their example more
to mind the Doctrine which is according to godliness, and less and more rarely
to engage in Controversies, is the prayer of,


The Lords most unworthy creature,
March 20. 1659.
FINIS

