THE FOXONIAN Quakers, DUNCES LIARS and SLANDERERS, Proved out of GEORGE FOX's
Journal, And other Scriblers; Particularly B. C. his Quakers no Aposiates, or
the Hammerer Defeated: Amanuents, as is said, to G. C. (as he sometime wrote
himself) Gnii. lmus Cal^^ius, alias William Penn.

Also a Reply to W. C. (a Churchman, the Quakers Advocate) his Tr^pidant^um
Mallens intrepid^^tur Ma^^^^tus, etc.

TITUS I. XII. (...).

By Trepidanti^^^^ Mall^us.

LONDON: Printed for W. Marshal at the (...) and J. Marshal at the (...), 169^

TO HIS Unholiness WILLIAM PENN, THE ENGLISH POPE.
IT is notoriously known, when the Old Papists, the Fathers of the Quakers,
could neither by Scripture or Reason, confute the Doctrine of Luther and
Calvin, they invented and published Libe is instead of answers against the Men
and their Morals: Luther was a Drunkard and had his Familiar: Calvin was an
Intemperate Man, and would often call for Wine, and they had found the mystery
in his name; he was also a second Lucian, and by an Anagram, they had sound
this in his name also.

That their Children, the Quakers, have taken the like method with the best
Ministers and People in the World, is so notorious, that it needs no proof;
that they have done the like also with some, that, for their Blasphemies and
other wicked procedures, have deserted them, is too well known; Mr. Bugg, Mr.
Pennyman, Mr. Keith, Mr. Crisp, are Madmen, etc. I therefore can expect no
better Treatment.

I am charged, by B. C. the Quaker, and by W. C. the Churchman, their Advocate.

1. With Love-Melancholly, and what Consessions I made on that Subject. 2. With
being clapped up in a Madhouse (BOX) 3. With high demands for Preaching, and what
befell me for it nigh Bristol.
To all which, I Answer.

1. That they are stories all False; and I declare, I never beard any such
things charged on me by my greatest Enemies, till I read them in their Libels.

2. That I will give to any man Five Pound, that shall prove, that ever I was
in Box, or any such place, One Hour.

3. That I never got much by Preaching, but at Brislington, named, I offered to
give all their dues to a Minister, 10 year Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge, but then
Poor, if they would employ him, and I freely gave him his Table also.

Who shall regard a Quaker, who tells a story, That I or my Brother (for he
cannot tell which) were found in bed with I know who, by an Officer. Not I, for
I never heard the story till now; and to be plain, I believe be neither: That
al^o affirms, That Bristol Friends, Steel, etc. never left the Place of their
Public Worship, unless when sick, etc. When I appeal to the whole City
(particularly the disappointed Informers) whether, for several years before
King James's Indulgence came out, they could find Men or Women there. That also
denies, That the Quakers Bow to any Man, except a few, Corrupted by us, and
Reproved by them: When it is so rotorious to all the World. You (their
Infallible head) are a great Bower, and so a common Idolater; that B.C.
imitates you his Master, and continues the Custom, since his denial of this,
to his and the Quakers perpetual shame, as some of them confess.

Who shall regard what this Churchman says after him, that talks of the Fable
of the Ma. House, etc. and in such a style, as if be were ^astning thither, or
lately came from thence; Cur, Yelping Cur, Mr. Woodcock, Goodman Goose, etc.
this is no later but amongst Children Young and Old: Whether, You Sir, were the
A^^^^r of the Quakers no Apostates, or helper to the materials (or rather
immaterials) of that (...) or only the Licenser, or Approver, m^n think as they
see cause; no Book must (...) without couse^t; thus the Lords Massage is s^opt,
curtailed or changed, since i^ pl^^sed you to set up Ecclesi^stical Courts, and
make Canons to try the Light by.

What if I should have affirmed stories, perhaps too true, of friend Green of
Colchester, that Cleveland speaks of, that bugger'd a Mare; I had been guilty
of too great cashness.

Help, Woodcock, Fox and Naylor,
For our Friend Green's a Stallion;
Alas what hope of converting the Pope,
When the Quaker turns Italian.
And that in good time of Christmas,
Which though our Friends have damned all
Yet when did we hear, of a cursed Cavileer,
Ever played such a Christmas gambal?
But thus our matters teach us,
The intent being well directed,
Though the Devil trapan, the Adamical Man,
The Saint stands uninfected, etc.
Had your Friends and Advocates these stories of me by Revelation? as the two
friends that came to Henry Windor ^^^d of the murder of his Child, and that
the Spirit should appear in the Court before the Judge, which proving false,
were imprisoned, etc. Is it true, that in Pensilvania some have been put to
death on friends Spirit of Discerning? When Christ was Crucified, had you been
there, had you not told five false stories to their one? B. C. talks of my
Learning, and that I am now the Champion of the Cause; that my Book was handed
up and down the City as an unanswerable Book: I doubt not but you thought it
unanswerable from the time you saw it; and I thank your scribe (as is said) for
contributing his best help to prove it to be so, though you were pleased
(unaskt) lately to send me word, You had no hand in the Book; yet your
sophistry is so great and abominable, I cannot understand you. Such a man was
Drunk, said a friend, when found to be false, yea with passion, has been the
a^^sn^er, etc. such Tricks are often among the Perfect ones.

You have lately, to serve aturn, declared, That you believed Imputed
Righteousness in the sense we plead for; the Body of Christ that was crucisi'd,
Rose again, and is circumscribed in Heaven; That there shall be a Resurrection
of the same Body laid in the Grave; that you believe 1 Cor. 15.20, 21. in a
literal sense, without an Allegory, when it was proved upon you, you had
Printed the contrary, You made answer That was against Men's Relying on this,
etc. as I had it from that good Minister to whom, with others, you said all
this.

Oh! How deceitful are Sinless Men? Goldney (that Creature in the shape of a
man) lately denied he said this and that of such a place; when proved on him at
my Lodgings, said, I did not name the place, though I pointed to it and spoke
of it; like him that said, George Fox never said, He was the Son of God; which
when proved, said, No, his words were, I am the Son of God. But there is no end
of this Villainy.

No Papist shall Lie or Equivocate more for the Church, than the greatest
Quakers for the Light; You having resused the proposals for a meeting, to
consider my Questions, and not owning the late Reply, I purpose to trouble you
no more.

Pardon me that I begin with George Fox's Journal, a new Folio, Printed lately,
since his death, and your large Preface; if I prove him a Liar, etc. your Cause
falls to the ground, for be was your first Apostle, or rather Deceiver: I doubt
as you do not, so you cannot believe the Fables you relate of him.

Some think, You Sir, in another disguise, to be the Author of the book W. C.
William Calamus; I fear it is so, I hope it is not; if not, I question not but
you know him; I appeal also to you, whether the design of my Reprimand were to
answer both Papers, as be said, when I never saw the first, till I finished my
Reprimand, and then put in a few lines about Cato, etc. or not.

1. To prove G. Keith no Apostate, though very Erroncous, and proved the contrary
from his charge of Election, etc. Then, 1. The Arminians in their Church are
Apostates too, which must not be granted. 2. Then the New Church of England is
an Apostate Church from her Doctrine, Discipline and Manners; which I have done
at large, The Union with Rome, etc.


Is this an answer to say I am no Arminian? What then? Are such as be,
Apostates? You are an Ungrateful Wretch thus to reflect on the Church of
England; What if I were? my Argument leads me to it; I am provoak'd to it; yet
the New Church I reflected on; my work lay not so much with them that own her
Doctrine or Old Discipline, that keep from the Lords Table, Men Ignorant,
Scandalous, Contentious, that use not the new uninjoyn'd Cercmonies, lowing to
the High Altar, etc. What is be, that writing of Reprolation, could not
distinguish betweens Non possibile, and a Non futurum? Who says, God makes any
man's Salvation impossible? others, besides G. Keith, have denied it: God has
made my being unable to flee, (...) non possibile (naturally) but never
ordained my being born in Constantinople so; be made it a non futu rum: so of
Christ's Legs not broken, he made it not an impossible thing, but a thing not
future.

2. My design was to reprove him, for favoring the Foxonian Quakers, whom I
proved to be Blasphemers, Imposters, etc. by proofs not commonly known,
therefore I entitled my Book a Reprimand, not a Vindication; I dare appeal to
you whether things are not so, and therefore such is be; as if unparaled Lying,
Rudeness and Impertenencies had contended, which should make his Reply most
Infamous.

To all this account of the Foxonian Quakers, he replies, without attempting to
vindicate them, We are Fools. -- and be bath sound me, I thank him; very good
Company; worthy good men of his own communion, and zealous for it too, as Mr.
Bugg and Mr. Snake, for so I used to callinm, seeing he puts not his name to
his book as I do not to mine, yet all know the Authors. Mr. Keith's being my
Tutor, I laugh at it; I speak it without vanity, and I suppose be knows it, be
need be no more my Tutor, than I his; nothing is more evident to me, that W. C.
wants not only a Tutor lut Schoolmaster, to teach him to make True Latin and
Verse, as the after account will prove; I take him to be a man of no True
Learning, though a man of some wit, only childish terms and nauseous phrases
sometimes spoils that too; the broken Latin Sir, locks like yours, who have
little knowledge of that Tongue, less of the Greek, though you once would
venture upon a criticism, forsooth, with Mr. Faldo, (...), which occasions a
little merriment, there are that know your Excellency lies not that way, lut in
some other parts of Learning, Politics, History and Theology.

Thine in the Light, without the Outward Name.

THE FOXONIAN Quakers, DUNCES, LIARS and SLANDERERS; Proved out of George Fox's
Journal, etc.
PREPARE thy Ears, Reader, to hear Legions instead of History, and Fables, as
prodigious as those in Father Cressy's Church History, both fit to be looked
into these Winter Evenings, when Stories are most acceptable for Merriments
sake: Mabomet was but little skilled in this trick when on the back of his
Elborae he rode up to Heaven, received the Law, and came back again: By the
way, I have it from good hands, that Dr. Pocock averred, That the story of the
Dove in his Bar, was a Fables, that be found the Turks knew nothing of it; and
that Grotius' confessed to (...) he look up the story only oncommon some.

Cressey makes no bones of Miracles by a Parenthesis (Who was raised from the
Dead) Jacob Beoman and Muggleton, had their Lying Wonders, and all to prove
their contrary Messages from God, foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. But the greatest
wonder was, That these Impostors were regarded; a Distempered Body and Mind,
may make Men imagine strange things A late Author of more wit than Honesty, in
his Interest of Reason in matters of Religion; seems much to doubt, When or
M^homet knew himself to le^an Imposter, but having the Falling Sickness, did
think the Angel Gabriel did appear to him, etc. What shall we then think of the
story of Sergius the Monk, and his Indoctrinating his Young Pupil, who never
knew Letters? For Popish Miracles, I believe the Rosary, scattered up and down
at Hounslow-Heath (where only King James appeared as a Man of Valor) did more
good against Popery, than all the Learned Tracts of Bishop Tillotson, and
Bishop Saillingfleet, though all were as gravely ^old as Fox's Journal, full of
Heresies, Lying Wonders done in a Corner, Revilings; what passages were for
Oliver and against the Stuarts, are left out; so those words, G. F. the Son of
God: Did not the Prophets words continue the same in all Changes? yet this was
the man who was called, as Simon Magus, The Mighty Power of God; but his
Wickedness was so great in pretending to bring contrary Messages from the Lord,
that Thousands of Quakers abhorred and disowned him as a Deceiver, etc.

Mr. Penn, in his large Preface, says, The Quakers declared, a Perfection from
Sin, but held not a Perfection in Wisdom and Glory in this Life: Well, Friends
had once no Sin, whatever they have of late; the Ranters, from whom they came
and derived some pure Principles, thought Drunkenness no sin, nor Uncleanness,
for there could be no Adultery among those old Friends, for Adulterium quasi ad
alterum; and that was impracticable among them, for they were Corpus Vnum.

But Oh! the Wonderful Humility and Modesty of Mr. Penn, that Confesses, They
be not so Wise and Glorious as they in Heaven: No truly, not many of them so
wise as those accounted here on Earth; not Wise, but Otherwise.

Mr. Penn tells us, G. Fox on a high Mountain in Yorkshire, had a Vision, He
saw People as thick as motes in the Sun, that should in time be brought home to
the Lord: Many, says he, had Convincements, who are now at Rest, Thomas
Salthouse, James Naylor, etc. Well, whoever had Convincements, it is doubted,
by Thousands of Quakers and others, whether William Penn had ever any
Convincements, except of the Folly of this People, and how soon he might take
the Chair, when George was gone, and play King or Pope with this Ignorant
Tribe: What is James Naylor honored by him; that unheard of piece of
Blasphemy, whom many Quakers cannot endure to hear of? I knew a Man born in the
same Town with him, who told me, How all began with Spiritual Pride; after be
was a great Repeater of Sermons, be would hear no more, he knew enough, etc.
What if Friends should come to Mr. Penn, or Benjamin Cool, or others, in the
name of the Lord, to lay aside their Perriwigs; would they obey? No, no, but
laugh at it: How can they then expect that others should on these pretenses,
throw away the Ordinances of Christ? Richard Richardson, a great Quaker, has
written a Book against Perriwigs, how Condemned they are by Sober Heathens,
Ancient Christians, etc. at last he tells us, How John Mulliner, (a Friend)
about Northampton, was made to leave that Trade, and to burn one of his
Porriwigs before his Servants; that John Hall, a great Man sitting in a
Meeting, was shaken by the Lords Power, and so pulled off his Perriwig, and
threw it away: Now were not these Inspired? What means the New College to
teach Inspired Persons to Preach, etc. Did not our Preface-Maker threaten
Friends, If such orders of his were not observed, to break their Meetings,
though he seems to write so zealously for the sufficiency of the Light in Man,
etc.

A Collection out of G. Fox's Journal.
WE have here the account that Margaret Fell, the wise of G. Fox (once of Judge
Foll) gives of her Husband, it is laden with Impertinencies, and little
circumstances of his Life. -- At last she tells us, How when he came into the
Steeple-House, she hearing him, cried out, We are all Thieves, we are all
Thieves, we have taken the Scriptures in words, and have known nothing of them
in our selves: That Thomas Salthouse followed him: I knew him, he was an Idle
Vagrant; never did work, that they were at last weary of him, and would have
him work; once I met him, and he urged that of Paul against us, these hand have
ministered to my Necessities: so would Fox say, yet neither of them would work:
Who would regard such shameless Beasts?

G. Fox's Journal. I had a Gravity and Studiousness of mind, when young, above
others. -- I took care not to eat or drink much. -- I kept to Yea and Nay; my
Relations were about to make a Priest of me, but they made a Shoemaker of me;
when I was with my Master, he was Blessed, when I left him he broke. -- People
generally loved me for my Innocence and Honesty. -- I saw many possessed not
what they professed. -- I was a long time almost in despair; and I walked many
Nights by my self: Priest Stephen wondered at my Answer, why Christ said, My
God, My God, why have thou Forsaken me: I said, He dyed for the Sins of Men,
and dyed not as God: The Priest said, it was a good full answer, such ^s be had
not heard; afterward be would highly applaud me, and what I said to him on the
weck days, he would Preach in First Days, for which I did not like him. -- I
was so dried with Sorrow, that they could not get one drop of Blood from my Arm
or Head. -- I would not go to Marriages, but Visit after, and if they were
poor, I would give them some Money, etc.

They that set up for Great Persons, often tell us of the Convictions of their
Childhood, though nothing to what others have known that keep silence: I
suppose his Dullness made his Parents make a Shoemaker of him, when they saw he
was not fit to be a Priest; like him that said to the maker of an Image of
Christ, of a knotty piece of Wood that would not do, If you cannot make a God
of him, make a Devil of him. Well, But why followed he not his Trade? I
believe, if the Truth were known, he was such a Blockhead he could never make
one pair of Shoos well, and if his Shoos were no better than his Teachments, he
could not live by that Trade, and so tried another; I believe not a word of the
story of Mr. Stephens, a Child of 10 year old might answer as well.

Well, George was a Madman too, was in Despair; he was then tempted to commit
sin; he tells not what; was here not Love Melancholy? No doubt this poor
Shoemaker was Ambitious of the honor and wealth he got by Marryage and
Speaking. I doubt, Reader, whether thou art able to believe, a Minister should
Preach on the Lords Day, what he got from a Quaker week days, especially such a
Notorious Dunce as this, who was not able to express himself, but others must
word his thoughts for him, and so is this Book no doubt changed to purpose.

Now for his Revelations.

Nigh a Gate, a Consideration arose in me, all Christians are Believers, both
Protestants and Papists; and the Lord opened to me, that if all were Believers,
then all were born of God. Make Sense of this, or Truth, Reader, if thou can.

At another time in the field, the Lord opened to me, That being bred at Oxford
and Cambridge, was not enough to fit a Man to be a Minister of Christ; and I
stranged at it: I would take my Bible and go into the Fields and Woods, and
told my Friends, It is said you need not that any Man teach you, but as the
Anointing teaches them, and the Lord would teach them himself.

Then I met with a sort of People that said, Women bad no Souls; but I told
them, Mary said, My Soul does magnify the Lord. Choice Observations, Reader,
and no doubt we have here the choicest flowers of what he laid up, gathered by
Friends.

When I had these openings, many troubles and temptations came upon me; in the
Morning I wished for Evening, and in the Evening for Morning; the Openings
answered one another; many Openings I had of Scripture and the Revelations:
Wonderful Ones no doubt: I sat in hollow Trees by day, and walked mournfully by
night; Yet none of us reported, he was in a Mad-house at Box, etc. Then, even
then, I heard a voice, saying, There is one Jesus Christ, who can answer to thy
condition. If this were examined, perhaps we should be told, this was not
vocally but mentally, an inward voice (that is motion) might serve the turn.
One Brown had Prophesies and Sights of me on his death b^d; and he spoke openly
of me, and what the Lord would bring forth by me: I prayed, when the house
seemed to sh^ke, and they said. It is now as was in the Apostles days. Pe^^^^
two or three giddy Women (...) thus prate; and that is enough for a Quakers
Miracle.

I was come up in Spirit through the Haming Sword, into the Paradise of God. I
knew nothing but Pureness, Innocence and Righteousness; so that I was come up
to the State of Adam before be fell, the Creation was opened to me; I was at a
stand, whether I should practice Physic for the good of Mankind, seeing the
natures and virtues of the Creatures were so opened to me. Wonderful Depths
were opened to me, beyond what words can declare p. 10. All I meet with cannot
bear man's coning to Adam's state before be fell: Reader, Tremble at the next
Blasphemy How then can they bear to hear of man's coming to the measure of the
fullness of Christ? which he before said be did.

Observe, Reader, what Nonsense and Impertinencies are in these Openings; I
doubt not, Drunkenness and Swearing are no sins, in comparison of such belying
of God. Whoever said, It was enough to go Oxford to be made a Minister. No,
many there, and that come from thence, are too Ignorant to be such; I knew one
there, a good Scholar that Preached, that could not tell me whose Wife Sarah
was, how many Tribes there were. -- I knew another, who when he preached on 1
Eccles. 2 began thus, Vanity at the first was but a little imp, but now it is
grown to such an exuberant Whale, that it can swallow three Jonas's at a
morsal, etc. I have heard of one in Exon College, coming down late to dine in
the Hall, was asked the reason, Oh, said he, I was reading the pleasantest
story that ever I read in my Life, if it be true; What story, said they, then
he began to tell the story of Joseph and his Brethren.

Now Friend George, it is opened to me, that it is not enough for a man to be
brought up in a Shoomakers-shop to be made a Minister. The Lord would teach
them, etc. Some kept to this, and cared not for any man's teaching; but after
all, George sets up for a Teacher himself, contrary to his first sayings, when
You need not that any man teach you. -- Is none of the Heretics he had,
Detected; for John at that time, taught them by his Epistle. George was Adam's
equal for Perfection and what Christ's too? yet the aforenamed Goldney (a famous
or rather infamous Quaker) among other notorious untruths by him and Wyat,
denied, That any Qua^ers beld Perfection; no not George Fox himself; for I knew
him, said he; then run on, Thou art a Liar, Report, and we will Report; Report,
and we will Report. Had George been a Physician, none had Cured half so many as
he had killed; why had he not acquainted Physicians of those Virtues and
Operations of the Creatures Opened to him for the good of Mankind? No, no, the
Cheat had then soon been discovered: How did Mr. Penn, and other Friends, like
the Pudding that George put Herbs into, etc. when they were almost choakt with
eating it? Truly I believe they had rather have been at a Friends Spiritual
Supper at Bristol, who invited several, all sat an hour, or more, at the Table,
none were helped, nor did Eat, the meat carried away, Friends, I invited you to
a Spiritual Supper; which made some Quakers-joqne, when one said, Truly he
sound great refreshment there: I could prove all, if they dared to face me.

On goes George.

The Lord said to me, go to such a Steeple-house, and testify against that
Ido'l and the Worshippers there. -- I cured a distracted Woman. -- Many were
cured of Infirmities; and Devils were cast out. One hearing a Priest in a
Steeple-house, the word of the Lord came to him, do thou not know my Servant
is in Prison; so he came to me. -- One said of me, there was never such a Plant
bred in England. O Pharisaical Vain-glorying! I was moved of the Lord to put of
my Shoos, and to go through the City of Litchfield, and cry, Woe to the bloody
City of Litchfield; I saw in the street, a pool of blood, and my feet were
warm; I knew not what it was; but I was told, in Dioclesian's time, Thousands
of Christians were there Martyred; so I was to go without any shoos in their
blood. -- Who can believe this Fable? One said to a Justice of Peace, an Angel
came in at Beverly Church. -- It was, said George. Observe the trick, he soon
got in and went out.

It was strange to see a man come in without a Band. Bands and Hatbands were
once condemned by the Infallible Spirit, as well as Lace and Ribonds. -- I
cried, preach freely. (Did George do so?) People were moved by my Groans. Did
he not groan on purpose? I saw a Profession without a possession. See how proud
the Fool was of a common Gingle going up and down among Illetirate Country
People. When they saw the man with leathern Breaches come in, the Priests would
be gone; Terror surprised the Hippocrites. Some of them would say, The Hireling
flees, but forgot it was when the Wolf comes, the Quaker. I had a Vision of a
Bear and two Mastiffs that should pass by me and do me no barm. -- which was
the Constable. So may we call every idle dream a Vision from the Lord.

Meat was set before me, as I was about to Eat, the word of the Lord came to me
saying, Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye. (that is, a thought or
motion arose) Immediately I arose from the Table, and eat nothing, etc.

Every Whim was at first a word from the Lord, till they mistook Places,
Persons and Things, and then Folly to all men. His Miracles were no more real
than Popish ones of the Rood of Grace, Christ's Blood, the blood of a Duck in a
vial, etc. when he tells of Outward Ordinances, know Reader, the design of this
Book, is a Lie in this thing; We affirm, That as Food or Physic looked on,
handled, tasted, neither kill hunger nor cure pains; so the bare talking or
knowing of Scripture, will not do without a deep impression on the heart; yet
the work of God lies with the head for knowledge, as well as with the Heart for
Grace. Must Men Experience Scripture, and know it after? They were of old
commanded to teach their Children the Law: Christ said, How read thou? None
said, Thieves, Thieves.

I thought to have gone on to George's Epistles, full of Blasphemy and Falsehood
but I grow weary of such stuff; and I suppose so does the Reader too.

After this Impostor and False Prophet, condemned teaching by Man, but by the
Light; he becomes a Teacher himself; after he disowned all Courts himself, The
Light was Sufficient, He pretends a word from the Lord to set up such
Assemblies, by them was the Light tried; thousands of Quakers seeing this
^are-fac'd Iniquity, hated him for his Hypocrisy. The Author of the Spirit of
the Hat, cries out, O Popery O Prelacy! O Presbytery! This was the thing we
condemned in them. -- Mr. Rogers wrote smartly against them, and tells you what
a bag of Iniquity Friend George was: Whereas George called Ministers False
Prophets; they were, strictly, neither false Prophets nor true ones; they were
True Teachers, but pretended not to Prophecy. George Fox, in another book I
have seen, calls the Scripture, and names Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, Dust,
etc. Papers sent forth for detecting Error, p. 6.

In Epistles I lately saw, George Bishop wrote to the King and Parliament, That
the Quakers were Innocent; in no Rebellion not Dissaffected to him. Yet he, and
Fox, and others, cursed the Presbyterians for attempting to bring in the King;
and when he came in, they wrote to him of their Love to him and Faithfulness.
George Fox would call his Writings, The word of the Lord, the word of God;
though this was too high for Scripture, only for Christ and their words. Mr.
Crisp, a Reformed Quaker, in his Babel builders unmasking themselves, has made
a Collection of their Abominable Errors and Blasphemous Assertions, taken out
of B^^roughs's Works.

That the Sufferings of the Quakers were Greater, and more Unjust, than those
of Christ and the Apostles; for t^ose, said he, suffered by Law, and in some
respect, by a due Execution of Law. p. 279.

In another Book he tells the story of Solomon Eccles, a great Prophet, a
Famous Man, who burnt on Tower Hill His musical Instruments worth about two
hundred pounds, as Cruiso says. He was a great Foxonian; and after John Story,
a Quaker, had condemned the Courts Fox set up, Solloman Eccles came to him (as
I have had it also from a Quaker then present desiring to speak with John
Story, who craved excuse, being very Sick and in constant expectation of Death:
Tell him, said one of Eccles his Companions, Solloman Eccles has a message to
him from the Lord; when they were admitted he thus said, O John Story thou have
condemned the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, Women's preachings and Women's
meetings, the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and thou art bound
in Heaven. -- Be reconciled to George Fox, who is Gods Friend, and the great
Apostle of Jesus Christ, this is the word of the Lord to thee, This year shall
thou dye, because thou have taught Rebellion against the Living God: He
replied, as the Quaker present told me, I expel to dye in a few hours; yet I
know the Lord sent you not: But see the Goodness of God to detect such Villainy;
the Man Recovered, and Lived four or five year after; now if he had dyed, what
a famous Prophet had Sollomen Eccles been? Pray prophecy next, Thus says the
Lord, This winter! O this Winter! there shall be Snow and Ice; yea, I say, Ice
and Snow; yet the next Summer, many Flowers shall be seen in your Gardens; yea,
much Corn in your fields, and not only so, but much fruit upon your Trees, for
so it is revealed unto me, and by this you shall know that I am a True Prophet:
But suppose none of this should be, why then all was understood, not Carnally,
for that is nothing, but Spiritually: This Reformed Quaker professed to me, No
men can understand them by their words.

I mention not George Fox in his Journal, comparing the best of Men with the
worst of Men, the Holy Labo^^^^ (...) of Christ, to Baal's (...) Sor^^^^.
^^das, the Devil (...) this is so common: Vast is the difference between
Pr^aching for hire and taking hire for Preaching: The Priests under the Law,
lived by the Altar, and a good Livelihood they had; can words be plainer than
those of St. P^^l, As they that waited on the Altar lived by the Altar, so has
the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel,
1 Cor. 9.6.7. Now, how is a Man said to live on any Employment; but to have a
Competency (at least for himself and his, and to lay up for wife and Children,
and himself too, against Sickness and old Age: The Disciples 10 Mat. 10. As
Laborers were so worthy of their Hire, that they were to be provided for by
their Hearers; they were forbid to carry Money of their own; the thing is quite
contrary to what our Perfectionists would drive at; Christ worked then
Miraculously, and they were commanded to Trust Providence.

Paul took Wages of some Churches, and Robbed them, as we say, I shall Rob you,
if we take freely; he told the Corinthians, He had power to forbear working,
which was enough, as well as Barnabas and other Apostles: If he wrought, he
complained of it to them, and ^ays the fault on them: Must we be reviled too,
or stoned, because he was? But I pray when did Fox work? If any say, he had
much other work; Paul had more, The care of all the Churches lay on him: Paul
bid. Timothy give himself wholly to those things; Meditation (or Studying) and
Reading. 1 Timothy 4.13. How many pair of Shoos, I pray did friend George make,
after he got so well by Speaking? He grew Rich, he eat the fat and drank the
sweet, and so the poor Shoemaker preaches up his Mortification. You shall find
how much George was concerned at what others said of him; I have heard of one
much concerned this way, and asked one, What do men say of me? He replied,
Fools say you are a W^se Man, and Wise Men say you are a Fool; and I pray which
thin^ you?

This Journal of G. Fox is now taught in their Public Schools, and read
instead of Scripture in their Families from day to day; This, in a word, is
become the Quakers Bible: they often have written against our Bible, I now have
written against theirs: Jam Sumus ergo Pares. Not only do the followers of
George Keith condemn this Fox, as a Notorious Deceiver and Impostor, but the
Harp-Lane Quakers disown his Discipline, as the Women's Meeting, etc. though
they are corrupt, as to his Doctrine about Christ. -- with the
Grace Church Street Quakers, who own both Doctrine and Discipline. Well, G.
Fox's Wife, once Margaret Fell, though past Childbearing, was to have an Isaac,
the Midwife was sent for, but nothing comes, yet this was the Marryage that was
a type of Christ and the Church.

I commend George among all the lies he tells, he added not this, That they who
went to Convert the Pope, according to their expectation, could by Inspiration
speak to him in his own Language: I have not so much Charity to believe that
Conscience or Modesty kept him from this, but an open Notorious Confutation;
Friends however made bold to whisper this among themselves, and have been so
impudent to tell me so. That his followers differ about their sentiments,
concerning the Trinity and Scripture, yet they care not for that, whilst they
all keep to the fundamentals of their Religion, that Men put not of their Hats,
nor the Women Kirsey, but both say Thee and Thou. There are about One Hundred
Thousand that have followed him, as has been computed; these make Heathens
Christians, and Christians Heathens. It is expected when Muggleton is dead, his
Journal will be Printed also, and his prophesies, as some of his Disciples tell
us; though Fox and he damned one another as False Prophets times without number.

He that would know more of George Fox's Ignorance, Lies, etc. Read his great
mystery and battledore a large Folio also. They, the Quakers, can tell who are
are Saints; who are Devils, who Apostates, without speaking a word. He denies,
p. 99. That Christ has a Humane Body or a Humane Soul. Asserts plainly, That
the Soul of man is a part of God, that it came from him and goes to him again.
p. 272. and p. 99. That Christ is not distinguished from the Father, if as Penn
pleads, he meant Separate; then George, though Inspired, was ignorant of words,
and in the name of the Lord condemned them that rightly used them. You are,
says he p. 114. conceived in sin; David did not say, You are, but I was, --
Profoundly answered: His answer to Dr. Owen's Chatechism, is fit only for
Laughter.

He answers John Gilpin's Book, (a book worth reading) of Quakers bewitch That
he was Drunk after he left the Quakers, and a Warrant was out for him; the
usual Answer. Page 244. The Immortal Seed are the Saints, and then they are not
Dust and Ashes; Abraham was so: In his Battle-door we have a large book about
Thou and You; what it is in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Syriack, Samaritan, Dutch,
German, French, all Languages to me, says he, is dust, who was before all
Languages were. O Blasphemy! the whole of this Book is a Cheat: this Fool
understood not English, much less what he wrote of, which was another words.
He could write Hebrew Letters, and many were hung up in Friends Houses to make
them believe he did all by Revelation; an Ungodly Cheat.

I shall only propose to the Quakers a few Questions.

1. Seeing the Papists pretend to Infallibility, Miracles and Prophesies, and
the Muggletonians too, why should you be credited more than they? Had any one
man of you the gift of Tongues? George Fox himself, when he was sent abroad,
when in America he sent for one Emperor and two Kings to Preach to them, they
understood not his English, he was a barbarian to those barbarians: if you say
the Testimony was inward. -- I pray be sure keep it there, trouble not us with
it.

2. Can any Atheist or Papist speak worse of the Holy Scriptures than you? It
is well known, Sam. Fisher said, They were not capable of being but a Lesbian
Rule, a nose of wax; and asked this question, How could any on: be Infallible,
that they were not a cunning devised sable? I have not seen his works in Folio
these many years; but I remember such playing on this subject (and that in
verse too) as is not fit to be named.

3. How abominable is it in Disputations and Discourse, to use words, Janus
like, with two faces or a double sense, one to quiet an Objecter, another to
satisfy Friends privately? You are good at Hocus Pocus (the old phrase from
the Papists, Hoc est Corpus, turning a Wafer into a Body) yet you will call a
man Liar if he repeat your sense, if not exact words; should you say a
Shilling, and I repeat it 12 pence, if to se^^e ^ turn, you would say you never
said so: How often do Friends answer to what is not asked, and evade what is?
You sometime ask us, What Scripture for Absolute and Relative? yet use such
words your selves.

4. How much are you unlike the People you were? Muggleton long since cursed
you, That your Visions and Revelations should fail: Blessed, said you of old
for your Quakings, are they that tremble at my Word; yet some said, The Devil
'trembled in them: What is he blessed then? Now you tell us, That as when a man
takes Physic, he is much disordered in his Body till his distemper be gone;
so you, till sin was purged out: What have none that turn Quakers, for almost
forty year past, any sin in them to be purged out, as well as the first
Quakers? Nothing was more common at first then this Scripture, They shall not
teach every man his Neighbor, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know
me from the greatest to the least. yet G. Fox taught them every where; and it
has been often said in Meetings, Friends, you are to take notice, William Penn
will be here next First Day. But how could they tell, on their Principle,
whether he should be moved to speak to them?

I close this part of my Work, with the words of Mr. Rogers, a Bristol Quaker,
he wrote a Poem, called A Scourge for George Waitehead an Apostate Quaker, in
the close of which, he has these words. Let George Fox, and they that uphold
him, Remember 'twas Jereboam that caused Israel to sin, and as his name was
branded to Posterity so shall thei^s (...). -- We cannot own them to be Head
and Lawgivers; their Church, Government, Orders, Canons Ecclesiastical, are
become a Reproach, Taunt, Byword in the Nation, as a just recompense of their
Pride Apostasy and deep Hypocrisy.

The QUAKERS No Apostates, Or the Hammerer Defeated, etc. Examined.
MY Learning is talked of by this Man, to make Trophies for his Victory, yet it
seems my Arguments are light; If by light, said one in the like case, you mean
clear, I wonder you cannot see them; if by light you mean trivial, I wonder you
cannot answer them. I thought I had in my first Book so smitten the Quakers,
that I need not to have smitten them a second time.

Because Repetitions are tedious, especially of Impertinencies, I shall not
trouble you with many of his words; neither shall I actum agere of what is my
own.

I see I have so broken their Teeth that they cannot bite, though they can bark.

This Man of impotent malice, having lost his reason, falls a Raving and Lying
prodigiously beyond all Men, as shall be proved: I had taken no notice of him,
nor W. C. the Churchman, had it not been for my foregoing work, being the
seeblest Adversaries I ever had. Reader, know for the veneration this man and
some few more seem to pretend to for the Scripture, it is nothing; they deny it
to be the word of God any more than their own Books, which are Writings of
Truth.

Are they good subjects that deny King William to be Lawful King of England,
because they grant him lawful Prince of Orange? As vast a difference is there
between the light of Nature, and that of Scripture, as between the light of a
Glowworm, and the light of the Moon in the Night time

I brought a writ of Error against the Quakers, and see how frantic they grow;
their Errors are so many, that if one should ask a Quaker, What is thy Name?
instead of the blasphemous answer of one, my name is, I am; he might reply in
the words of the Demonaick in the Gospel, to Jesus, Legion, for we are many;
ask their Principles, one tells you one thing, and another another, and all
from the same Infallible Spirit; nay, the same man shall transform himself into
several shapes; they cannot stand before Scripture or Reason; when the Sun
appears, the night of Bats and Owls is come.

I profess my self to be ashamed to meddle with this Accuser, who is so
Infamous for Lying, that all the world can confute him: The Papists in their
Casulstical Writing, have asserted, It was lawful for a Priest, if suspected
and taken, to say or swear it before a Justice of Peace or a Judge.

Quest. Are you a Priest?

Answ. No, that is of Bacchus or any Pagan God.

Quest. Did you ever read Mass?

Answ. No, that is not with a design to tell you of it. etc

They can deny at the place of Execution any Treason or Murder, and say they
are as innocent as the Child to Night born: Why? because forfooth, they have
been since absolved; nay, if occasion be, that they dye Protestants too; that
is, they protest again? the rieresies of the times.

It was well said of Mr. Mead the true Englishman, in the late Reign to his
Immortal Honor) when Sir D. C. told him of the Quakers Knwery about five years
since in Brislot, in cheating the King (a piece of Roguery too long to relate)
the men chosen, as the best of them, by his Majesty's order, to decide the
matter, were so vile, that he said, thou have them upon the hip, spare not a
man of them. -- B. C. i^ a Foxonian Quaker, Ideal with him as such; not a
separate Quaker, these roundly answered to Dr. Lancasters Questions (Bp. of
Londons Ciraplain) about Christ, etc. when the Foxonians did it sophistically;
the Separate ones answered well to alltl equestions from Philadelphia in
Pensilvania, when the Foxonian ones there refused to do it; they swallow all
that Fox once said, and now Penn, without chewing: To Revile and Curie is
Common; Oh! what puputridstinking words come from the mouths of the pretenders
to Pure Breathings?

No doubt when some of the Quakers, Fellow-Heathen in America, hear their hard
character of the best Ministers with us, they think we are like Canabals, or
like Infernal Fiends.

Some when they drank of the old doctrine of Christianity, desired not their
new. 5 Luke 39. but said as he of the wine, The Old is better.

Deism is now a thriving weed in England, and Quakerisin is of kin to it. The
Deist (observe) and Quakers are very friendly one to another: how writes Mr.
Nor is of Love to God as Creator, Benefactor; Why not Redeemer? I have been
asked the question, Is be a Deist? I do not say he is; this is he that has
written so favorably of the Quakers to his perpetual shame.

I am informed, the Quakers Preach more a crucified Christ within a year or
two, then ever they have done this thirty year. Well, G. Keith, and other
Reformed Quakers, have taught them to speak well, but have they yet taught them
to think or believe well? They say no, All but mere Tricks: Ignoramus Whitehead
now Preaches, Christ's Body is in Heaven that was once in the Grave. Well, if
you be Inspired Persons now, you were Impostors once.

Now for some of B. C's Assertions, the naming of which is enough, or more than
enough for any that have read my Quakers Impostors or Apoststes, proved from
their Avowed Principles and contrary Practices. he says, That he found not
Truth or Serse till be came to p, 62. of that Book. That the Bristol Quakers
never left their meeting in the last Persecution unless when Sick, etc. not
Lawrence Steel, or others. That the Quakers generally bow not to men, etc. That
George Whitehead and William Penn did ever hear their open Testimoney, that in
my bro^ I grant the Quakers are more just than others, and careful not to tell
a Lie. That I plead for Lying as a Lawful thing.

That I bring 2 Timothy 15. When I call to mind the unfeigned faith that dwelt in
thy Grandmother Lois, etc. as a place of scripture for playing at Bowls and
Ninepins: These and many more things, I dare be bold to say, He knows all to be
false. He must have a face of brass that asserts this. No wonder Quakers cry
shame, and Mr Penn sent me so civil a Message to disown his being concerned
since the Cry about it. This man has cut the throat of their cause. If I prove
they Bow, I prove them Apostates, on this man's Confession; then Penn is an
Apostate; and the Quakers so, and B. C. himself so, and that since he wrote
this Book, as well as before, as Quakers themselves confess.

Other things I shall Reply to; That I had a fit of Love Mell ancholy, made my
Confessions, and put up in a Madhouse BOX. Hence I am called what he pleased
times without number; as he had this from the Devil, so I suppose W. C. from
his Book: if this be false, if I never was one hour in any such place, What
Defamers are these? Who shall believe any thing on their Evidence? as all my
Friends and Enemies too, acquainted with me, know these stories to be some of
the most Impudent Falsehoods that ever were written, as I declare they are, and
I never heard the stories till now; so I say, as the Epistle, I will give Five
Pounds to any man that shall prove it. I hope no Ministers, for my sake, will
regard what these Monsters, not Men, say of them, and People not Regard.

That R. V. denies, That be corfessed to me, their Minds were changed, about
leaving the place of Public Worship in time of Persecution. That Monsieur
Whitehead, denies he expounded Solomon's Fool for a Holy Man. Whosoever is Simple,
Prove. 9.4. Give me any form of Words as an Oath or Protestation before God, I
will use them, That I heard both these two things with my own Ears; the
Cretians are always Liars, and so are the Quakers. Should I say, I this day saw
a Quaker carried along Drunk by six Men, holding his Hands, Legs, Body, that I
never saw none so carried but he, I care not for their denying, when so many
Spectators know it True. That he knows not the story of the 40 days Fast, etc.
Never heard von of Mrs. C. of Plymouth? if her husband A. be alive, let him
thank you, not me, you force me to it; I care not to mention names, for
reason-mentioned in that Book.

That W. P. denies the story of Mr. Nicholet whom he caused to be turned out of
his place for Licensing a Book against Popery, in the Reign of K. James the 2d.
Why had not Mr. Penn gotten this under Mr. Nicholet's, own Hand? Let him yet do
it, it much concerns him; No, no, his guilty Conscience keeps him from desiring
it, and Mr. Nicholets honesty and credit from doing it. That I say, I have
(...) me, yet I write what I have read and heard. Every Child, B. C. excepted,
would know the sease of this; Did any one think, tho I am far from my Study and
friends, I must forget all that ever I read and heard too?

That I said, I would not propose a Question to William Pnen, and yet did,
about not serving Protestant but Popish Kings in Wars, when the sense is plain,
I proposed it not for an Answer to me, he being suspected to be no small
Jacobite. And now the Guas road, Chimpuden and Falsehood: The Lake for the Liar,
and the Liar for the Lake, etc. But what is for thee B. C. thou impudent
Publisher of so many notorious Untruths? nay, no and of them: as that I wrong
the Quakers, to charge them with denying Scripture to be a Rule: Judge all men,
Quakers themselves; That to pray in Families and alone, is the known practice
of Quakers, etc. must be a notorious Untruth or Equivocation: What is it the
Old shift, mental Prayer? no friend C. that is almost gone too. Seeing you so
provoke me about Barclay, others remember the Words as well as I; and I
declare, He was once a Papist and served the Priest at the High Al^^^: I am
ready to prove his Confession of this, where, and to whom, had my challenge
been accepted of: I am a Hundred Miles from my Study, I think it not worth
while to go to Cullington to carry your Answer, who have out done all men in
Lying, by telling me in Print, that Quakers generally bow not to men; What will
you say as one, We bow not, but give a civil N^d? Well, the Civil Nod was once
called Bowing and condemned to man, as due only to God, and all in the name of
the Lord.

I am not bound to follow thee B. C. in thy large discourse to make up something
about Baptism and the Lords Supper; only was not 1 Cor. 1.14 etc. a notable
place to prove it is out of door to Baptize, when Paul names whom he Baptized
did he go beyond his Commission? or acted he not according to Mat. 28.19, 20.
He gives the reason why he was glad he Baptized no more, Iesi any should say I
Baptized in my own name? for some said, I am of Paul: Christ sint him not to
Baptize, as his principal Work, for that was to preace the Gospel; Like That,
Labor not for the most t^^^ perishes (not so much, or not in comparison) but
for that which endures to Eternal Life, Laboring for food that perishes, is
so far from being a sin, it is a great Duty in all, and the neglect a great sin
against the Law of God and Nature. Mat. 28.19 must be of water baptism, for man
cannot baptize with the Spirit.

For the Syllogism B. C. lays down (once condemned by the Infailible Spirit as
a Heathenish Custom, hateful to a Christian) how knows he the Apostles
Baptized not acording to the Form, Mat 28.1, because we read not so; besides,

What if Christ's Words be not a necessary form to be then Used; they that
preach in the name of God and Christ, may do it without naming this in so many
words, I determine not now but confute his Argument; the Lords Supper they Say,
they need not; the Substance is come to them; you wicked and Ungodly Wretches
was not the Substance come to Paul, and other Saints at that time: what
Substance is come to you you Prayerless Worldly Creatures?

Now how can this Man call his Idle Tale an Answer? might I not have expected
my Questions to W. Pean to be considered in Order?

Q. 1. About Perfection. What I say of Job, Asa, Paul, None of my reasons here
are considered; if the Doctrine of Perfection be not True, they were Imposters,
if True, Apostates, for they now Confess, They are not Perfect; then say I of
the Devil, for so they once said to us.

Q. 2. Of G. Bishop's Lookings Glass, if way of the Quakers was not like the
Old Christans, He was an Impostor; If the Old way was good, they (...) Apostates

Q. 3. For Matings, They left (...) their Public Place, were taken in a
Private One: Would in a good ^^^mour tell some of ours, how they Itgle a
meeting such all ask day, (...) going in and coming out so fear of ^^^^^^ers;
Were they Aposiates that did this? They that came out of Prison went no more
Openly; O shameless Creatures to deny this, and call me Liar.

Whitehead, when blamed for not appearing in London as before, said, He could
be of as good Use in such (...) ^^^vate Place; Was never in Prison in all the
lift Persecution, as I am creditly Informed; yet some wright Acts 9. 24. that
had not been in Scripture Paul's being let down in a Basker, etc. Deny, and Deny
as you will, I snow you so well I will as soon take the word of a Seminary
Priest or Jesuit about his Church, as yours about your Light, etc.

Mr. Vickris at his own House told me, There was a Dark Day came on us cannot
decayed. -- Some were in Dect, Fritters (...). When I answerted him, The (...)
in it (...) not in (...) (...), he said, I believe (...), else it unist be
(...) as (...) say. The a said (...), Pepent of (...) a fuly. Message from
for Lord, and do it no more. so we sat down good Friends, and talked of other
things The Story of Elizabeth Serring and For as Dole, is Notorious; did I name
the Habitation of either or them, that you thus B. C. quarrel? Pray Look again.

Quest. 4. The Question is, About (...) Ministers for Hummour beginning and
following Penn for his. The answer is about Spiritual Learning. Was not Perm
followed for his Parts? Had he more of the Spirit than the rest? No, say some
Quakers, much less; others say he had none at all: Was not Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew condemned, etc. Must I name things again and again, and still
unanswered? My charge against Penn; being no Scholiar seems to be granced.

Qust 7. About Bowing to men. Thon tellest the Greatest Lie that ever was told
the world, You bow not; you Quakers, Men, Women and Children, speak out; Is not
B. C. an Impudent, Infamons, Ungodly I var?

Quest 5. For saying one thing to Cromwell in the name of the Lord, and the
quite contrary to King Charles; I am put off, The Snake in the Grass will be
answered. It will be a pure dish; it has been long looked for; the answer you
give me and others may serve a Menter is: For my Questions they should have
been considered, which an^s;wered of the Reader.

What is W. Penn? what are the Quaker^?

I am told How many of us promised lives and for tunes to K. James, I answer,
Jeremary, yet not so many as you image: They that did, did not pre^end to
(...), Inspiration, and I know not (...) the Bristol Address was from them
called Presbyterians; There were five of us in or nigh the City; this was the
act only of one Man; all the rest of us (Ministers) protested against it; nay,
One (now Dead) Said, He could be content, they and their Pesterity, should lose
the Benefit of Law, who so shank fully betrayed it. I and one Minister more,
were in deny or of being bed at Council Board for opposing the Court design:
What a horrid (...) piece (...) was it, to tell that King, (...) Security of
their King (...) (...) from Mature judgment and Rooted Principles etc.

Yet 1. They kept Fast Days for fear of Popery and Slavery.

2. Then ^ould (...) be no Papist, if he believed it Unlawful to Persecute Men
for Conscience in the common Acceptance of the Words; then had the Pope Er^ed,
and a Council, and that in no small matter; but alas K. James knew Prose ution
of men for Heresic was to Persecution for Conscience, besides, an Peroneous
Conscience, was no Conscience Quit non est scientia etc.

3 The Addressers would say privately. All was but a Trick of K. James; No
wonder he Laughed at them when they were gone, and PVAW'd -- etc.

I have been every where, of late years, Plagued about those Scand^lous
Addresses. Some would call a Second Judas, a Second Cyrus, and the Destroyer of
their Country, the Repairer of their Breaches. Well done B. C. to call them
that did it to Repentance, I have called on them; all little enough.

Now Friend C. let me ask thee a few. Questions.

Was it not shameful to censure me and another man, for not putting our names
to our Books, and thou never put thy name to thine? I gave it out to all I was
the Author.

May I not debate the matter with Jews Mahometans and others, and yet be
conclusive in the Doctrine of Christianity? Why Child, what ails thy Noddle?

Is it proper to censure me for being Comical, after I gave my reasons, and
they not considered? p. 6.

Is it true W. Penn Expounded on Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, a sense denied in
one place, confirmed in another; to serve a Turn (I see there was a little
Mistake in putting the names of the Book) could not so great a Liar as thou,
that talks of my being once in a maed-house; that deniest Quakers Bow; Could
not thou have said, Some Enemy, or the Printer, or others, put in those Words,
or that some Letters accidentally jumpt together and make these unhappy
Sentences; Where is Inspitation now? when he was lately told some Quakers deny
any Body of Christ in heaven, etc. He said, they were Ignorant tho Sincere:
What friend William, is the Light and Infallible Spirit come to this?

Did I say in my Book, The Quakers were more humble than others? etc. Away thou
shameless Man; What will thou saynext? Or that, The Quakers were more Just than
others? No, I did not so wrong them? Did I not give a true account of Barclay
about the Light? p. 79. Look once again.

May not Perfectionists, long continuing so, at last reform, and so God be
merciful to them in their Conversion, be a proper Petition: I am not used to
deal with such silly Arguers.

Suppose I should plead the cause of him that wrote the story of Henry Windor;
let it not displease, seeing he was joined with me; who he is I know not.

He is said to be worse then Mad, worse then the Hammerer: why? the two Quakers
that came to Henry Winder and his Wife from the Lord, that they had Murdered a
Child and must dye, and the Spirit would appear in the Court: They were
Meiancholly or Mad, says B. C.

1. They were owned by the Quakers before, in and after, to their Death.

2. This Madness was not discerned by the Justice or Judge, or Quakers or
others, but the Quakers closed in with them.

3. If any thing falls out as they say, They be the Lords Prophets; if not,
they were then mad. Was Sollomon Eccles Mad when he Prophesied falsely to John
Story; not when he prophesied of the burning of London, of which Friends took
no more notice then the Men of the World, and so never moved their Goods,
saying, It was a Delusion? Was W. Penn Mad, when he prophesied against Thomas,
Hicks? For the story in Bristel of a Quaker that said, Thus says the Lord,
give the man his Rope again; it is denied; so is every thing else; but I pray,
Why not as well as when G. Fox was about to Eat, The word of the Lord came unto
him, saying, Eat not. -- as before.

Now B. C. to humble thee, if it may be, for thy Folly and Falsehood; I will
suppose, I should apply my self to thee in the same Language thou have done to
me, and with the like Falsehood, What would thou say of me? what many now do,
and many more will of thee: Suppose I should besprinkle thee with some of thy
Oratory to me and another; Th^^ impostor, in thy Colors, fit for Box or
Bedlam: in thy south thou were burnt in the band at Bristol for a Highway-man;
yea, thou were Pillored, and thy Ears were cropped off for Sedition: Thou
refusest to Preach to the Quakers under Five Hundred a Year. None of my Friends
in Bristol ever deserted St. James's Back, etc. in the last Persecution; and I
will prove it, for it is well known John Weeks was committed to Prison;
therefore neither he, George Founs, Samuel Winney nor I, did ever refuse to
walk up and down the City on week days, or to Preach in our Public Places to a
thousand at a time, Lords Days. O thou Impudent Man, Madman, etc. Thou did
prove the Unlawfulness of Bowls and Ninepins from Mat. 1.2. And Abraham begat
Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his Brethren. He must
set up for the trade of Lying, that does it more than thou; every lease is full
of Nonsense: None have so much the command of the Peoples Purses as the She
Speakers; yet to avoid Reflections as much as may be, I have thus spoken to
thee, etc. But there is no end of this; should I thus do, might I not fear as
Cain; you had as good cut off a man's arm or leg as thus desame him: Well, one
consideration is comfortable, a Quakers word is no Slander.

You have been known to be Notorious Liars in your highest Pretenses, your
greatest Speakers.

I had almost forgotten to tell the Reader, that B. C. in the name of Friends,
says, As Scripture contain the Word and Command of God to us, so they are the
word of God, etc. No more need to be said; your cause is gone: I therefore
declare my work lies with Mr. Penn, to him were my Questions sent, and seeing
he cannot answer, and therefore wisely attempts it not, I intend no more to
answer such scriblers as B. C.

I leave you with St. Paul's words, Gal. 1.6, 8, 9. I marvel you are so soon
removed to another Gospel; but though we or an Angel from Heaven Preach any
other Gospel unto you, then which we have Preached unto you, let him be
Accursed; as we said before, so say I now again, if any man Preach any other
Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be Accursed. Which words
have been wisely and seriously used by some Ministers, when Quakers have come
from far to them to deliver a Message, forsooth, from the Lord, against the
Outward, Word, and Outward Christ, and Outward Baptism, and Outward Supper.

Now for the Man of Wit, Civility and Learning; the Author of,
Trepidantium Malleus, Intrepidanter Malleatus: Or, the West-Countrey
Wise-A-ker, Crackbrain'd Reprimand, to a late Book called, Mr. Keith no
Presbyterian, nor Quaker, but George the Apostate. Hammered about his own
Numscul, being a Joco Satyrrical Return to a late Tale of a Tub, emitted by a
Reverend Non-Con, at present residing not far from Bedlam, By W.C.
NOw Monsieur, I hope I have pleased you to the heart; and no more will you
send a Hue and Cry after me for taring away a Rag of the Title of your Book.

What a Blustering Title is here? I must not examine its Grammar or Oratory,
because the Writer is a great stranger to both, as will be soon enough
discovered: In the mean while, I remember I have heard that when K. James I.
was about to Knight* one Williams of Essex, he asked him, what his Christen
Name was? He answered, penny ruden buden budibras penny knip knap clip clap
clun clap, I think, said the King, the Old Nick was thy Gadfer that gave thee
such a name; Sir Ruden, I cannot tell what, Williams, arise, said he: whoever
gave him his name, let the world judge who made your Title for you, who is the
Father of Eye, the Slanderer of the Brethren: Well, Mr. Trepidantium Malleus,
Intrepidantur Malleatus, I cannot tell what; let me parley with you; Empty Casks
make great Sounds: Your Title, that Blazing Comet, does it presage any
mischief? certainly its own disappearing. You tell the World strange news of
me, that I assure you I never heard till now. Had you it from the Infallible
Spirit and Writings of Friend B. C. of my Love Melancholy, and being at Box,
mentioned and hinted 10 times in your little Pamphlet? Always on the same Tune
you know what Creature is so: When was this? when was I at Box, or any such
place? Oh I have hit it, it was when the Presbyterian said, If ever Jesus
Christ was D -- it was when he made the Lords Prayer; which W. C. makes no
bones of to write plainly, though a Turk would hardly wirte so of his Mahomet:
-- What will not Church and Quakerish Jacobites say: W. C. a Churchman, he
says, and perhaps the first letter may stand for Wicked. Well, Mr. W. C. you
Wicked Churchman, I promise any of your Brethren, Five Pound, if they can
before me, prove your Charge: You say, You are afraid, lest by answering me,
you should be forced to go to Bedlam too, etc. Sure here are had simptomes of
hastniag there, but alone for me; and in the close of all, you anticipate an
objection to your Readers.

What think you Sirs, am not I almost as mad as my Antagonist to answer his
rambling stuff? How does W. C. answer, by granting the thing, but promising
Reformation; Excuse it this once, I will trouble you no more: Well then, You
have been once mad; if this be granted, your Readers are mad too, if they
regard such a man's promise out of his fit, much more if in it.

I never heard what the fate was that besel me for my High Demands for
Preaching; Had you it from B. C.? you are grown a great Church-Friend to
Friends; you write of Mr. Penn, Mr. Whitebead and other Quakers, with great
veneration and devoir, and have many a good word for them; They Allegorize not
away the Literal Sense if Scripture; though it is so noto^^ous they have done
it often; though to serve a turn, they shall call for the Literal Sense, Take
it up, look on it, lay it aside again: but Mr. Keith and I are both fit for
Bedlam; it is pity the Hospital in Moor-fields should part-us, etc.: Nay,
which is more strange, Mr. Bugg, a Reformed-Quaker, and now a Zealous Pious
Churchman, cannot escape the Lash: He, Mr. Pennyman and Mr. Crisp left the
Quakers on disgusts, and particular Pecques; why had you not told what they
were? for fear of a Confutation: All know they left them only for their
Blasphemies, Heresies and Abominable Practices.

But that which is almost unpardonable, is, your Vilifying the Man whom all the
World Admires, an high Episcopal Man too, the Author of the Snake in the Grass!
All that wrote against the Quakers before, played with them, till he wrote that
unanswerable piece. p. 17. That his writings are collections of those
Gentleman's before named; which is, say you, as if we should take an account of
the Presbyterians from Bishop Laud or Heylen; or of our Church from Bellarmine
and Harding: Well macht Mr. Churchman, say I, but the mischief is, his
Collections are not in their Books; in good truth Sir, you might well ask your
Reader, Whether he did not think you mad? Mr. Snake consulted the Authors he
cites, and it would have been a most Injurious Charge to so great a Man to be
so unworthily Reflected on, had it not been by such a D -- as all must see that
are Scholars, and read your Book.

He, Mr. Keith and I, in our Three New Ways of Dealing with the Quakers, help
not one another to Materials: after you censure us all, as if Fools or Madmen;
you tell us, Such Fools as you think to make Fools of them (Quakers)

You ask us, How does it appear Mr. Keith is Reformed? He desires you to
appear, so do I; there is no end of Printing in your way, Cite at large, and
then dispute what is the sense of this word and that word; but neither you, nor
William Penn, will meet Mr. Keith, or me; Come torth you Cowardly Defamers,
show your Faces if you dare.

Because Mr. Keith, changed not in any one Article of Faith, may he not
therefore be ^^anged in other things? You say, You set as a looker on, That the
Joy of all Ministers about G. K. is groundless, and they be all mistaken: What
is the Bishop, Lord Mayor, and Clergy mad too, as well as G. K. and
Trepidantium Mallous? Conformists know not who you are: You seem to own your
self to be a Jacobite, though not a Socinim, and that I have hit the mark about
your being paid by the Quakers for the Service you do them, and ask me,

Why may not I as well as Dr. Stubbe? It is an old question, Why may not one
man play the Knave as well as another? Perhaps you are of the opinion of H. P.
in the time of the War, when one called him Knave, said, If thou were not a
Fool thou would be one too now: Yet you tell me, I would unsay all I have
written against the Quakers, for Money: Well Brother, I am then no fool, though
so often called so: You ask me, Whether when I had a Privilege Place, I ever
put on my Surplice? No Sir, when I was at the worst, I was never so Mad yet, as
to put my Shirt on all my Clothes; I will not only as soon, but sooner take Du
Moulins Fools Coat, which though he would wear, all would not; Would not a
Fools Coat well become a Minister of the Gospel? when I was a Preacher at
Brislington and Charleton, I had Presbyterian Ordination; I baptized according
to the Directory; I Catechized in the Church, in, What is the chief end of Man?
etc.

Mr. W. Churchman tells me, He could trov. G. Keith 's Questions to be
Prepositions, if need were. -- He can say more of the Aberdeen business then I
do know, or are like to know for him; is a fine way of answering: I ask you one
question, Whatever place Mr. Keith Allegorized in Scripture, Did he once disown
the Literal Sense? this his Adversaries, you plead for have done; though
sometimes they would own it Politickly; Show one place where he is guilty here?

For your Citations, It is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones when it
Rises; then say I, Not the same Numerical Body: He ever owned it the same for
Substance, though not Qualities: What think you of the stub stance of the Egg,
and Chick coming of it? of Rain, when Ice or Snow? So his other, is not that
Flesh that shall be raised; the Apostle says not, That Body, etc. 1 Cor.
15.27, 53. Yet this Mortal shall put on Immortallity: How shall it arise?
Various opinions are about it, among them that are sound in the Doctrine of the
Resurrection.

For your great Contradiction, p. 13. about (...) the (...) Christ, as
universally ^^^essa^^ to S^^vation and yet True C^ristia^^y may sul^^^^n about
the ^^^^^edge of Christ in the ^^^^r, he says, ^^ny know little of the History
of Christ, (...) Birth, manner of Life and Death, that must know him to be a
mediator and Savior, and how far God may even to Heathens, discover a
Mediator, before they dye who knows? You have many in your Church, and too many
in ours, that assert more than this, That Heathen Turks, etc. that never disown
their Mabomet, may Love God and be Saved: are these Apostates too? For that is
my Question; not whether G. Keith wrote Unsoundly at one time, or contradicted
himself at another: For that mistaken passage in his Exact Narrative, He had
not changed in one Principle of Religion, for Thirty Year or more: He did not
mean by Principle, Opinion, as you seem to understand him, but Artitle of
Faith: Sure he confessed before, (...) Change in Opinion about many things, as
Matthew 28.19. but he was Baptized himself in Infancy, which he owns, etc.

You tell us not what bitter Expressions he once dropped against Presbyterians
and others, but in the general, Hard ones; only that he called y^^ Prelacy
Limbs of Antichrist, your Mi^^stry, Ambitious, Lordly, without Ze^^ for God,
and you bid me look in his Books. -- Why Sir, I thought you had known that not
only G. Keith, but the Scots Presbyterians, Rutherford, Gelaspee, and many
others, called them so too: and at home the Anabaptists, and some Independents
and Presbyterians themselves have done the like: Does this prove them
Apostates? No, no more, nor so much as the names you give our Ministers and
Meetings, too gross to foul my Paper with, prove you to be so: For Election, I
take him to be more found than you, your Citations of him and your joques
compare together.

If you prove him a Corrupt Man, a Man that had forgotten himself, and dropped an
Unadvised word at Turners-Hall, I had not been his Voucher; but an Apostate he
was not by any Arguments of yours, and therefore you a Libeller; what your
design was in that abusive Pamphlet, he that runs may read: I know he has
corrupt notions many and great, and yours of the New Church of England
(Remember there I keep, not the Old one) not few or sinail; how I have proved
that, I need not tell you; so well, you thought it not safe to Reply, but only
rage, You Ungrateful Wretch, etc. I profess, when (...) look upon my
Reprimand, I wonder how you could call your Return an Answer; Was it Ignorance
or Malice? perhaps both; but no wonder when you tell the Quakers, that I have
written nothing to purpose against them; I suppose you do not, cannot think so:
Why answer you not my Questions to Mr Penn, he could not, B. C. attempted it,
but has ruined their cause, and advanced mine, by making Lies his Refuge,
which I suppose makes Mr. Penn disown any hand in it.

I say it again, My work was not fully ^^^^ify G. Keith, (...) whether he hat^
contradicted himself, but to detect W. Churchman 's design, which was to
strengthen the hands of Penn and the Foxonian Quakers, to wound the Separate
Ones; this is obvious to any Sober Reader to be his Design: Did G. K. ever
reject the Literal Sense, as they often did of Scripture? If he said Christ
within was the Object of Faith; did he say only as within; denying Christ
without to be so, which all know the rest did times without number: I am glad
we have him so far, I wish more, I doubt not he is C^^pable yet not so vile as
W. C. makes him; he will shortly answer for himself.

Further, W. C. proves him an Apostate by denying Election, etc. I replied,
Then are the Arminians Apostates, which is to be abhorred by Sober Men: He says
I am no Arminian, No, and yet joques after B. C. and sports himself with you of
the Election of Grace; (...) Reprobate World; you babes of Grace; which Pious
Sober Arminians do not: Well, if he be not so, are such Arminians as appear in
a great Figure, and who are numerous in the Church of England, Apostates? I
proved at (...) the New Church of England is an Apostate Church on his
Principles, not mine: I am answered, You are an Ungrateful Wretch to reflect
on that Church that gives you your Liberty: We humbly and heartily Thank His
Majesty and the Parliament, for continuing the Liberty we had before, but will
you not thank us for helping you to secure your Liberty, by joining with you to
effect the late happy Revolution: How odious would it have been, after all, to
have made our Circumstances worse than King James did; yet to be plain, Had not
he given a Toleration, we might have been to seek for it for some of you:
Suppose a Man on the Highway is full of Rage, Beats me, takes away my Money,
and was about to cut my Throat; there comes a Highway-man to destroy both, he
calls for my help, we kill him, he cuts not my Throat after all, I am beholding
to him I confess; but is this an answer to my Objection, Then is this Church an
Apostate Church, etc. which I have abundantly proved, consequent to his Opinion
to say, You are Ungrateful. -- and never answer one of my Arguments; Is this
Disputing? -- The Title of my Book shows what I designed, not a Vindication of
G. Keith, against all his Citations; no, but to convince B. C. of his feeble
Arguing about Apostasy.

In what sense Baptism with Water is and is not a Fundamental; I shall take no
notice of an old objection, when my answers are not considered: Let him read
once again my Reprimand.

Mr. W Churchman, you tell, What care you should take to keep G Keith out of
your Church: I pray let him attempt, First to come in: We do not see he is in
such have: you say, You will not so casily take Members. -- I grant according
to your good old Constitution, you should not: We might be agreed about
Communicants; but according to the practice of some Innovators, this Body has
for scores of years lost its Purgative Faculty, and therefore is so unhealthy
and giddy, by keeping in those Dregs that should be thrown out; you now take
and keep Atheists, Adult^^^rs, Swearers, Ignorant Persons, no^^ (...) visibly
such: thus is its Discipline corrupted as well as Doctrine, for its Doctrine it
is one of the best Churches upon Earth: You ask, Why leave we the Church of
England? I affirm we cannot find it, you have left it, as I have proved in my
Reprim^^^, clearly, fully, accordantly, which you reply nothing too, and I love
not Eandem Cantilenam.

Well, The Presbyterians Persecuted in New England, say you, Whom? Blasphemers
of Christ, Cursers of Magistrates in the Streets, False Prophets, etc. Obj. In
Scotland now: What? such as were found in Popish Cabals, that say, Their
Interest and Religion is concerned in the bringing in of K. James again: But
your Church early Persecuted B. Hooper for not wearing a Surplice, who honestly
condemas all Symbolical Humane Ceremonies in the worship of God, in (...)
Preface to his Savory Exposition on the prophecy of Jonah: Fox, that Glorious
Martyrologer, was a Non Con: Famous Mr C^^^wright, and many more, such, must be
involved in trouble for a few Popish Tri^^^ets: Were your New England (...)
Saints such (...) these? Are your now Martyrs taken up and sent to Goal, for
being in a Corporation, or within 5 miles of it? Ruined for not coming to their
Communion? etc. It is not the Suffering, but the Cause, that makes the Martyr,
for when Christ was crucified, two Thieves were crucified with him.

Did ever any Presbyterian persecute as your Brethren? Who countenanced Sham
Plots? By whom was Stephen College Murdered? Who condemaed him and rejoiced
at his death? I speak the more freely of him, because I was with him often
after his Sentence, and before his Execution: Who believes he came to Oxon with
a design to seiz the King? What be, and be alone? It is well known what the
Earl of Anglesey said: Could my Lord Howard, after his Pardon and Discovery of
another Plot, confirm this? No, he knew nothing of the Shaftsburian Plot: Mr
College, with a shower of Tears, solemnly protested to me, when I begged his
silence if in the least guilty, I never expect mercy from God, if I was guilty,
or know any man to be so that way: Such Sham Plots, put some on real ones,
which indeed were not successful, as your Plot was against James the Second.

I dare say, you cannot believe it, say what you will, That the Presbyterians
railed at much at the Quakers, as the Quakers at them.

Neither can you think the Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments turned into verse
by me, so bad as you say: Pray read, how your Church has done the Lords
Prayer, at the end of the Psalms, approved to be Sung; if mine be Uncouth,
Rhyme Doggrel, Profaning of Scripture, yours much more; so I challenge any man
to take the substance and words of the Ten Commandments more exact in one stave
or eight lines; others approve and more than so, but you will not any thing
that is mine, and for that reason, because mine.

I suppose some in Be^lam have talked better then you, or some others yet out
of it argued more subtilty; I have heard of Mr Widows, famous for a Tract of
Natural Philosophy, that being heard to make a great noise in such a place,
some came to him and asked him what it meant? The Devil, said he, has appeared
to me, and told me, be could prove I could not be saved; I told him be was a
Liar from the beginning, and would be so to the end: The Devil began
Syllogistivally, He whose name is not written in the book of Life, cannot be
saved, but thy name is not written in the book of Life, Ergo thou carst not be
saved; I told him, said he, my name was written in the book of Life, and
therefore I denied the minor: so the Devil went on, The Scriptures is the book
of Life, but thy name is not written in the Scriptures, Ergo, thy name is not
written in the book of Life: I denied, said he, the minor again, and told him
my name was written in the Scripture, he asked me where, I told him, Honor
them that are Widows: indeed there is my name Widows, so I lasted the Devil,
and he is gone.

Were you in such an Academy, or amongst such Collegiates, as you phrase it?
perhaps you might hear things more Ingenious with your Ravings than now we do.

How is it you have not a word to savor the Quakers Prophesies? Is it because
you have such in your Church? Arise ap Even, that mad blasphemous Prophet: Was
it before the Wars, that a Parson prayed, Confound all the Enemies of thy
Clearch and People, a violent cough took him, when over, he thought he was in
that part of the Pulpit Prayer for the Prelates, and so went on, By what Names
or Titles soever they be Dignified, whether the Most Reverend the Archbishops,
the Right Reverend the Bishops, and all inferior Priests and Deatons.

You a Defender of the Church of England! and take no notice of the Cassandrian
Articles, Non Resistance, Bowing to the High Altar, not indeed, Book of Sports
now; thank our Meetings: Desire some one to answer for you, seeing you cannot
for your self.

Now Sir, you would let the world know you have read more then Cato's Verses,
perhaps the Sentences under, for you bring us Noble Apotheigems.

In ipso limine titubare outinosunt est
Nullum reprebenderis vitii, cujus ipse queas reprebendi.
Faedares invidia est, et Authori interdum perniciosa.
Ex me disces, quidingenui homines serre non possunt.
O rare discoveries! such as a Parson said, Amor res est bona, as St. Austin
says: Perhaps you would convince me, that you have yet your Grammar by you,
but all will not do: Insipientes est discere non putarem, etc.

Well, Eris mihi magnus Apollo, is right.

De mortuis nil nisi bonum, and all that follows it, was answered in my
Vindic^ae and Reprimand too, therefore I shall not answer now: Only, Are not
those you Revile every 30th of January, Dead? Was not Dr. Owen Dead? who never
swore to Richard Cromwell, as Oliver, his son, lately assured me: If I must, I
will produce the testimony of Dr Goodwin, Mr Jenkins, about Evangelista
Quintus; and also of Mr Sydrack Symson, Dr Sanderson and many others, whose
little finger was thicker than my Loins: We are better reconciled than you
think for, except a few men that talk as you write. You tell me of one that
said of me, I was fit for Bedlam, but it was as the Quakers say, Good Company.

Mr Baxter was a Prodigee for natural and acquired Accomplishments, I never
doubted, only he wanted the culture of better Education; he was a grave Man, of
a sober life, full of life and motion, a hard Student, very Zealous, and of a
Public Spirit, one of the gravest Preachers upon Earth, which pleased me well;
and I more believe he was a Good Man, than that Origin or Tertullian were so.

But the Quakers will (say you) take Advantage of my comparison between
Baxterianism and Quakerism: that I suppose pleases you, why complain you if
so? but others will see where they are going; whose Cure I hope and see, and
could tell of great instances of Great Men already, were it convenient; I
expect no cure of Quakers when others made a comparison be, tween Baxter and
Bellermine: No doubt Papists triumphed, What then Protestants Reformed.

Because we are often twitted about some men's expresing themselves in these
points, particularly Mr. S^^ph^ard; I declare I am well assured, that the
Sincere Convert was never wrote by him, he gave this under his own hand to Mr.
Giles Fermin, and told him, He never saw it but once, and never desired to see
it more; this Mr. Fermin in censuring that Book, and Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest
and other Tracts, with great depth of judgment has told the world I also with
them, disown Dr. Crisp's wild, unsafe, unsound expressions, and as it is a
trouble to me, so it is to others, particularly some Worthy Congregational.
Divines, that some men, who seem to plead our cause, have dared to be his
Advocates: How odious is it to hear some men, when reproved for idle-walks
about business Lords Days, to say, Jesus Christ has kept the Sabbath for me,
etc. and then cite Dr. Crisp; why do not such say, Jesus Christ has kept the
sixth seventh and eighth Commandment for them, and therefore they may Kill,
Commit Adultery and Steal; such may as well say, Jesus Christ entered into
Heaven for them, and that is enough, tho they never go there; we are content
with Mr. Bolton's way for Distressed Consciences, Dr. Sibbs and others, without
the Doctor's Wild Phrases.

But O wonderful! you have some verses out of Ovid too, but still mistaken

Quo me fixit amor, quo me vehementuis ussit.

Whether the Printers mistake or yours, is a query with me, for the next verse
which must be yours not his, shows what you are.

Hei mihi quod Amor non sit Medicabilis Herbis.

This strongly proves what you say, Fools will be meddling; I suppose you
learned it not out of Obid, but your Grammar, at the end of Syntaxis; look, if
you have it, you shall find it thus.

Hei mihi, quod nullis Amor est medicabilis Herbis

Thou art not able to scan a verse is evident, that took Quod -- a to be a
spondee, when both short; now how might I triumph had I but the tithe or thy
Brutallity.

Seeing you love Cato so well, I will direct to some choice verses, and
suitable ones too, as well as I can remember, without Books by me.

Virtutem primam esse puta compescere Linguam.

Had you remembered this and the next,

Rumores suge, ne inciipas novi^s Auther haberi.

You had never Printed your false stories of Box, etc.

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auce^s.

You flatter the Church of England, smile in her face and cut her throat.

Nam sine Doctrina vitu est quasi mortis imago.

There is for you Sir!

Now for some choice Sentences in Prose ( Erasmus if you have learned so for)
instead of your dullones.

Si male dixeris pejus Audies: That you deserve tho not have.

Bate sapi^^^^, et Quercus concionantur.

There is for you and the People; now for his Eccho's

Quid agunt, qui ambiunt Sacerdotium? Otium, non felix si boni Literis? Eris.

Now for some Proverbs, Ne suitor ultra Crepidam: Had G. Fox, the poor
Shoemaker, and you, thought of it, he had not set up for a Preacher, nor you
for a Poet.

Ante victoriam canis Triumphum; be sure play the fool no more that way: Omnium
borarnm bomo: for the Church of England and the Quakers, (...) the same time
too? There is your m^^ for you: Asinus ad Lyram: W. C. at the Poets.

Now I have stockt you, How often will you throw out these sayings? I have read
them in Erasmas Adag. and else where.

You are coming on as a precious Youth among Friends; Sam: Fisher, or G. Fox
cannot go beyond you for Lying, in loathsome phrases, and homspun Sentences:
Suppose I should, in your words, charge you as falsely as you me, Forty times,
about Box or the Madhouse, etc. would you not (and all the world with you) say,
I was a most Impudent Rogue: Suppose I should say,

You cracked brain; Mad man, in no degree Compis Mentis; you measure your own
Cornby another Bushel (Learnedly Expressed) You Car, you Yelping Cur, you make
my worship smile; remember the Proverb about your charge of Amorous Passions,
etc. the old woman had never sought her Daughter in the Oven, had she not been
there her self: Remember how you were condemned for an Assassinator, and are
shortly to be hanged: You got loose lately from a Mad-house, remember what you
endured there: You were whipped about London-streets for cutting Purses, as all
know.

You Dunce and Blockhead, that write of Latin in Prose and Verse, and
understand not a sentence of either: You deserve to have your bones broken: Do
you hear? Goodman Goose, Goodman Woodcock, you ought to be thankful that I am
so favorable to you: Away you Blockhead, to talk against the Dissenters; I
could answer you if I saw fit; you deserve a kick of the --

Or suppose my Book bore this Title,

The London Wise-aker, Crack-brain'd Apostate maker, proved an Apostate, about
his Numseul, being a joco Satirical return to a tale of a Tub, emitted by a
Reverend Conformist:

How should I expose my self instead of you, as you have done your self in
stead of me?

Who shall believe such shameless infamous Libellers, as B. C. and W. C.
Brethren in Iniquity? Had you served some Men so, they would have ruined you
both; but you have done it your selves, as to your Reputations, etc.

I advise you read a Book over before you answer it, and if you have not so
much wit as to speak sense, have so much wit as to be silent.

The great Dean, Thompson of Bristol, I remember once in the Church, asked a
Boy, before all the Congregation:

Quest. Who made the Catechism, called Man's Chief End?

Answ. A company of Perjured Presbyterians.

Quest. What did I do with one of those Catechisms that that Prodigal Fellow
gave? (That was Trepidantium Malleus.)

Answ. You tore it in pieces, and trampled it under your feet: (He did so in
the open street.)

Quest. What say they of it?

Answ. Oh that it is a most Heavenly Piece, etc.

Quest. But what say you?

Answ. They tell of the Trinity: -- Distinguish between Justification and
Sanctification, etc.

A Curate of his Preached on the 30th. of January, on that Text, He stilleth
the Madness of the People: On went he to work, to prove, The People of England
were a mad People, in that they chose mad Representatives to sit in Parliament;
and he would prove they were Mad, in that they voted against the Succession of
his Royal Highness the Duke of York; in that they sent for and committed to
Prison his Majesty's best Subjects, particularly one now present ( Mr. Thomson)
etc. But, said he (as you to your Readers) You will say, this is a mad
discourse; if I am Mad, said he, I am sure you cannot say as Festus to Paul,
Much Learning has made me so; the People smiled, and said, No, they would
clear him there. You Sir, write like one, if you are such, I also, and all that
read your book, cannot but clear you too in that point.

It is too large here to tell the world of the manner of Mr. Keith's
Convictions, of a Meeting in England, in Pensylvania, etc. he has done it.

Now, That it cannot be charged on him, That ever he denied Christ's Body in
Heaven, etc. which the others did; and Curtis in Redding now still does, Owns
no Christ, nor Heaven nor Hell without him, etc.

Can it be imagined, W. Penn and G. Whitehead had not appeared, when G. Keith
called a Meeting at Turners-Hall, had they not known they were guilty? How many
vain pleas were there to excuse their Nonappearance?

I forgive you from the heart, for these Abuses; but were I Quaker, and you had
so abused me in Print, perhaps I had made my Fleshly Arm to have smitten thy
Outward Man.

I thank you for the kindness you have done me, Slander is sometime the
greatest, that makes all, even Enemies, to Pity, and Pity paves the way for
Love: and I suppose, your story about the Presbyterians, and the Lords Prayer,
no one will believe for my sake; they that object against the use of it say,
what I suppose you cannot answer.

It was made under the Legal Dispensation; that is, when Circumcisions
Sacrifices, etc. were in force: nothing in it is explicitly asked in the name
of Christ; if it be the Laudable custom of all the Churches to conclude a
Prayer, or Grace, if never so short, with a Through Jesus Christ our Lord: Is
this form proper for us now? Hitherto you have asked nothing in my name,
(implicitly) sure, what you shall ask the Father in my name (explicitly) you
shall receive; after this manner pray you, Ties to things, not words; Say thus
to such a man, says the Master to the Servant, He does his business, though in
other words; I will not say, whether the use of it be a matter of Liberty which
lies between Sin and Duty.

Be so wise as not to Talk of your Churches kindness; I was once to be Tried on
the 35th of Elizabeth; one was then questioned for saying, the Bible was good
for nothing but to make men humoursome, that he received the Sacrament in Spain
as well as at Bristol, where they pleased for him; that the Communicants in
their Church, looked like a company of Geese that were to be crammed; that he had
nothing to do at Church but to see fair Women; when this was heard; many were
in a rage for questioning this Gentleman about such things as these, this was
no Fanaticism, and believed that it was Spite, not Zeal, in their Brethren,
that put some on complaints, which they found true.

Well, Mr. Jacobite (for all observe you deny not this, though you do your
being a Church Arminian or Laudencian) I pray remember what your friend Mr.
Penn, wrote to Pensylvania of Mr. Keith.

I am sorry any should quarrel with Honest and Learned G. Keith; my Love to
him, let him enjoy his Principles; he shall want no encouragement from me; for
I love his Spirit, and honor his Gifts, and peculiar Learning, Tongues,
Mathematics and Platonic Studies; yet to please others, Mr. Penn played the
Proteus, and Excommunicated him in London, with such Zeal or Fury, that he
said, He knew not whether he Sat, Stood, or Kneeled; yet had so much wit not
to prophecy against him, as he blasphemously and wickedly did against others,
which came not to pass, therefore Mr. Whitehead has done that in these words,

Thus says the Lord, Thou have poured out great reproach and contempt upon my
Servants and People, I will assuredly pour out great contempt and confusion
up-thee. Yet we hope he will go to the Grave in Peace, as did Thomas Hicks.

You Mr. Wicked Churchman, who are such a Lying Historian, cannot you set up
too for a Lying Prophet, and be talked of as such, with Mr. Penn, and Mr.
Whitehead, your dear Friends?

If it be objected by my Readers, why I have not been less facetious in dealing
with my Adversaries, I have answered to it in other Books, and shall only add,
Some think to give always grave answers to ridiculous Persons and Things, is to
make the answer ridiculous too.

Well, Sir, To draw to a close, Whatever bad Properties I have (too many) some
say I have this good one, To be easily Reconciled.

If we fall out, we must fall in again, I know no other Remedy amongst Men,
unless those that by a figure we call so.

If you please to come to my Lodgings, I am plain without a complement, you go
no where where you can be more welcome; and the subject of our discourse you
shall choose, not I; an Amicable Conference or Silence about these things as
you please: I have often said, It is not falling out that does so much mischief
in the world (for that is to most unavoidable) but not falling in again.

If you signify your Reconciliable Temper (for you seem to be too facetious to
be malicious) be pleased to let me know when, ^here and with whom, I may wait
upon you and kiss your hand. Anger, says Solomon, Rests in the bosom of
Fools: I am not in the least disturbed by what you have done against your self,
and for me Eventually.

Postscript.
SINCE this Book went to the Press, Mr. Keith has witten a Just Vindication;
and his long promised and long looked for Retractions are now in the Press, and
to them I refer W. C. and his Friends the Quakers. I declare I never read, nor
never will, Mr. Keith's former Books, nor dispute what he meant by this word
and that; for I stand by him no farther than he by the Old, though late
Exploded Doctrines of Christianity: The Author of the Snake in the Grass, this
day has Learnedly appeared in his Vindication, against Mr. Ellwood (a Quaker)
The Title of this Masculine Tract, is Satan Disrobed, where he tells us,
Imputed Righteousness, when examined, was In putted Righteousness: (...) Men
need not seek to Jerusalem to Christ Blood, Quakers have Printed, Ellwood says,
it was a mistake of the Printer too, for whoever did go there to seek his
Natural Blood shed; he says, they condemn them that plead for an Outward
Sanctification: Who of us ever said, Sanctification was an outward thing: a
great Preacher among them no Jo. 14 said, In my Fathers house are many
Manchets, he applied it White-bread, Fine Provision was in God's House: yet all
was by Inspiration: One Printed, such a Friend was Meeker than Moses, Stronger
than Sampson, Wiser than Solomon, more Patient than Job, Harmless and Innocent
as Christ himself; That some pretended to come beyond the Outward Christ, or
Jesus: That Isa^c Pennington wrote to the Jew; and never names the Outward
Christ, but the Light within: That they have condemned going beyond Yea and
Nay, and attesting God to any thing, and made such things Oaths, yet now have
consented to this Form, on the Parliaments giving them this favor, In the
Presence of Almighty God, the Witness of what I say: As the Lord Lives, they
said was an Oath, yet denied, W. Penn swore, when he said, As sure as the Lord
Lives, because the word sure was added, which made it the Higher: Read p 45,
46. about Penn's Prophecy of Thomas Hicks, what Lies and Folly was used to
secure Mr. Penn from being a False Prophet, which no man can do, and this will
be a stain and curse on his name: He names T. Curtis and others, that deny, or
will not own, what Penn's followers are forced to say after Mr. Keith. -- This
Ingenious Author (on whom our Conforming Episcoparian flings dung as well as on
me (became once more an Advocate for Mr. Keith, who is his Intimate and
Correspondent, That nothing but Conscience ind^^ed him to this Change, (...)
being against his interest in the World, etc. They tried Mr. Keith in
Pensilvania for his Life, about his Doctrine, and no doubt had put him to
Death, had not his Majesty at the nick of time sent over a New Goverrour, W.
Penn then Absconding (the world too well ^^ows for what) they there sent out
warrants to (...) Printers and P^^lishers of Books against them. He tells how
Mr. Pennyman left the Quakers because they would not in London proceed against
Friends for Lying, Deceit, Uncleanness, that was fully proved against them,
whilst they would continue in the Unity: He proves Cressius the Dutchmans
History of the Quakers very lame and defective, as about Bur^oughs's
Sufferings, when the quite contrary was known, that learned Man was too
credulous and believed their Lies and published them: The Whoredoms of Arcler
proved, for which he ^^ed, and here received, read in that Book.

I justify the late hand of God on my mind and Body, after many years ease a
both: But was Spira mad? Was Mr. Rogers of this City so? Mr. Tra^ross of
Cornwall who pined away for a ^ime? to name no others: Such as ^. C. and W. C.
who Lie, etc. as if ^ast feeling, are not so safe as Spira, ^f whom Mr. Perkins
has spoken favorably, and given weighty reasons, ^^d Mr. Baxter more in his
Christian Directory; no Scoffers know what lie between them and their Graves: A
tempestious winds arise on a sudden on Mariners, who just before were in a
Calm, and (it may be) at their Music, which may not only ^oss them, but cast
them away, and none can allay, but he whom the Winds and the Seas obey; so may
an inward Tempest do. -- Remember that of David, Search me O God and know my
heart, etc. and that of Paul, Examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith,
etc. for the best may say as Heman, I am even distracted through thy Ferrors;
yet was he no Mad Man; None accused him of I know not what Impieties; neither
does my Conscience Accuse of such idle stories, that those men and Mr.
Sylvester (like an old Quaker) have set on foot; none of which I ever saw, and
they dare not face me: Is their cause good? They are Suspicious Commodities
that cannot bear the Light.

It is expected when Muggleton is dead his Journal will be Printed also, and
his Prophesies, as some Muggletonians tell; yet Fox and he damned one another
as False Prophets times without number.

FINIS.

