A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE His MAJESTY AT WHITE HALL 29 DECEMBER. 1678.

By EDWARD YOUNG, B. L. L. Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxon: And Chaplain to His
Excellency THOMAS Earl of OSSORY, GENERAL of His MAJESTY'S Subjects in the
Service of the UNITED NEATHERLANDS.

By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. James, for William Birch, at the Sign of the
Black-Swan over against S. Clements-Church in the Strand: M. DC. LXXIX.

A SERMON Preached Before His Majesty, etc.
St. IOH. XV. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin.
THE WORD was made Flesh (says the same Evangelist) and came and dwelt among
us, and we saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God; full of
grace and truth. His Conversation was endearing, his Works all Mercy, his
Doctrine convincing, and his Overtures of Reward more great and encouraging
than Mankind had ever heard of before: Never was such a gracious Person sent
upon such an acceptable Message, and yet he met with very unequal
Entertainment. The unprejudiced and considering Party of those that heard him,
repented, and they that repented received him; and to as many as received him,
he gave power to become the sons of God: But others were otherwise disposed;
they felt no burden of sin, and therefore no cause of Repentance; they thought
their affections happily engaged in this World, and therefore cared not for
removing them to another: Opinion and Business and Enjoyments had taken up
their Hearts, and filled them as full as the Inn of Bethlehem was at his
Nativity; and these could not receive him. For God in all his Methods of
Salvation never puts any force upon us; he always treats Man as he made him,
that is, as a rational and free agent; he proposes aptly, and invites tenderly;
but then he leaves us to the discretion of Compliance; he moves and assists us
to the best, but still he leaves us with power to do as we please; because it is
that alone that commends our choice, when we do as we ought. They say of the
Manna in the Wilderness, that it had no actual taste of its own, but received
its taste from the fancy of the Eater; so that an Israelite did make his Meal
either nauseous or pleasant, according to his own either thankful or peevish
disposition. And if so, that Manna bare a general resemblance to all the
Dispensations of Providence which are generally determined to good or evil (as
to us) merely by our own usage and reception; and have all their influences
governed by our deportment. It Is our different Temper that makes the same Heat
both melt and harden; it is our different Disposition that makes the same act of
God both Mercy and Judgment: And as of all the Mercies that God has vouchsafed
to Man, there is none of a Kinder Design than that which we now commemorate,
The Nativity of our Savior; so there is none capable of being abused into more
fatal effects. It Is upon this account, that the same Jesus Christ is called in
Scripture, The Rock of Ages; which is a term of equivocal importance: he is a
Rock, and they that will, may save themselves upon him; but they that will not,
must necessarily split against him: It Is by reason of him (says the Apostle)
that there is now no condemnation; but it is by reason of him too (says my Text)
that there is now no Excuse. If I had not, etc.

To take the most proper Sense of the Words, I suppose in the first place, that
by Them (if I had not come and spoken to Them) is meant, not simply the Jews,
to whom our Savior himself had spoken; but likewise all others, to whom the
same Gospel should at any time be preached: for it is evident, that our Savior
means the same here that he does in the foregoing Verses by the World; which
signifies extensively all such as are disobedient to the Gospel. In the second
place, I suppose that the Expression, They had not had sin, is to be taken only
comparatively; that is, They had not had sin in such a measure: For we know
that both Jews and Heathens had a Law, by which in proportion they are to be
convicted. Thirdly, We must observe, that the Word (...) in the Text, which is
rendered Cloak, signifies any sort of Apology or Color; either such as may
really excuse, or else such as can only be pretended to excuse; and then the
plain sense of the Words will appear to be this, That, Before the Revelation of
the Gospel there was such Apology for Sin in the World, as did much lessen and
excuse the Guilt of the Sinner; but that since this Revelation the Guilt of Sin
is aggravated, and there remains no Excuse, nor so much a^ Pretense for it.

To illustrate the truth of this Proposition, I shall proceed in this Method:
1. I shall produce the Excuses: And 2dly the Pretenses, that can ordinarily be
pleaded for the Commission of Sin; and show respectively, that all these are
voided by the Revelation of the Gospel.

There are Two Things which seem reasonably to Excuse in Humane Actions: The
First is, Want of Light; whereby to know that which we are to do. The Second
is, Want of Motives, to set us about the doing of that which we know: For it is
not enough for me to know that this or that is fit to be done, I must likewise
know of what importance it will be to Me if I do it, or if I let it alone.

How far the First of these Excuses (that is, Want of Light) obtained in the
World before the Revelation of the Gospel, is a Subject too wide to engage in.
We know, in short, that there have been Ages of as much Ignorance, as
Sensuality still wishes for to cover her Shame. We know the gross of the
Gentiles sat in darkness; the Cloud was so thick about them, that they could
not tell which way to move out of it. Yet as Darkness it self is sometime
called upon in Scripture to Praise the Lord, so even Intellectual Darkness,
that is, Ignorance, has occasionally great reason to join in the Praise: For,
supposing Men to be sinful, it is happy for them if they are ignorant, the
Supreme Judge of the World having laid down this for one Rule by which he will
proceed: (viz.) The Servant that knew not his Masters will, and committed
things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes; Luke 12.48.

But we will go farther; we will allow (as we must) that many of the Heathen
had a greater share of Light; for many of them arrived to a great height in the
Speculation of Virtue, and formed Excellent Precepts of Living; and yet, when
all was done, as if their Systems had been rather for Ostentation than for Use,
they did not generally oblige themselves to the Practice of their own Advices:
They Knew well, but acted otherwise: And yet even These had an Excuse, that is,
They wanted proper Motives to set them on work.

Now a Man may be said to want proper Motives to set him about the doing of
that which he knows fit to be done, when he has no certain expectation of
reaping such benefit by it as will recompense the difficulty and uneasiness of
the doing. For though God, who is complete in Happiness, and can receive no
addition, has no other Motive of his Actions but Rectitude and Justice; yet
Man, who lies here under a great sense of want, and moves only after Happiness,
can have no proper Motive of his Actions but Benefit and Advantage: And
therefore the Civilians distinguishing a Law into parts, the Preceptive Part,
which enjoins the Duty, and the Distributive Part, which assigns the Punishment
or the Reward, are pleased to call this later the Sanction, that is, the
Binding Part of the Law: Not but that Equity and Authority, which appear in the
Precept, do more primarily bind; but because, considering Humane Reluctance,
they do not bind to Effect: They move our Understandings, but want force to
govern our Affections; and therefore Punishments and Rewards are the only
Effectual Arguments of our Obedience. Nor does God Almighty ever address his
Commands unto us but upon the same Supposition, and with the same Compliance to
Humane Infirmity: For he never urges his Dominion over us, nor the Equity of
his Laws; nor yet the Benefits whereby we stand actually obliged to him, as
sufficient Motives of our Duty: but he always moves our Affections with
something Future, some Expectation of importance, proportionable to the measure
of that which he commands. To serve God purely for his own sake and without any
By-respects, is an Heroic Notion, and may be proper for the State of Heaven;
where his Service is accompanied with his Vision; where Sin has no more
temptation, nor Duty any uneasiness; but to serve him so here is a more refined
piece of Piety than ever yet he was pleased to exact. God knows that while we
carry this stubborn Clay about us, Hopes and Fears are the main Springs that
move our Soul; and therefore he has made these, as it were the measures of our
Obligation.

Now to come to our Instance, we know the Heathens were much in the dark, in
reference to a Future State: Indeed the Poets had prettily fancied an Elysium
and a Hell, but the soberest Men amongst them looked upon these rather as
well-contrived restraints for the Vulgar, than Matters of their own belief.
Esse aliquos Manes, etc.
Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur,
Sed tu vera puta. Iuvenal. Sat. 2.

Vera puta, etc. says one of them, It is good to think they are true, though
they be not. And we see that the most Venerable amongst them for Moral Wisdom
(for example) Plato in Phoed. where Socrates is introduced saying, I hope there
is a place where I and good men shall meet; yet I cannot affirm it.

Cicero Tusc. Quest. I wish you could prove to me that our souls are immortal,
and that we do not wholly die.

Senec. Epist. ad Lucil. If wise men have said true, and there be a place to
receive us after death.


Socrates, Tully, and Seneca, when they discourse expressly concerning the
Immortality of the Soul, want Arguments to convince themselves of the truth of
it, and end all their Disquisitions with a Peradventure and a Wish. Now if
these Men did live amiss (though by the way, many of them lived so well that we
may be ashamed of the comparison) but when they did live amiss, they wanted not
an Apology, and such an Apology as God in proportion will admit of: For St.
Paul tells the Men of Athens, Acts 17. 30. That till such time as God had
manifested his Decree of a future Judgment, and given an Assurance of it, by
raising Christ Jesus from the dead; till that time God had winked at their
Ignorance: Not their Ignorance of what they ought to do; for therein their
Notions were excellently good; but their Ignorance of the Resurrection, upon
which depends all the Life of Humane Endeavors; But now (says the Apostle)
after the Revelation of this, Now he commands all men every where to Repent.

And we shall find that God proceeded by the same measures with the Jews under
their Dispensation? For we cannot assign a Reason why God should at any time
have given a Law so far short of the Perfection of Man's Nature, and beneath the
Purity of his own; as that of Moses was: wherein the greatest part of the
Religious Service consisted in Ceremonies, that affected not the Mind; and
wherein there were such Indulgencies in Moral Actions as Good Men were not
willing to make use of: but only this, that God did proportion his Covenant to
his Promises; and required no more of them than he gave them sufficient Motives
to perform. The Promises that God was then pleased to make, were only Temporal
( i. e.) a happy Land, and such Blessings in it as were requisite to the
passing of a Comfortable Life. Now these Temporal Encouragements would not
Morally bear a greater stress of Duty. And it is in this Sense our Savior tells
the Jews, Mark 10. 5. that Moses did indulge them in some things for the
hardness of their hearts; not that we may interpret that Man ever was, or ever
will be, indulged, purely because he is stubborn: but therefore Moses indulged
them for the hardness of their hearts, because the straitness of his Revelation
wanted proper efficacy to work their hearts to greater softness. But when the
Fullness of Time was come, to which God designed the Fullness of his Revelation;
when Christ had brought Immortality to Light, whose Issues depend upon a future
Judgment; and when he had thereby given such a full Employ to Humane Hopes and
Fears, as that nothing ought reasonably to engage them beside; then was the
season of extending his Commands to their just proportion; of requiring all our
Affections, because he had given sufficient Springs to move them: of demanding
all we can do, because he had given us sufficient Reason to do all that we can.

And now we come to see how these two former Excuses are voided by the Gospel.
The First ( i. e.) Want of Light, is voided by the Excellency of its Doctrine:
And the Second ( i. e.) Want of Motives, are voided by the Greatness of its
Sanction. First, The Excuse of Want of Light, is voided by the Doctrine of the
Gospel; for the Excellency of that Doctrine consists in this, that it gives us
such new Notices as make Virtue appear to have a larger Extent and a better
Foundation, than either the Heathens or the Jews could imagine.

The First Notice it brings us of this Kind, is the Knowledge of our Selves,
and the Corruption of our Nature; wherein men were never sufficiently
instructed before: For by the Gospel we learn, that notwithstanding the dear
Union and Commerce that is between Soul and Body, there are no two in the World
at such enmity one with another; none that drive on such quite different
Interests as they: All our Fleshly Lusts are an Army that war against the Soul;
and the speediest way to ruin, is to hearken to the Whisperers in our own
Bosom. And therefore those Acts of Self-denial, which were sometimes looked
upon as Natural Imprudencies, are now the most necessary Parts of Christian
Duty. I must curb and cross my Inclinations, because to comply with my
Inclinations, is to put my self into the hands of those that will betray me. I
must not revenge Injuries, because I must be revenged of my Passion; which does
me more injury than any other can. I must love my Enemies, because it is a
worse Enemy that provokes me to hate them; and yet though I must love my
Enemies, I must not love my Self; for in my Enemies I always see something
good, they bear the Image of God, which Christ died to redeem; but in my Self
(meaning by my Self my Sensual Part) there is nothing but the Image of the Evil
One, which Christ died to destroy.

Now, I say, from this Knowledge of our Selves, and the Corruption of our
Nature, it appears that Humiliation and Poverty of Spirit, and Voluntary
Restraints and Inflictions, such as the Gospel calls, Taking up of the Cross,
are necessary Parts of Christian Duty, though they never came into the
Catalogue of Heathen Virtues.

The Second Notice we have from the Gospel, is the Knowledge of the World; that
it is but a Passage, and not a Place of Abode: for as our Souls were made of no
part of the World, so it is in vain to look for their proper Satisfactions in it.

Indeed if the World were our Home and our All (as both Heathens and Jews did
generally believe it) there were no reason but that we should take up with the
pleasures of the Place. If we could conclude (as Solomon sometimes does,
Eccles. 2. That, This is our Portion, and that no Man may come back to see what
shall be after him; We might infer with him too, That, There is nothing better
for a Man, than to eat and to drink, and to rejoice in his labor. But the
Consideration, That God is our Portion; and, That we are but Strangers and
Pilgrims here; is a forcible Argument to restrain our Affections.

Now we know that we are designed for a happier Country, we ought not to look
upon this as a Place of Enjoyment, but rather of Exercise and Discipline. The
love of this World must now needs be enmity with God; because to place our
Affections here, is to vilify that better Provision which he has made for us.

The Working our selves into Fortunes by indirect Arts, is no longer
Self-Interest, the rescuing of our selves from damage by unlawful Methods is no
longer Self-preservation. Our Soul is chiefly our Self, and who would engage
that for a pitiful share in the World; St. Matt. 16. 26.
which our Savior tells us is more worth than the whole? From this Knowledge
of the World, it likewise appears, That Heavenly-mindedness, and Contempt of
the World, and Choosing rather to die, than to commit a Moral Evil, are the
necessary Offices of a Christian; though a Jew might have been excused, if he
had looked upon them as Indiscretions.

The Third Notice it brings us, Is the Knowledge of the full and perfect Will
of God, contained in the Commands of the Gospel; and the Sum of what they
require of us, in short amounts to this: ( viz.) A Sincere Justice, an
Universal Charity; a Checking of our Passions, and Regulating our Enjoyments;
an Habitual Reverence of God, and a Constant Application for his Grace; a
Striving and Running, and earnestly Contending toward Perfection, to the
measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ.

Now these are the Notices we have from the Gospel, and by these our
Understandings are sufficiently informed: We can no more pretend Want of Light;
for the Rule is clear, and admits of no Doubtings, as likewise it is exact, and
admits of no Prevarications.

We must see in the next place how the Second Excuse (i. e.) Want of Motives;
is voided by the Gospel; and this is done by the greatness of its Sanction;
that is, by the greatness of the Punishments and Rewards that are there
proposed.

And now, In the First Place, If Fear have any power to deter us from Sin, what
can we hear more important than this; ( viz.) That the Wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness: And that this Wrath of
God will finally express it self in Burnings, Darkness, Anguish, Confusion,
such a State of Complicated Horror, that our very Fears, which usually exceed
in the Representation of all other Evils, cannot reach the extremity of this:
And what Man then in his Wits can believe that he ought to fear any thing but
This, and Him that can inflict it? Mount Ebal had its threats at the Giving of
the Law, but they were only Temporal Evils, and the last of those Evils, which
is Death. Now these were but a poor Restraint to an Eager Passion. Death, when
it is a Mischief (for it is not always one) is a Mischief that the meanest
Passion we have will contemn; and as for all the Mischiefs that attend Life,
since they can be of no long Duration, but must end with the Subject, there can
be no vast difference betwixt them and the Pleasure for which a Man would choose
to bear them. If a Jew would prefer the Enjoyment of a Wanton Midianite in the
Wilderness, before his Share in Canaan; if he would chufe to indulge himself in
the Methods of his present Passion, rather than see his Milk and Honey flow, or
his Vine and Fig Tree flourish; yet both his Choice and his Hazard being
Temporary (I speak to the Letter of the Revelation) I say, his Choice and his
Hazard being both Temporary, they bare proportion to each other. But when the
Hazard comes to be Infinite, when the Curses of Ebal appear to be but the
beginning of Sorrows, and Death but a passage to an endless Train of Severer
Evils, in what proportion then stands the pleasures of Sin? And how wild is the
Appetite that will not check at such a Gulf?

In the Second Place, If Hope have any influence to incite us to our Duty, what
can we hear more inviting than this: viz. A Kingdom of Heaven, an Inheritance,
a Sonship there, nay a likeness to the only Begotten Son; for when he appears,
says St. John, we shall be like him: A state where there is no Want, no Pain,
no Tears; but an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, of Pleasure, of Joy;
and (to leave our Hopes in an Exstasy) such as neither Eye has seen, nor Ear
heard, nor can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive. When the Master of
the Vineyard, Mat. 20. went into the Marketplace, and reproacht some he met
there with this Question, Why stand ye here all the day idle? They made him
answer, Because no man has hired us; and the Answer was taken for a reasonable
Excuse. Had we never heard of these Evangelical Promises, we might have had as
fair a Pretense to be idle; but after this Revelation that our Wages are by
Gods grace Eternal Life, what Apology then for not working? He that has these
Hopes, and purifies not himself; he that has these Invitations, and prepares
not himself; like the Man found at the Marriage Feast without a Wedding
Garment, he must be dumb; he can have no Excuse. And yet though Men must be
dumb before God, it is certain that as long as they sin, they will have some
pretense to themselves; for we cannot bear our Nakedness without a Fig-leaf: We
must have some shadow of Excuse when we sin; and that not so much in point of
Virtue as of Honor, whose Jurisdiction in the World is larger. For he that
does an Action of important consequence, as the Commission of Sin is, and can
give himself no reason why he does it, he downright calls himself Fool in the
doing; and in this point Men are usually tender. Let us see therefore in the
next place the usual Pretenses for Sin. I shall mention Three.

The First, Is the Pretense of the Lazy, and that is, The Difficulty of the
Command.

The Second is the Pretense of the Presumptuous, and that is, The Mercy of the
Judge.

The Third is, The invincible Buckler of all Pretenses, that is, A new
Infallible Guide.

First, The Difficulty of the Command: And it was by this very pretense, that
above 600000 Israelites forfeited Gods Promise, and were all cut off by
immature Deaths in the Wilderness. For when God had promised the Children of
Israel, that under his Conduct they should drive out the Inhabitants of Canaan,
and possess themselves of a fruitful and happy Land; and in the mean time had
given them such Demonstrations, both of his Good Will and his Power, that they
had no reason to doubt of either in any future Undertaking; yet such was the
Diffidence and Cowardice of those that went to spy the Land, that they returned
with an Evil Report of it: They reported that the Soil was barren, that the
Inhabitants were Giants, and they but as Grasshoppers in comparison; and upon
this the Attempt was concluded impracticable; and what should they do but go
down again into Egypt? And this was the Provocation that made God swear in his
wrath that they should not enter into his Rest; (as we may see the History 13th
and 14th Numb.) In the same unreasonable manner, and with the same fatal
consequence, do sensual men raise themselves discouragements from the
difficulty of Religion; and notwithstanding that God has demonstrated by
giving us his Son, that with him he will give us all things; the Assistances of
his grace, to do what he requires, and the Communications of his Spirit, to
make the very doing pleasant; yet still we cry with the Sluggard there is a
Lion in the way: Who can resist his Desire before a fair Temptation? Or his
Revenge at a secure Opportunity? Who can check his Honor or Ambition in their
hurry? Or part with other Darling Pleasures, dear as his Right Hand or his Eye?
Who can take up a Cross while the World does not frown? Or bear up against the
Tide of Custom and Company? Or make himself gazed at by an unfashionable
Devotion? The difficulty of the thing it self, together with humane infirmity,
make it altogether impossible; we must despair to do it. Indeed all Habits are
impossible to the unexperienced: It is impossible for a Man to draw a Face,
that never drew a Line: It is impossible to be Master of our Passions in an
instant, as much as it is to be Master of a Craft. But Christianity is our
Profession, and Life is our Apprentisage, and Practice makes easy, and
Perseverance makes perfect: And who will excuse the Man that at Seven years end
shall say, He has made no proficiency in his Craft, because he found it
difficult at the first Essay? Bring me a Man that has Watched and Prayed, and
taken as much Pains to overcome Desires, as another will take in the mean time
to satisfy his Desires; and such a Man will tell us that the difficulty is
over. But alas! we cannot allow so great a share of Endeavor to make our
selves good, as we willingly contribute to make our selves bad. Vice can
command our Care and Attendance, Strength and Estate, Reputation and Life it
self: but Virtue is not thought worthy the meanest of these, notwithstanding
all her present Comforts and future Expectations. What strange infatuation does
Sin bring upon Men! We may observe of the Jews, that they repined not to
sacrifice the dearest of their Children to Moloch, and yet they thought a Lamb
of their Flock too much for God Almighty.

The Second Pretense, The Mercy of the Judge.

It Is evident, That our hearts are most there, where we are most fearful to
miscarry: Now how cautious and provident are we in relation to our present
Concerns? we will not trust God here without our own Carving, notwithstanding
all his Promises; and yet so sanguine are our hopes, in relation to our future
state, that we will trust God there without making any Provision,
notwithstanding all his Remonstrances. To size our Provision for another World,
there is no Example seems to run so much in our heads as that of the Thief upon
the Cross; though this be an Example, whose chiefest circumstances can never
occur again. But we will not advert the Gutter'd Cheeks, and Callous Knees, and
Passionate Mournings, and Severe Inflictions of the Primitive Penitents.
Repentance was heretofore the Porch of a Christian Life, but Modern Ages have
made it the Postern; it is the last thing Men set themselves about: It was
heretofore a solemn irksom task of changing Affections and introducing New
Habits; an utter Detestation of Sin, and an open Profession of Shame for it; as
well to mortify themselves as to deter others: but Modern Ages have passed a
Repentance, that looks rather like a Charm; that can do that with ease, which
cost others so much pains; that like the Miracle of Circes Wanne inverted, can
change a Hog into a Man, by a gentle touch. Indeed, when the Church grew so
indulgent, as to give Heaven upon these easy terms, I wonder not that
Purgatory grew so fast into repute; it being (as the Hypothesis made it) so
very modest an Error. For who could believe that Souls could mount directly to
Heaven with such Indispositions, and be there upon a sudden transported with
the pleasure of Hymns and Devotion; which, while here, could scarce ever be
easy at their Prayers?

These gross mischiefs sprung up in an Age when Men offended at the Light,
resolved to draw the Curtains and keep it out; when they shut up the
Scriptures, and then fancied New Models of Christianity, New Measures of Gods
Justice, and New Schemes of Salvation, not according to the Doctrine of Christ,
but their own wishes: and at last, that the Conviction of the Gospel might
never recoyl upon them again to effect; they set up an Appeal from the
Scriptures to a New Infallible Guide; that invincible Buckler of all Pretenses.
For Infallibility is like the Poets Chaos, a vast, dark Womb, that teems with
every thing; and as it can produce all Opinions, so it can as easily maintain
them; because whoever will oppose, must beg the Question.

A Cardinal Jesuit going about to demonstrate the benefit and necessity of
this New Guide, gives us this Reason for it: Palavicin. in his Introd. to his
Hist. of the Coun. of Trent.
Men (says he) must be governed as they are, and not as one could wish them to
be: Now we know that Men are generally born with corrupt inclinations, and
therefore the Gospel (strictly taken) being too rigid for corrupt Nature to
observe, it was necessary to constitute such a Vicar here upon Earth as might
temper Religion and accommodate it to Humane Affections; and abate, remit,
dispense, and give grace upon occasion, as Temporal Princes do to their
Subjects: so that if at any time Men would not live up to the Rule, the Rule
might ply down to them; and so God still be served, and Men kept good
Catholics upon such terms as they would bear. This is the import of what the
Cardinal says more at large: And surely in this he spoke more truth than he
intended; for although it be profane to say that this was Gods reason to
constitute a Vicar (for he had no hand in the Constitution) yet doubtless this
was the reason that set Men on work to constitute such a Vicar; that thereby
they might better bring Religion to serve their Carnal Ends. For though they
were pleased in an unmannerly comparison to call the Scriptures a Leaden Rule,
yet they found it wanted flexibility enough to comport with their Designs; and
therefore the only expedient was to set up another Authority.

Under the Countenance of this New Guide began a See the Jesuit Writers of
Practic. Divinity.
Casuistical Divinity to direct Men's Consciences without the Rule of Gods Word;
the chief effect of whose Doctrine is to destroy the Nature of Truth, by
distinguishing Words from Meaning; and to confound all Morality, by
distinguishing Acts from Ends; by teaching to sanctify ill Practices with good
Intentions; and to make Religion a Cloak for Sin; though my Text says, that the
Religion which our Savior delivered, had left all Sin without a Cloak. And
then to what purpose is it that our Savior came? Or to what end that he spoke?
As one of the Mediterranean Pirates told Caesar, Sir, If you kill the little
Pirates, and set up for a great one your self, what is the World the better? So
if Religion come armed against all Vices, and beat them out; and yet may bring
them in at the Back Door, to serve her own turn, how is the World amended? To
what purpose is it, that according to the Principles of Christianity, we
renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, if yet we may plough with all
these, to bring in a Harvest to the Church; if this World may be hooked in, in
order to the next; and it be lawful to debauch Nations, in order to proselyte
them; that when their Consciences are distracted with Guilt and Fear, they may
run into the Arms where they find most Indulgence; and catch at a Plenary
Absolution, as a drowning Man will catch at a Floating Twigg. Nay, If Religion
may be made a Cloak, the World is the worse for it; and Men would have been
less barbarous, had they continued Infidels. For the Machiavel Disc.
Florentine Politician makes it one instance of Humane Weakness, that Men
cannot be thorow-pac'd in Villainy; and the reason is, because the natural fear
of Conscience baffles them, and makes them Cowards; and so for not acting their
Mischiefs home, they commonly lose both themselves and their Designs: but this
Check of Conscientious Fear can have no place in the Case of a Religious
Villain, who has the ill of the Action reeonciled to his Conscience; in such a
Case Men have no restraint, they dare be as Mischievous as Machiavel or the
Occasion would have them to be.

This bold Treatment of Religion, to bring it to serve to Carnal Ends, made
others conclude it a more ingenuous way to the same Ends, fairly to renounce
Religion: and so Italy became at the same time the Mint both of Faith and of
Atheism. And indeed the New Guide and the Atheist seemed to proceed upon some
Parity of Reasons. For the One would new model the Church and govern it without
the Scriptures; and teach for Doctrines the Traditions of Men: And the Other
would new make the World, and govern it without a Providence, and teach instead
of Scripture the Projects of his own System: The One found out Methods to
forgive Sin without purging the Conscience; and the Other found out Methods to
commit Sin without affecting the Conscience: The One disposed of Heaven and
Hell for no seeming Reasons but that he was Arbitrary; and the Other as
arbitrarily laughed at the supposition of the places: The One invested himself
with a Divine Attribute, that is, Infallibility; and the Other divested himself
of the Chief Humane Attribute, that is, Immortality. And now who can tell
whether Nebuchadnezzar's fancy was more extravagant, when he believed himself
to be a God, or when he believed himself to be a Beast? I shall not meddle with
the Decision; but only observe this from the Instance, That, When God once
leaves Men to their own Affections, there is nothing so absurd but they may
believe it: As like wise, When Men once leave the Scriptures, the Rule of
Truth, there is no end of their Erring.

From what has been said, we can infer nothing more naturally than our Duty
and manifold Obligation to value and revere the Holy Scriptures, as our Guide,
and our Blessing, and Gods powerful Ordinance for our Sanctification. It Is the
Holy Scriptures that entertain our Minds according to their proper worth; for
they inform the Understanding with the most sublime and important Truths; they
work upon the Conscience by the strongest Convictions; and they enlarge our
Bowels by the most affectionate Motives and Instances: so that no Man can read
them, without finding himself in a nearer Disposition both to Wisdom and to
Piety: As, on the contrary, those Legends, which have sometime been substituted
in their place, for the Entertainment of Devotion, do so debase the Majesty of
God by unworthy Condescentions; and so impose upon Men's Understandings by vain,
fantastic, unprofitable, irrational Idea's, that no man can read Them without
finding himself in a nearer Disposition both to Irreverence and to Folly. It Is
by the Holy Scriptures that our Savior comes and speaks to us, as he did
heretofore to the Jews: And forasmuch as it is the Effect of his Coming and
Speaking, that We have now no more Cloak for our Sins; it is in our hands to
make good Use of this Effect, by considering that Sin is now no more to be
covered, but to be purged.

All things are naked and open before the Eyes of Him with whom we have to do:
Why then should we think of a Disguise? Why should we cheat our selves into
Boldness, by putting on a Vizard? To dawb and palliate our faults, is but like
keeping our selves in the dark, that the Sun ^^^ dazzle us the more when it
breaks in U^^^ us. All the Discretion we can show (...) to expose our selves to
the Light; to our selves thoroughly, and to let others (...) us too: For, If we
are Good, Exampl(...) the best luster of Virtue; and, If we (...) Bad, Shame is
the best step to Am^^^ment.

FINIS.

