Mr YOUNG's TWO SERMONS AT WHITE HALL.

THE Great Advertisement, That a Religious Life is the best way to present
Happiness: IN TWO SERMONS Preached at WHITE HALL, The 1 st. on Sunday, April
the 15 th. The 2d on Sunday, Apr. 22. 1694.

By E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester-College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Especial Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIV.

SERMON I.
Psalm xxxvii. 4. Delight thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy heart's
desire.
THere are Two Opinions which the Devil has been always busy to propagate in
the World, as the Two main Pillars of his Kingdom: The First is That a Sinful
Life is a State of True Liberty, and sincere Pleasures, and happy Advantages;
The Second is (on the contrary) That a Religious Life is a Servile and
Uncomfortable State.

He made the first Breach upon humane Innocence by the former of these
Suggestions; when he told Eve, That by Eating of the Tree of Knowledge she
should be as God, that is, she should reap some high and strange felicity from
doing that which was forbidden her to do. But we know the Success: Eve learnt
the difference between Good and Evil by her Transgression, which she knew not
before; but she learnt the Difference to be this, That Good is that that gives
the Mind pleasure and assurance; and Evil is that that must necessarily be
attended, sooner or later, with shame and sorrow.

As he thus began his Kingdom, so he has carried it on ever since by the same
Imposture; that is, by possessing men's minds with vast expectations of the
present Incomes of Sin; and making them dream of golden Mountains, mighty
gratifications and advantages they shall meet with in following their Appetites
the forbidden way. Whereas on the contrary, there are Seasons wherein all
Sinners are ready to confess, that their Counselor has been a Deceiver, that
their Foolish Hearts have been darkened, that their Hopes have been Vain, their
Gains no Profit, and all their Enjoyments leading to Bitterness. So little
trust is to be given to all the promising Overtures of Sin.

To promote the second Opinion, That a Religious Life is a Servile and
Uncomfortable State, the Devil suggests to our thoughts, That true Freedom is
to follow our own Humor; That to deny our Appetites is to be Miserable; That
not to prosecute our Passions is to be Cowards; That to ty our selves up to
Truth and Justice is to have no Liberty; That to live by moderate and
prescribed Rules is to have no Joy; and therefore that when the Religious Man
looks for Joy, he can only see it at the tedious distance of a Future Life:
Which were it true, our Nature that is so importunately goaded on with the
desire of present Happiness, could not but languish under the discouragement of
so Remote an Expectation. But in the mean time the Holy Scriptures give us a
quite different prospect of this matter: there we are told, that the service of
God is true Liberty; that the Yoke of Christ is easy, in comparison of that
which any other Form of Living will bring upon us; that Religion has
Pleasantness in its ways, as well as Glory in its End; that it will bring us in
Peace and Joy, such as the World cannot give; and therefore that the Religious
Man's Joy does not stand at so tedious a distance, but is so present and at
hand that it may be felt and tasted every moment. And a Summary Confirmation of
all this we meet with in the words of the Text: Where we have Religion
described both in its State, and in its Fruit; and recommended to us in both
from that which we so much long for. Delight thou in the Lord, this is the
State of Religion; and he shall give thee thy Heart's Desire, This is the Fruit
of Religion; even its Present Fruit: Now where there is Delight for the
Principle, and Attainment of Desires for the Income, we have little reason to
suspect that such a State can either be Servile or Uncomfortable.

The Words therefore lead me to assert the great Advantages of a Religious
Life; and to recommend it from the influence it has upon our present
well-being: And this is the Point I shall pursue, and pass to the Evidence of
it by the steps of these Three Propositions, viz. I. That to Delight in God is
our most reasonable Duty. II. That to Delight in God is the True State of
Religion. And III. That to Delight in God is the happiest Method of compassing
all our Ends; as is implied in this Promise or Assertion, He shall give thee
thy heart's Desire.


I. That to delight in God is our most Reasonable Duty. We may observe that
none of the Voluntary Actions of Men, whether Good or Evil, can have any Life
or long continuance, unless they are supported by some Kind of Delight. Even
sinful actions will cease; when we come to have no pleasure in them: And hence
it comes to pass, that many Men have forsaken particular Sins, without ever
Repenting of them; forsaking them only from the Principle of a Carnal disgust:
And if Sinful Actions will cease without the support of Delight, much more-will
Religious, to which we have so much less both of Power and Propension.
Forasmuch therefore as there are many Offices of Religion which cannot be in
themselves the proper matter of Delight; we must either delight in Him for
whose sake we do them, that is, in God; or else we must necessarily sink from
their performance.

Now to Delight in God is to possess our Minds with such a proper sense of his
Goodness, as may be able to produce an habitual comfort and pleasure in the
Contemplation of Him. And this is a matter so practicable, that the only reason
why it is not done, is because we do not set about it. For let us but consider
what it is that makes us take delight in any thing: It is only this, First to
conceive a thing as Good, and secondly to conceive that Good thing as Ours; and
then it is impossible but that such a thing should delight us. Now all allow
that we have no Notion worthy of God, unless we conceive him to be the chiefest
Good; nor have we any notion worthy of his Truth, unless we likewise conceive
him to be Ours: For by the Christian Covenant he has engaged himself to be Our
God, that is, the Author of all Good unto us. And therefore God, infinitely
Good as he is, is more certainly Ours, than any thing that the World can most
hopefully promise us; For in respect of any such thing many accidents may
interpose to prevent our possession of it: Nay God is more Safely Ours, than
any thing of the World that we possess; for that Possession is defeisible; it
may, it must determine in a little while: But God is Ours Certainly, Safely,
Everlastingly; unless we consent to part with our Title, unless we will not
that he should be Ours. Now who can doubt but that under this Contemplation God
is the most proper Object of our Delight?

That we can delight in God is our peculiar Privilege; it is both the Honor
and the Happiness of our Nature: For as our Nature is endowed with a Capacity
to apprehend God, so it is that Capacity alone that gives us preference above
the Beasts that perish: For abstracting from this our Power of Knowing, and
contemplating, and Enjoying God, there is no Evidence that we are more Wise;
much Evidence there is that we are less Happy than they.

But to show more fully what Reason we have to delight in God, I shall make the
Comparison betwixt God and all other delectable things, and argue from the
respective Consideration of all those things, that if they are to be delighted
in, God is more so.

All the delectable things that we can either know or imagine, we may range
under these Three Kinds, Natural, Moral, and Heavenly: In the First consist the
Pleasures of the World; In the Second consist the Pleasures of the Good; and in
the Third consist the Pleasures of the Blessed: And my purpose is to show that
each of these three do point us out to God as a far better and more
transcendent Delight.

1. I begin with the Delectable things of Nature.

Wonderful is the Variety of those things in Nature that are accommodated to
our Liking; and their power to delight us we acknowledge too much by the power
we usually give them over our Affections: And yet all these things do point us
to seek after something Better; as our own Hearts will tell us, so often as we
seriously think of the Emptiness of all natural Delights; and how by reason
either of their offensive Mixtures, or necessary Decay, they leave our Souls
lean and pining in the midst of their Enjoyments. And this is an Argument that
God himself insists upon, Isa. 58. Where he complains of his People That They
had forsaken Him, the Fountain of Living Water, and had hewn to themselves
Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that would hold no Water. The Words are very full
and curious in their matter. For (1.) God representing himself by the Emblem of
a Fountain of living water, intimates, That He is the only Source of solid
Refreshment, of sincere and lasting Delectation, and such as is adaequate to
the measure of the longings of our Soul: And, (2.) That all that will, may come
freely to these Waters, because they flow freely toward All; and whoever do
come to them, that is, whoever do cleave unto God by Contemplation and Desire,
shall be sure to find their desired Refreshment in him: But, (3.) that Men,
hurried away by their own foolish Choices, come to distrust and forsake God the
Fountain, and hew unto themselves Cisterns: Hewing Cisterns out of the Rock is
hard Labor; and it implies the great Pains Men take to seek out the Waters of
Comfort in Worldly Methods; but when all is done, Their Cisterns will hold no
water: The Water they catch is not Living, it is Palled and Foul; and yet such
as it is it will not tarry with them: their Worldly Methods fail them
deplorably, for all the Pleasures they bring in are Heavy and Polluting, and by
and by they will be none at all.

When Solomon gave his heart a Loose into worldly Delights, he thus expresses
it -- I gave my Heart to know Madness and Folly; Madness and Folly: All those
Delights that are Irregular and Sinful in their matter are pure Madness. That
Demoniack the Gospel tells us of, that he pleased himself to dwell among the
tombs, and there to cry and cut himself with stones, had not a more
Compassionable Delight than the Sinner has: his Delights are pure Madness. And
as for the Common Delights that entertain us with greater Innocence, yet these
are no better than Folly: The usual Diversions of Men have nothing more solid
in them than the Toys of Children; and they seem to take all their
Commendation, as they do their Name, from Passing away Time: As if Time laid so
heavy upon our hands, that we were beholden to any thing, that may help to take
it off. Whereas were but more of our Time devoted to Pious Offices, so that our
Souls might be wrought into habitual Reflections upon God, and the Amiableness
of his Nature, and the Sweetness of his Favor, and the Excellence of his
Promises; how would the whole pass more Cheerfully, Usefully, Accountably? And
how should we be able to look more like our selves, that is, Erect and Rational?

I do not deny but that the Accommodations of Life from the Goods of Fortune,
from the Diversions of the Mind, and from the regular Gratifications of our
Senses, do bring in matter of real Delight: But then, Are not all these the
Blessings of God? And therefore so long as we pretend to Reason, as well as
Sense, How is it possible we can delight in these good things, and not withal
delight in God as their Author; from whose Goodness proceeds both all we have,
and all we hope for? Be sure that if we cannot take delight in the Supreme
Good, all we take delight in besides will directly rise up in Judgment against
us, and condemn our Choice from the very Principles of our Choosing.

But moreover, we must acknowledge thus much farther concerning all Natural
Delights (viz.) That they are Deceitful in the Use: For they serve us only when
we have least need of them; not in the Bitterness of Affliction, not in the
Destitutions of the Soul. Whereas a Spiritual Commerce with God, which breeds a
sure Hope in him, is a steady Enjoyment that no Accidents can interrupt: For it
will stick by us, when both Objects and Appetites shall cease; when all other
desirable things, and the very Desire it self shall fail. In the multitude of
sorrows his comforts will refresh us; says the Psalmist: It is God our Maker,
that gives songs in the night; says Elihu in Job. i. e. That gives Comfort in
the night of Affliction, and in the gloominess of humane Despair: As it was at
that time Job's own Case.

I have thus far taken a view of the State of all Natural Delights, to show,
How their Emptiness does properly point and remit us unto God for something
better and more satisfying: And to this I shall only add one Reflection out of
the Prophet Habbakuk, where he says, Is it not from the Lord that the People
weary themselves for vanity? Here he styles all worldly things by the Name of
Vanity or Emptiness; And he does not mean it is from God, that Men pursue these
worldly things; This is from their own Appetites: Nor does he mean, it is from
God that Men weary themselves in that pursuit; This is from their own Folly:
But he means that the Emptiness of those things they weary themselves about.
This is from the Lord: that is, God has purposely designed, that worldly things
should not be satisfying, nor able to answer that importunate desire of
Happiness which he has made Connatural to the Soul of Man. Now since God has
given Man such a Desire, and withal put no capacity in things here below to
answer it, and yet has certainly made nothing in vain; It is a Demonstration,
That He intended himself to fill up the measure of our Desires, and to be
Himself that Delight which we long for.

2. I pass to examine the Delights of Virtue, or Moral Delights: And from these
we may learn the same Instruction.

Moral Delight is that which springs from the Conscience of Well-doing: And
though this be a Pleasure that properly belongs to the Good; yet even the
Vicious can hardly be insensible of it; because it may be felt to spring from
any Single or Casual Act of Virtue. As for Example; Let a Man but refresh the
Bowels of the needy, or comfort the afflicted, or check an Appetite, or
overcome a Temptation, or forgive an Injury, or receive an Affront with Temper
and Meekness, and he shall immediately find the tacit Praise of what he has
done, darting through his Mind, accompanied with a sincere Delectation. And
thus Conscience plays the Monitor even to the Loose and Unregenerate in their
most Casual Acts of Well-doing; and is like a voice whispering behind them, and
saying, This is the way, walk in it. But when the Principles come once to be
fixed in a Man, and his Virtue to be habitual and uniform; this never fails to
be followed with a stable Serenity and Pleasure; and a Satisfaction not to be
equalled by all the Ioys of Sensuality. And this it was that made the honest
Heathens prefer Conscience before Appetite; and style it their Solace, their
Riches, their Haven, their Wall of Brass; as being sufficient, not only to
recreate and please them, but likewise to support them in Trouble, and to
balance the Spite of ill Fortune.

Now if Conscience may thus be delighted in, my Argument runs, How much more
reasonably may God be delighted in, who is the Rewarder of Conscience?
Especially when we consider, that this Delight springing from Conscience, is
nothing else but a boding Instinct, that there shall be a future Reward. And
undoubtedly it is nothing else: For otherwise, were the Verdict of our
Consciences not accompanied with such a boding Apprehension, it were impossible
that it should amount to a Delight: that is, The Conscience of Virtue could
never amount to be a Delight unto us, were it not accompanied with the
apprehension of a Future Reward of Virtue. For as no ill Man fears from
himself, i. e. no ill Man fears lest at any time hereafter he should come into
the mind of punishing himself; So likewise no good Man hopes from himself, that
he at any time hereafter shall be at the Discretion of rewarding himself: And
therefore the simple Verdict of our Consciences upon good or evil Actions,
would never be able to produce Hope or Fear, Joy or Grief; were it not for this
further Apprehension, That there is a God, who knows all as well as we, and who
will take care some time or other to make Distributions accordingly. And thus
Conscience was always an implicit Proclamation of God unto the Heathen.

I know it may be alleged, That, without this Apprehension of a Future Reward,
a Man might delight in the very Practice and Exercise of Virtue; because Virtue
is no small Reward unto its self, in its immediate Consequences; nay, though
nothing else were to follow, yet a Man might please himself in the Conscience
of this, viz. That he had acted suitably to Reason. But this is an Argument so
fine spun, that it serves rather for Ostentation than for Use. I know indeed
there are some Virtues of such a Nature, that a Man may take pleasure in the
very Exercise of them; such as are Beneficence and Justice, and the like;
Virtues that carry Glory along with them, and make the Man that exercises them
look Great, and bring in Praise and Blessing as a concomitant Reward: And
therefore we may meet with many Instances of Men, who have been glorious in
these Virtues; not as Virtues, but as they are Lures of Reputation and Fame;
and at the same time continued very vicious in other Respects. But (on the
other hand) as for all passive Virtues, such as Self-denial and Patience, and
the like, their very Matter being not Joyous but Grievous, it is impossible
they should be practiced with Delight for their own sakes, but only in prospect
and expectation of a Future Recompense. And this is the Reason that we find in
the Gospel-Writings, It is not their usual Method to urge and inculcate Virtue
from the Topics of concomitant Rewards; lest the Foundation being too narrow,
might give occasion of Offense to those who should rest too much upon it; but
they urge Virtue from the Prospect of Heaven, and the Hopes of that Glory and
Immortality which God has reserved for it. Indeed it is truly said, That the
Man who acts suitably to Reason may find Content and Satisfaction in himself
for having so done, though no other Advantage were to follow: But then we must
consider, that, abstracting from this Notion of a Future Reward, no Man would
act suitably to Reason in any thing that brought upon him a Temporal
Inconvenience; nor would there be any Reason for Virtue farther, than as it
might succeed to be presently advantageous; and the same Reason there would be
as well for Vice. And this the Apostle expressly argues, 1 Cor. 15. 30. 32.

The Inference I make from the whole that has been said upon this Head, is
this, That there is a necessary Relation between God and our Consciences;
Insomuch that whenever we conceive any Pleasure upon the Remembrance of any
thing well done, that pleasurable Movement of our Conscience is a Natural Call
to us to delight in God; who is the sole Foundation, and Hope, and Reward of
Conscience.

And this gives me occasion to reflect upon two sorts of Men: some there are
who pretend to please themselves with the Offices of Conscience, as that they
keep their Words, and stand to their Contracts, and injure no Man; though in
the mean time they are very careless of God: And some, on the other hand,
pretend to delight in God, and make their boast in Religion, though in the mean
time they make bold to wave the Offices of a good Conscience. The first of
these are guilty of great Absurdity, and the second of as great Absurdity, but
greater Scandal. For from this necessary Relation between God and our
Consciences, it follows, That our Regard to either cannot possibly be supported
without an equal regard to the other. If we pretend to delight in Conscience,
we have no Reason to do so, but only this, that God is a Rewarder of
Conscience: and if we pretend to delight in God, we have no Reason to do so,
but only this, Even the Testimony of our Conscience, that we have a Title to
his Reward: And therefore as they who neglect God, have no Foundation for the
Repose of Conscience; so they who neglect Conscience have no Foundation for
Complacency in God.

3. And now I come to the last kind of delectable things, those of Heaven: A
state so happy and pleasurable, that the Apostle tells us, the very Expectation
of it is sufficient to work in us a rejoicing with Joy unspeakable and full of
glory. No Man has so mean a Conception of that State, but that he must needs
wish it; and though never so sensual, desire it in Exchange of all his present
Enjoyments. Bring one that will say, he could not delight in Heaven; and I have
nothing to urge to such a one why he should delight in God. But if Heaven be to
be delighted in, God is more. For if we look into the bottom of the Notion, we
shall find, that Heaven is no other in effect than God himself; and that God is
not only the Rewarder, but the very Reward, of those that seek him. Accordingly
we shall find in the Holy Scriptures, that all the Ioys of Heaven are defined
with Relation to God; and the Seeing of God is declared to be the Root and
Foundation of Eternal Beatitude: From whence the Schools have styled it the
Beatifick Vision. Not to mention other Texts to this purpose, Our Savior says,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for they shall see God; And St. John yet more
expressly to our matter, 1 Epist. 3. 2. We shall be like him, for we shall see
him: where the being like God, i. e. the Participation of a Bliss and Glory
like to the Divine is expressed to be the formal Happiness of Saints; but their
causal Happiness to be their Seeing of him. I therefore propose to determine
what is meant in these Texts by seeing God; and the doing of that will
sufficiently confirm the Argument I am upon.

And (1.) As the Essence of God is purely Immaterial, and therefore Invisible,
so the Seeing of God can be no other than Intellectual, and performed by an Act
of the Mind, in comprehending and knowing what that Essence is. And that this
Knowledge of God shall hereafter be complete in all Saints, the Apostle
intimates, 1 Cor. 13. 12. where he says, Now I know in part, but then I shall
know, even as also I am known. As if he had said; Even I, though I have been
wrapped up into the Third Heavens, and there admitted into Inutterable Secrets,
yet even I hitherto have but a partial and imperfect Knowledge of the wonderful
Things of God; but Then, when I shall be possessed of my Interest in the future
State, Then I (with all other Saints) shall know God, as also I am known; i. e.
as perfectly as God knows me: He would not say, I shall know God as perfectly
as I know my self; this had been too short a measure, because no Man knows
himself but imperfectly; but as God knows me; i. e. Then I shall know all the
Wonders of his Essence, all the Beauty of his Perfections, all the Reasons of
his Providence, all the Treasures of his Wisdom, all the Riches of his
Goodness; I shall know them thoroughly and exactly. Now he who is any way
sensible what a Pleasure strikes through the Soul of Man upon the Discovery of
any curious Secret, or the Attainment of any important Knowledge, will easily
allow, that such a Knowledge of God must needs be a more transporting
Entertainment, than any can be imagined within the bounds of Nature. This is
the Intellectual Vision of God.

But (2.) We have no Reason to deny, but that the Saints shall likewise have a
Bodily and Sensible Vision of God. For although God's Essence be Invisible, yet
there is a Glory, which is as it were the Train and Attendance of his Essence.
(By the Psalmist's Authority, I may call it the Garment or Clothing of his
Essence; for so says the Psalmist of God, Who decketh himself with light as
with a garment: and by the Apostle's Authority I may call it the Dwelling or
Palace of his Essence; for so says the Apostle concerning God, Who dwells in
light that is unapproachable:) and this Glory or Majesty of God is such as we
must allow to be properly visible. And therefore there is a Distinction between
the Essential and the MaIestatick Presence of God: For his Essential Presence
is Infinite; and so every where, and every where unseen; but on the contrary,
his Majestatick Presence is the Notifying or Discovery of his Essential
Presence in a determinate Place, by some kind of magnificent luminous
Appearance: And this we know has been accommodated and brought down to the
perception even of Mortal Eyes. Thus the Glory of God is said to have appeared
on Mount Sinai six days together: And afterward in the Sanctuary it is said to
have rested and dwelt, because of its long and uninterrupted continuance there:
And at the Dedication of the Temple it is said to have filled the house; And at
the Birth of our Savior it is said to have shone round the Shepherds; And at
his Transfiguration in the Mount St. Peter tells us, There came a voice (...),
from the excellent Glory. And hence it has come to pass, that the word Glory,
besides its common Meaning, is used technically in the Art of the Painters, to
signify a luminous Radiation, or circular Darting of Light. Now all these I
have mentioned are Instances of the Majestatick and Visible Presence of God.
And this manner of Vision the Apostle seems to have respected in that passage,
1 Cor. 13. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, i. e. In
this Life (according to the course of ordinary Dispensations) we can only see
the Glory of God in its Shadow and Reflection from the Glass of his Creatures;
and they who have had the vouchsafement to see it directly, have rather found
it to be an Astonishment than a Sight; And he who had the most familiar
vouchsafement of this kind, that is, Moses, could only see the Back Parts, i.
e. some small measure and scantlings of it; because the weakness of Mortal Eyes
can bear no more: But Then, when this Mortal shall have put on Immortality,
when the Bodies of Saints shall be invested with the New Powers of Spirituality
and Incorruption, Then face to face; Then we shall be able to see the whole
Luster of his Majesty as familiarly as one Man beholds the face of another.
Now as we must allow, that the grateful Objects of Sense do make up a great
part of humane Delectation; so we cannot doubt, but that this Glory of God
being so accommodated to our Senses, will produce a more ravishing and
transcendent Delight, than all the Objects in Nature are capable of producing.

These are Two ways of Seeing God, by Intelligence, and (in some manner) by
Sense.

But I do not imagine, that these Two make up the Beatific Vision, or are the
whole and adaequate Cause of the Beatitude of Saints; There being yet Another
Cause of more Importance to Beatitude than both these. For undoubtedly it is
not so much the Sight and Contemplation of the Divine Glories (which is Our
Act) as the Communication of those Glories (which is God's Act) that makes the
Saints so perfectly Blessed. Because it is from this Communication that they
come to be (...) (as St. Peter words it) not bare Spectators, but Partakers of
the Divine Nature; i. e. Partakers of such a Bliss and Glory as resembles the
Divine. I may illustrate this matter by a Similitude obvious to our Senses.
Truly Light is sweet, says Ecclesiastes, and a pleasant thing it is to behold
the Sun; A pleasant thing it is to Behold the Sun, as they who came out of a
dark confinement will readily confess: But then when we consider that the Sun
is the Cheer and Vigor of Nature, and the very Life of all Animal and
Vegetable Beings; think how much more Man is obliged to the Sun for his
Influences, than for his Sight: And so much more are the Heavenly Inhabitants
obliged to God for their Receptions from him as the Fountain of Life, than for
the Sight and Contemplation of him as the Subject of Perfection.

And therefore we may make a Third Interpretation of Seeing God; and that is to
signify the Enjoyment of him. And in this sense the Word Seeing is often used
in Scripture: As in these Phrases, To see Good, to see Life, and to see good
days, by Seeing is meant Enjoying: And thus the seeing of God signifies the
Enjoying of God; through the Communications of his Goodness, the Beamings of
his Favor, and the Effusions of his Love; passing through the whole Man, and
producing an intimate sensation of him both in Body and Soul, and filling both
with an unconceivable and endless Delectation. And this St. John seems to mean
(in the forementioned Text) by Seeing God As he is: We shall be like him, for
we shall see him As he is, i. e. We shall see him purely Good and Gracious and
Beneficent; for so he is in his whole Nature. Indeed we do not see him so Here;
for Here we see his Dispensations mixed with Discipline and Punishment and
Anger; But these are Opera Aliena (as he calls them in the Prophet) Acts not
His, but strange and preternatural to him; and such as he Would not, only the
Violence of our Contempt forces them from him: But there shall be no such
Mixture; There he will appear purely As he is, i. e. purely Kind and Good, and
Communicative of that Good to all that see him; and then how can the Vision be
otherwise than Beatifying? Suitably to this the same Apostle in his Vision of
the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. after he has described it as a Magnificent City,
and most preciously built, he adds, That the City had no need of the Sun to
lighten it, for the Glory of God is the light thereof; Intimating that God is
the same Blessing to the Heavenly Inhabitants, as he has constituted the Sun to
be to the Inhabitants of the Earth; the same Blessing in Resemblance, though
infinitely greater in Proportion. And accordingly we may observe, that as the
Word light is used peculiarly to express God, 1 Io. 1. 5. so the same Word
Light is used peculiarly to express Eternal Happiness, Col. 1. 12. to confirm
the Argument, that God is the Eternal Happiness of the Future Life.

From the whole that has been said upon this Head, we may make this Inference (
viz.) That it is not the Place Heaven, but rather the God of Heaven that is the
Reward of his Saints; procuring them endless Blessedness by the Light of his
Countenance upon them, and the Influences and Emanations of his Bounty toward
them. Which Blessedness that the place it self can no way procure, we may
gather from that Instance, 1 Kings 22. Where we are told, that a Lying Spirit,
i. e. a Devil was in Heaven, mixing himself with the Blessed about the Throne
of God; And yet it is certain he was never the Happier for being there; but
being deprived of the light of God's Countenance, i. e. his Love (which
properly makes up the Beatifick Vision) he even there carried his Hell about
him. Well therefore and with good reason does the Psalmist cry unto God, Ps.
142.25. Thou art my Hope and my Portion in the land of the Living: By the Land
of the Living he means Heaven; For Earth is no more than the Land of the Dying;
I say by the Land of the living he means Heaven, and yet he does not look upon
that Land, but merely upon God in that Land to be his Hope and his Portion. And
the Apostle St. Paul, speaking of the state of God's Eternal Kingdom, 1 Cor.
15. 28. clears and determines the whole matter in two words, while he says that
in that state God shall be (...) (...), All in All; Every thing to every Saint;
For All that they can want, All that they can wish for, All that they can
conceive, God shall be to every one of them.

And now what farther Evidence can I need to my Conclusion (viz.) That if
Heaven be to be delighted in, God is more? And if God be the Chief thing to be
delighted in Hereafter, how Reasonable is it that he should be delighted in
Now? For let us consider yet farther, If God be not delighted in Now, How shall
we be able to delight in him Hereafter? Now must necessarily be the Disposition
to Hereafter, there being no Interval that can form any New Dispositions in Us.

He therefore that will Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, let him Enter: Why
stands he at a Distance from the State he pretends to desire? Or why looks he
for Another Opportunity; whereas there is no other but the present? For Delight
in God is Heaven Begun; and the Consummation of that Delight is Heaven in the
perfection of Bliss.

ERRATA.
PAge 12. l. 20. for Isa. 58. read Ier. 2. 13. and p. 16. l. 15. for Habbakuk,
read Habb. 2. 13.

SERMON II.
Psalm xxxvii. 4 Delight thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy heart's
desire.
IN my former Discourse I proposed to insist on the Doctrine of these Words, in
these Three Propositions.

I. That to delight in God is our most Reasonable Duty. II. That to delight in
God is the true State of Religion. And III. That to delight in God is the
happiest way to compass all our Ends, as is implied in this Assertion, He shall
give thee thy heart's desire. So that if that which is Reasonable can conclude
our Understandings; if that which is Religious can affect our Consciences; if
that which is advantageous and gratifying can move our Affections; Delight in
God has a proper Claim to all our governing Powers.
The First of these Propositions I have already dispatched, and therefore shall
proceed directly to the Two remaining: And, I. To show, That to delight in God
is the true State of Religion. I am aware that Religion is frequently expressed
in Scripture by the name of Fear, ( the Fear of God) a Passion very opposite to
Delight: But if we look into the bottom, we find shall that Fear is a Duty
arising rather from the Respect to our own Nature, which is corrupt, than from
the Respect to God's Nature, which being all Goodness, and all Propensity to do
good, it requires no more than Love and Delight to express our Just Sentiments
and Veneration of it. So that Fear is not so much the State, as the Guard of
Religion; and a necessary means of restraining our Appetites from offending
God, rather than the true and proper Worship of Him. And this we may learn from
Mount Sinai it self: where to usher in the Delivery of the Law, God
presentiated himself in all the Formalities of Terror; in Thunder and
Lightning, and Darkness, and Fire, and Smoke, and all that was powerful to
create an astonishing Fear; and yet after all this terrible Preface, the
Precept it self was only Love; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart; And this Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Now there is so great an
Affinity betwixt Love and Delight, that we can hardly distinguish between them:
what we love, we always delight in; and what we delight in, we always love; And
if we will distinguish them as nicely as we can, the Difference is only this;
That Love is the Desire of our Object, and Delight is the Complacency that
accompanies that Desire. So that delighting in God is one thought higher both
in Worth and Efficacy, than simply loving Him; because it implies the Activity
and Heartiness of our Affections.


But to clear my Point, That to delight in God is the true State of Religion, I
shall insist upon these Two Arguments: 1. That to delight in God is the only
way to express, that we have a Just Sense, and worthy Notion of Him: And, 2.
That it is the only way to render Him a proper Service.


1. To Delight in God is the only way to express that we have a Just Sense and
worthy Notion of him.

What notion we ought in Justice to have of God, I shall argue from the
Consideration of these Two familiar things, (1.) The Names that we are entitled
to call upon him by; and (2.) The common Benefits we receive at his hands.

(1.) God has entitled us to call upon him by the name of Father, the nearest
and most beneficial and most indulgent of all Relations: And though there are
some Fathers whose behavior might bring the Credit of the Relation into
Dispute, Fathers without Affection; yet it cannot be so with God, whom pure
Affection has made him to be our Father; who has drawn us out of the distance
of Aliens and Destitutes, and brought us near unto himself, and adopted us into
his Family, and assigned an Inheritance for us with the Saints in light; such a
Father cannot but have an Affection more large and inexhaustible, than the most
tender Bowels of the most tender Sex: And he himself expressly says as much of
himself, Is. 49. 15. Now how is it possible we can call upon him by this Name,
and in the mean time conceive any proper sense of the Name we pronounce, and
not withal be convinced both of our Obligation and our Privilege to take
delight in him?

There is another Name that I must not pass by: God in the third Personality of
his amiable Essence specifies himself by the name of Comforter: Now is it
possible we can have any true notion of a Comforter, and not delight in him? Is
not Comfort in it self a Delight? Nay it is the greatest of all Delights in
this respect ( viz.) That it comes in the Season when we have most need of it:
And do not the Exigencies of our Life afford any Seasons wherein Comfort would
be welcome? Certainly they do: If then it be necessary to our nature to delight
in a Comforter, and yet we do not delight in God, what can be the Reason but
that we are sunk away from the notion that God is a Comforter? We have no Just
sense of his being so: And this is the Cause why we neglect his gracious
Influences that would support us in our Exigencies; and betake our selves to
Sins and Vanities, which can no otherwise than fail of our design. Remember
that we condemn the Socinians (and we do but our Duty in condemning them) for
denying the Holy Ghost; but remember likewise that we by not delighting in God
do in effect deny the Comforter, which is both of equal scandal and prejudice
to Christianity.

I might make the same Reflection upon the endearing name of Savior, and so
represent the whole Blessed Trinity condescending to our Affections, and
courting us to make themselves the subject of our Delight: But I leave this as
obvious to your own Meditation to supply, and pass to the Consideration of,

(2.) Those Common Benefits which we receive at the hands of God. How great is
the sum of them? Says the Psalmist, and how can we say less, when we think
upon Life and all its Blessings, upon our Mercies, Comforts, Aids, Preventions,
Deliverances; how great is the sum of those Benefits we enjoy? Now if we look
upon these Benefits, and not look upon God to be their Author, we have no
notion of him at all; And if we delight in these Benefits but cannot delight in
God, as their Author, our notion of him is very Irrational. I know there is a
Difference between a Benefit and its Author; and this difference Men often
catch at as the Opportunity of their Unthankfulness; while they hugg and
rejoice in a Benefit, and in the mean time neglect and vilify the Benefactour:
But remember there is a difference too between the Benefactions of God, and the
Benefactions of Men: when a Man bestows a Benefit, we can retain it, and enjoy
it in spite of the Donor; because he may want power to call us to account for
our Unthankfulness; But God certainly has this power to call us to account, and
it is as certain that he will execute it. Nay further (to speak accurately) in
the Benefactions of God there is no difference between the Benefit and the
Author: there is difference indeed between God and the thing he gives; but not
between God and the good of that thing; because God himself is properly the
Good of every thing he gives: Insomuch that if he but withdraw himself, and
turn away his Countenance, though the thing remains, yet the Benefit becomes
immediately voided and lost. Thus Life and all its Comforts are the most
valuable Benefits, so long as we are thankful to God for them, but when we
cease to be so, they change their nature, and turn into so many Debts, for
which we shall be found to be miserably insolvent.

But in the mean time, we all certainly agree in this Point, That it is natural
for a Man to delight in that which seems good to him, and consequently in the
Causes of such good; i. e. in those Natures that are friendly and beneficent:
And hence it came to pass, that one of the Roman Emperors, Titus, because he
was a Man of a kind and obliging Spirit, had the Felicity to be surnamed the
Delight of Mankind. And yet how many of Mankind were there that Titu's
Benefactions could not reach? And how many that the Confinedness of his Power
must necessarily disappoint? But the Favors of God extend universally, his
Benefits reach to every particular Person; and his Invitations point us out to
far greater Benefits, and no Man ever was, or shall be disappointed by him,
that fixed his Trust and Expectations upon him: And how reproachful then must
it be to us? And how convictive of our Insensibility, if God cannot arrive to
the Honor of being esteemed the Delight of Mankind?

2. My Second Argument to prove Delight in God the true State of Religion is
this, Because that to delight in God is the only way to render him a proper
Service.

When the Tabernacle was to be made, and the Contribution of the People was
necessary to the Work, God's Instruction to Moses was this, Exodus 25. 2. Speak
now to the Children of Israel, that they bring me an Offering; of every man
that brings it willingly, with his heart, ye shall take my Offering: where
observe, All were commanded to bring an Offering, and yet the Offering of none
was to be accepted, but what was brought willingly, heartily and freely. And
from this Service then required to the House of God, we may learn the
Qualification that is necessary to recommend all the Service that we do to God
himself; It must be a Willing Service. Men indeed that stand in need of
Services do oftentimes accept them without regard to the Principle from whence
they come; but God, who has no need of any Services that we can do him, always
carries an eye to the Principle; and if they come not willingly, and from our
heart, they never reach Acceptance with him. Now nothing can render a willing
Service like Delight in our Master: And of this we may make a sad Proof from
the Service of Sin: When we serve any irregular Appetite, as Couetousness, or
Ambition, or Luxury, or Lust, or Malice; Alas! we delight in our Masters; And
then, though the Service be hard, and the Wages mean, yet we can do any thing
for our Master's sake: we can watch and labor, and wait and solicit, and beg
and bear, and deny our selves, and dissemble Injuries, and all to content:
whereas let but the same Acts be required in Religion, how uneasy and tedious
do they seem? They are complained of as difficult, and quitted as Impossible.
And what now can make all this Difference, but only a different Respect for our
Master? Nay we may take notice farther, That all the Services of our Lusts,
however toilsome, however disquieting, however ill attended they may be, yet
still nevertheless they are styled Pleasures, and Men swallow them eagerly
under that gilded Name. Now would we but transfer our Affections to God, how
much more reasonably would his Service be styled a Pleasure, and be willingly
and cheerfully undertaken, and seem easy to us in the discharge? But an ill
Opinion checks all Endeavors, and benumns all the sinews of Diligence. He, in
the Parable, that conceived his Lord under the Notion of a hard Master, made no
advance in his Service; he profited nothing at all: And how far any one else
can profit under the same Circumstances, we may learn from our own sad
experience; while we find that, so long as our Affection is not with God, all
our Services languish into a heartless Application, and a bare unedifying
Formality.

But I need say no more to commend the Duty; and perhaps it may be more worth
our while to consider what are the Hindrances of it in common Practice.

We may observe, That delighting in God has Three main Adversaries, ( viz.)
Inconsideration, Sensuality, and Superstition: by reason of the first, Men will
not; by reason of the second, they cannot; and by reason of the third, they
dare not delight in God. I shall examine all these.

The first Hinderance is Inconsideration. And this is that which God charge
the Israelites with, as the Cause of their neglecting this Duty; in that known
place of Isaiah, The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his master's cribb, but
Israel does not know me: where the word to know (according to the old Rule of
Scripture-Interpretation, Verba scientiae connotant Affectus), signifies to
love, or take pleasure in; And then the Argument of their Reproach runs thus;
The Beasts, which Man looks upon as much more stupid than himself, do yet own
their Feeder, and love him, and take pleasure in him, and render him a willing
Service: Now, says God, I feed my People as effectually as a Keeper feeds his
Beast; I give them all they have, and more; I sustain their Faculties in a
capacity of Enjoying what I give them, and yet I have not such a Return as even
the Beasts do make; Israel will not love or take pleasure in me; and the Reason
of all follows, My people will not consider, This was the Cause; and where this
Cause is, the Effect is necessary; for how is it possible we can take pleasure
in that which we will not think of? Amiableness is properly the Parent, but
Thought is both the Midwife and Nurse of Desire; and be the Object never so
amiable and obliging, while we do not consider it, it affects us no more than
if it were not at all. From this unhappy Slothfulness and Indiscretion of Mind
it comes to pass, That many, though otherwise of inoffensive Lives, and
moderate Appetites, and lying under no Indisposition that might hinder them
from enjoying God with a proper Delight, do yet wholly defraud themselves of
the Comfort of so doing, and suffer their Time to pass heavily over their
heads, only for want of applying some due Portions of it to the Contemplation
of God and his Goodness; which Portions of Time so applied would wonderfully
lighten all the rest, and render our Lives, as much more accountable, so much
more pleasurable too.

But, Secondly, Sensuality sets Men at a greater distance from delighting in
God; in that State they cannot do it; And the Reason is, Because that when the
Soul once comes to serve under a Complacency in things of Sense, it necessarily
becomes gross and fleshly, and loses all its spiritual Taste: And thus the
Wisdom of God has made it a natural Effect, That none shall be able to enjoy
Him, who set up his Creatures in competition with Him; It being made above the
capacity of our hearts, as well as it is beneath the Honor of God, to receive
the Commerce of his Love in any other than in our largest Room. Indeed the
Prophet Isaiah, chapter 58. 2. tells us of the Israelites, that they pretended to
delight in God, while their Affections were extremely carnal, and set upon the
World; but this was an Affront to the Divine Majesty, which he was commanded to
cry loudly against: And we may lay down this for a Rule, That of all Hypocrites
they are the greatest, who pretend that they delight in God; and of all
Enthusiasts they are the highest, who believe that they delight in God, while
they dare delight in any thing that does offend him. If therefore we will
delight in God, it is necessary to draw off, at least so far, from the World,
as to make our Delight in him, preside over, and moderate all the rest of our
Enjoyments.

The third Hinderance of the Duty is Superstition; which is the Vice of those
that dare not delight in God: The word Superstition is sometimes taken in a
greater latitude; but I take it here in its strict and original sense to
signify a Worship of Fear; a Worship of Fear proceeding from a sour and
terrifying Opinion of the Nature of God. Now this unworthy Opinion, which is
the Parent of Superstition, does sometimes grow from Principles of Doctrine
received, and sometimes from bare Complexion. As for example: Supposing it to
be believed, That God has determined a great part of Mankind to Eternal Misery,
merely to show the Absoluteness of his Dominion: How does such a Doctrine as
this detract from the Amiable Goodness of God; and necessarily tend to make all
Mankind superstitious, fearful, and heartless; unless it be such as pretend to
be secure of their own Exemption from that Decree? And yet none can be secure
of this, without a particular Revelation. But my chief Aim is to speak of that
Superstition that grows from Complexion: And this Complexion is sometimes
natural, by reason of the Melancholy of Temper; and sometimes occasional, by
reason of the Infirmity of Conscience: Now in both these Cases it is usual for
the Minds of Men to suggest, That to delight in God is too bold a Familiarity;
That as we are Creatures of a sinful Nature, and much more as we are actual
Sinners, the Majesty of God requires a more awful distance of our Affections,
than to be delighted in by us. But all this is no more than weakness of Thought.

For first, Although we cannot be too sensible of the vast Distance, that is
between the Vileness of our Nature, and the Majesty of God's; Yet we must
remember, that his Condescension has been pleased to void all this distance; so
that though He dwells in the highest Heavens, yet He declares himself to dwell
too with the humble spirit; and therefore if we can but keep our Spirits
humble, (which is very well consistent with Delight) there is no fear of our
being too Familiar.

But secondly, To reflect on our selves as Actual Sinners; And here indeed the
Case requires a Distinction: For supposing a Sinner to retain the purposes of
Sin, such a one has neither Reason nor Ground to delight in God, and his
Pretenses to do so are a direct Affront: But supposing a Sinner to turn from
his Sin in Sincerity, such a one has of all others the most Reason to delight
in God, and to love much, because much shall be forgiven him; as our Savior
argues in the Case of Mary Magdalen. And if we consider the Passages of the
returning Prodigal (in the Parable) and what Delight his Father expressed to
receive him, we must conclude the Son to have been Unthankful, if he did not
delight in his Father more after his Return, than if he had never gone astray.
For, by the way, we must not have so mean a Notion of delighting in God, as to
think it is exclusive of Godly Sorrow: The Heathen could say of true Joy, That
it is not a Giggling thing, It is a Severe thing: Joy, we know, has its Tears
even in Nature; but it has more in Grace; and nothing better expresses our
Delight in God, and nothing better advances it than Sorrow for Sin. So that,
supposing a Man's Mind to be but religiously bent, there is no other
Circumstance can exclude him; (exclude him did I say?) nay, can excuse him from
delighting in God. For we must consider, That to delight in God is not only our
Privilege, but our Duty; it being the proper Acknowledgment that is due to the
Divine Goodness; and therefore whatsoever may be pretended to hinder it, can be
no other than sinful and weak, because it does not only deprive us of our
Comfort, but it likewise robs God of His Due.

And now I come to,

II. The great Motive and Encouragement of this Duty, He shall give thee thy
Heart's desire.

It was a very large Promise the Devil once made, when, pointing at all the
Kingdoms of the World and the Glories thereof, he cried, All this will I give
thee; and yet had he had power to make his words good, the Overture had been
short of this in the Text: For we see that they who have the greatest share in
the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glories of them, have still an Emptiness of
Heart; and complain of as many Wants, and Troubles, and Disappointments, as are
to be met with in meaner Fortunes; and therefore it is evident, That to have
our Heart's Desire, is a greater Boon, than all the Pomp and Affluence of the
World is able to contribute. Now were so large and obliging a Promise as this
is, not to be fulfilled till the future Life, it were well worth the waiting
for: but yet God has provided more indulgently for those that love him:
Godliness has the Promises of this Life, as well as of that which is to come;
and this in the Text has peculiar Respect to this Life; and therefore I shall
only treat of it in reference to its Accomplishment here; and show how, and in
what manner the Goodness of God will infallibly make it good to every one that
delights in Him.

When a Man shall hear of such an Overture as this, Thou shall have thy Heart's
desire; It is natural for him immediately to consult his Heart, and see what
Desires he has there, thronging forth at the Hopes of their Accomplishment: And
there perhaps he may find the Desire of Ahab, to enlarge his Possessions; or
the Desire of Amnon, to compass his Lust; or the Desire of Haman, to gratify
his Pride and Revenge. I mention these Instances particularly; because they may
afford us some farther matter of Instruction. For we may observe of these Three
Men, that though one of them was a King, and the other was a King's Son, and
the third a King's chief Minion or Favorite; yet each of them accounted
himself an unhappy Man, till such time as he could compass his particular
Desire; They could neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep without it;
notwithstanding all the Greatness of their other Circumstances: And, from their
Example, I would have you take notice of one mischie^vous Error, that all
Mankind is prone to; i. e. We are all apt to think, that our present Desires
are necessary to make us happy, and that we cannot be happy without them: And
yet we may farther observe of the same Three, That those very Desires which
they looked on, as necessary to make them happy, were the express Cause of each
of their undoing: And in like manner I conclude, concerning the generality of
Mankind, That however they esteem the Accomplishment of their present Desires,
as necessary to make them happy, yet it is so far from it, that if God should
give them their Desires, they would certainly be undone. If the Intemperate Man
had his Desire, he would have more Health; and, if he had, what would follow,
but only that he would be more Intemperate? If the Ambitious Man had his
Desire, he would have more Honor; and, if he had, what would follow, but only
that he would be more Insolent? The Contentious Man would have more Authority;
and, if he had, what would follow, but only that he would be more Injurious?
The Scoffer would have more Wit; and, if he had, what would follow, but only
that he would be more abusive? In a word; If all Men (speaking of them in their
ordinary natural State) had their Desires, they would only have more room and
more means for more Guilt; and how far would this be from making of them happy?
We may therefore lay down this for a certain Rule, That so long as our Desires
are any way loose and irregular, though then they be a Torment while they are
not satisfied; yet they would be a greater mischief if they were satisfied: and
therefore it is pure Mercy in God that he does deny them. When therefore it is
said, That God will give a man his heart's desire, it must necessarily be
understood, That the Man's Desire must first be regulated before it be given
him; otherwise the giving of it would be a Curse.

To clear the whole Matter we need only examine the full Meaning of this
Expression, He shall give thee thy heart's desire: Were such a Promise made us
by a Man, we should expect no less from it, than the full satisfaction and
accomplishment of our Desires; And be sure we may expect the same from God; for
there is no Sophistry in the Divine Promises: But when we consider that God who
makes this Promise, has power to govern the Heart, and order the Desires, as
well as to procure those outward Issues that are necessary to their
Satisfaction, we must of right interpret the words to bear a farther sense, and
that is this; He shall give thee thy heart's desire, i. e. He shall give thee
first the Desire it self, and then the Accomplishment of it: This therefore is
the full sense of the Words ( viz.) That when we apply our selves to the Point
of delighting in God, he will form and order all the Movements of our Hearts,
and teach us to desire such things as are safe, and then he will fulfill our
Desires. And let not any Carnal Imagination cry within it self, I am defeated,
if my Desires must be changed, for how shall I be happy without the present?
The Case is Just the same when a Man lies heated with a Fever; His Thirst
calls for mighty Draughts, and he thinks nothing else can content him; and when
the Physician, instead of a mighty draught, offers him some little thing of a
very different appearance, he looks upon it as a provoking disappointment; but
after Application, when he comes to find his Thirst allayed, and so his Desire
changed, and withal his Disease abated; ask him then what defeat there is in
the Change of his Desire.

The truth is, that while our Desires are in our own hands and management, it
is impossible we should be happy: for so long as they are unsatisfied we feel a
sensible Unhappiness from them, nor should be less unhappy if they were
satisfied so long as they are unsafe: But when our Desires are in God's hands,
to be managed and formed by him, we cannot but be happy; for they will be made
such as are fit to be fulfilled, and then certainly be fulfilled.

The only thing remaining is, To show in what Method this shall be done: And
thus it is; Whenever the Grace of God has its proper work upon our Hearts, it
will effectually reduce the multitude of our Desires to these Two. ( Viz.) 1.
It will make us desire God himself chiefly, as the Chiefest Good; and, 2. It
will make us desire all other inferior good things with Submission to God's
Will.


1. The Desire of God himself will become the first and masterly and governing
Desire of our Soul; the Desire of Importunity and humble Violence resolving not
to be denied: One thing have I desired, which I will require; which I will
insist upon, which I will not forego, says the good Man; and that is, That God
will communicate himself unto me: And when this Desire is once come to be
rooted and habitual, the Heart will be so filled, and healed, and strengthened
by it; that (as when a powerful Medicine is given to a Leper) the multitude of
our common Desires will drop off like the Scabs of our natural Itch. Indeed we
may observe even from the Instances that are vicious, how one Desire, when
grown masterly and governing, will be able to suspend the Actings of all other,
and fill, and take up the whole Soul: Ex. gr. Let a Man set his Heart upon the
Love of Money; This Desire will be able to wean him from all other Desires; and
from all regards either to Virtue or Credit, or even to Pleasure it self; and
so long as this one Desire is thriving, he will account himself an entirely
happy Man: Thus it is when a Man makes Treasure his God; and how much more
happily will it be so? How much more happily will one Desire fill, and take up
the whole Soul, when a Man shall make God his Treasure?

But Grace requires not that Nature should be extinguished, and therefore there
is always lawful Room for a Second Desire, i. e.

2. The Desire of Temporal good things, such as are Health, and Ease, and
Liberty, and other Conveniences of Life: But then this in the good Man is a
Desire of Submission and Resignation, and resolved Acquiescence in the Will and
Pleasure of God: For this Reason, Because, although it be lawful for any Man to
desire these things, yet it is beyond the Wisdom of the wisest Man in the World
to know, whether the Enjoying of these things would be best for him; nay,
whether it would be simply safe. There is one Consideration, that is reasonably
sufficient to make us distrust and be Jealous of all our natural Desires,
however Just and regular they may be in appearance; and that is this; It is
certain, that if we should have our Desires, though never so honest, yet they
would quite evacuate and set aside the Cross of Christ; for we should never
desire Wants, and Chastisements, and Afflictions: Now he that thinks the Cross
of Christ an unnecessary Imposition; or that Wants, and Chastisements, and
Afflictions are not sometimes best for us; neither understands himself, nor the
designs of God upon him for his Good. God only knows what is best for us, and
what the State of our Passions can bear at all times to the best Advantage: And
his absolute Promise extending thus far, That he will give like a Father to
each of his dutiful Children, (...), as much as he needs, or as much as is
useful and fit; the good Christian takes it for a Demonstration, That what God
gives him not, is not fit for him.

Upon this state of Mind it follows, That whoever delights in God, he has
effectually his Heart's Desire: For in the supreme Desire of his Heart he
cannot miscarry; God will be undoubtedly his; he already tastes his Goodness,
and rejoices in it: And in his inferior Desires of Worldly Comforts, he is
secure from disappointment, because he makes God's Will the measure of his own:
So that if he chance to want the desirable things of Life, he cries to
himself, These things indeed are Good, but God is Better; and upon this Rule he
establishes his Content. And, on the other side, when he enjoys the desirable
things of Life, he cries to himself, These things indeed are Good, but blessed
be God that he has better things than these in store; and with this Rule he
both moderates his Appetite, and doubles his Enjoyment.

Now how can any one desire more than this, To be at the same time Content, and
Joyful, and Safe? I am sure this is more than any one can obtain from the
World, though he had the World more at his Will than ever yet any Man had. And
yet he that delights in God shall never fail of this, To be both Content, and
Joyful, and Safe. And, I think, I need not allege any more to prove, That
Delight in God brings along with it the fullest Accomplishment of Humane
Desires.

And thou, O Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly Wills and
Affections of sinful Men; Grant unto thy People, That they may love the thing
which thou command, and desire that which thou do promise; That so, among
the sundry Changes of the World, our Hearts may surely there be fixed where
true Ioys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Archbishop of York's Thanksgiving Sermon before the King and Queen at
Whitehall, Nov. 12. 1693.

The Archbishop of York's Sermon, About the Government of the Thoughts, before
the King and Queen at Whitehall, March 4. 1693/4.

The Dean of Canterbury's Sermon before the King and Queen at White Hall, Ian.
14. 1693/4.

The Dean of Hereford's Sermon before the Queen, March 23. 1693/4.

Mr. Young's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 4. 1682. on St. Matthew. V. 3.

-- 's Sermon, exhorting to Union in Religion, preached at Bow-Church, May 20.
1688. on St. John XVI. 31, 32.

-- 's Sermon before the Queen, on Easter Day, 1693. on 1 Thessalonians. IV. 18.

-- 's Sermon at Salisbury, July 30. 1693. Concerning the Wisdom of Fearing
God. Published at the Request of the Lawyers.

The true Conduct of Persons of Quality. Translated out of French.

A Treatise relating to the Worship of God, divided into Six Sections. By John
Templer, D. D.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Man, both in his Natural and Political
Capacity: With an Examination of some of Mr. Hobb's Opinions, relating
thereunto. By James Loud, Rector of Setrington in Yorkshire.

T. Burnetii Archaeologia Philosophica, sive Doctrina Antiqua de Rerum
Originibus, 4 to.

The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man. The Fourth Edition, 12.


