December 21. 1688.
Licensed.

Fourteen Papers, VIZ.
I. A Letter from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his Friend in London, upon
occasion of a Pamphlet, Entitled, A Vindication of the present Government of
Ireland, under his Excellency Richard Earl of Tyrconnel. II. A Letter from a
Freeholder, to the rest of the Freeholders of England, and all Others, who have
Votes in the Choice of Parliament Men. III. An Enquiry into the Reasons for
Abrogating the Test imposed on all Members of Parliament. Offered by Sa. Oxon.
IV. Reflections on a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, Parliamentum Pacificum. Licensed
by the Earl of Sunderland, and Printed at London in March, 1688. V. A Letter to
a Dissenter, upon occasion of His Majesty's late Gracious Declaration of
Indulgence. VI. The Anatomy of an Equivalent. VII. A Letter from a Clergyman
in the City, to his Friend in the Country, Containing his Reasons for not
Reading the Declaration. VIII. An Answer to the City Minister's Letter, from
his Country Friend. IX. A Letter to a Dissenter from his Friend at the Hague,
concerning the Penal Laws, and the Test; showing that the Popular Plea for
Liberty of Conscience is not concerned in that Question. X. A Plain Account of
the Persecution said to the Charge of the Church of England. XI. Abbey and other
Church Lands, not yet assured to such Possessors as are Roman Catholics;
Dedicated to the Nobility and Gentry of that Religion. XII. The King's Power in
Ecclesiastical Matters truly stated. XIII. A Letter of several French Ministers
fled into Germany upon the Account of the Persecution in France, to such of
their Brethren in England as approved the Kings Declaration touching Liberty of
Conscience. Translated from the Original in French. XIV. Popish Treaties not to
be relied on: In a Letter from a Gentleman at York, to his Friend in the Prince
of Orange's Camp. Addressed to all Members of the next Parliament.
LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin' near the BlackBull in
the Old-Bailey. 1689.

A Letter from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his Friend in London, upon occasion
of a Pamphlet, Entitled, A Vindication of the present Government of Ireland,
under his Excellency Richard Earl of Tyrconnel.
SIR,
AS soon as the Letter, Entitled, A Vindication of the present Government of
Ireland, etc. came to my hands, I set upon Answering it with the same
expedition, and plainness of Style, as uses to accompany naked Truth, which
needs not the clothing of sophistical Arguments, or florid Expressions, to
recommend it to the unprejudiced part of Mankind: And indeed upon the very
first reading of every Paragraph of it, the slightness of the Arguing, or the
notorious Falsehood of the Matter of Fact, did so evidently appear, that a man
of ordinary capacity needs not put his Natural Talent on the Rack to resute
them.

The very first Position of the Paper, viz. [That Ireland is in a better Way of
Thriving under the Government of a Native, than an Englishman;] (by which, I
suppose, you mean one not barely so by Birth, but by Inclination, Interest,
Education, Religion, etc.) is so false, that it contradicts the Experience and
Reason of Mankind, and disgusts one so much in the front of the Letter, that I
was tempted to fling it away unread, judging it not worth the loss of so much
time, if the rest should prove of the same kind (as indeed I found it upon
perusal;) but having ventured through it, I looked upon myself obliged to say
something by way of Answer, since in the opinion of some sort of Men, the not
Answering (though even the most trifling Pamphlet) is given out to be the
Inability of the Party to reply to the weight of such Arguments as are
contained in it.

I will not insist much upon the constant Practice of all the Predecessors of
our English Kings, and their Counselors, ever since the Conquest of Ireland,
who made it an established Maxim, in relation to that Kingdom, That none but an
Englishman should be Chief Governor; insomuch that (till within these two
Years) that Practice gave occasion to the common erroneous opinion, That a man
born in Ireland, however otherwise qualified, was thereby incapacitated from
being Lord Deputy: It is certain, that long before the Reformation, when
Matters of Religion made no distinction between the Natives of each Country,
this was the settled and unaltered Rule: Have we any reason then to alter it,
(now that Religion is put into the Scale, and become the additional weight,
which never fails giving the advantage to the side it espouses and adheres to)
or rashly to condemn the wise Proceedings of the Ancestors of our Kings, and
(contrary to the Opinion of the World) judge our Author's Irish Understanding,
better than all the English ones that have been heretofore?

Our Author will certainly allow Ireland to be a conquered Country, and
consequently that the Conquerours have right to establish Laws with such
restrictions and limitations, as shall seem fitting and convenient toward the
keeping it in their hands, and the welfare of the Inhabitants; which are of two
sorts, the British Planters, and the Natives. I shall prove, that it has been,
and still is, the Advantage of both these, that Ireland should be Governed by
an Englishman.

By the way, I would have it understood, that I do not pretend to put these two
Interests into any balance: I know the British Interest does so far outweigh
the other, that it were a wrong done it, to bring them into any competition;
more than two parts of three of the Lands of Ireland, being (by the several
Rebellions of the Irish) in British hands; and for the Quality, Temper,
Industry, etc. there is no comparison: besides, that if one of two Parties is
to be pleased (though by the detriment of the other) it is but just, that the
Conquerours (who have right to give Law) should be indulged; how much more when
it is consistent with the welfare of the Irish themselves, if they understood
their own good?

I am convinced, that whatever has been done in favor of the Natives, is pure
Grace, and cannot be claimed as a just Debt, any otherwise than since it has
been confirmed by Our Laws, and Acts of Parliament: He that reflects on 1641,
will readily assent to this, which makes me admire at the pertness of our
Author, in Capitulating, as if we stood upon even ground with them; but: it is
plain, he considers the Interest but of one Party in that Kingdom, and though he
names Ireland often, he means the Native Irish Papist only. But I proceed

To prove, that it is the Interest of the British, that Ireland should be
Governed by an Englishman: I need say no more than that they all ardently
desire it; and People are the best Judge of their own Necessities: The common
Maxim, That Interest will not lie, Holds good here to some purpose. The ill
effects the contrary method has had on their Persons and Estates, is but too
visible. Whoever had seen Ireland four Years ago, and would compare its
Condition with what it is now, from the most thriving and flourishing Country
of Europe, from a place of the briskest Trade, and best paid Rents in
Christendom, it is fallen in one. Year and a half's time, to Ruin and
Desoration: in the most frequent Cities, empty Houses, and melancholy
Countenances; in the best Peopled Counties, unmanur'd neglected Fields, and
Solitariness: Such a one, I say, might justly exclaim, Heu! Quantum mutatus ab
illo. But it would be impertinent to insist any longer on this. I must now
prove, That it is the advantage of the very Natives themselves, (who have long
been uneasy under the English Government, and often endeavored to shake it
off) to be Ruled and Guided by that Nation they hate so much, They are
beholding to us for reducing them from a state of Barbarity, which left but
little difference between them and Brutes: We taught them to Live, to Eat,
Drink, and Lodge like humane Creatures; (if they esteem this any advantage, and
do not really prefer their Native Wildness to all the Benefits of Civil
Society, Trade, Agriculture, Merchandising, Learning, etc.) and if the
gentleness of the English Government could have had any influence on them, they
had no reason to be discontented at it: They had the equal Protection of the
Laws, in relation to their Estates and Persons; they bore but their just
proportion in all Taxes and Cesses: Their Lands improved in value, by the means
of their British Neighbors, and their Rents were much better paid than
formerly, whilst themselves were Masters of the whole Island: They had a large
connivance for the exercise of their Religion, and were even allowed to hold a
National Synod of their own Clergy in Dublin, Anno 1666. The poor Natives were
not oppressed, when their severe Landlords, the Irish Gentry, by their cruel
Extortions, Casherings, Duties, and Days Labor ruined them; who as soon as the
English Manners prevailed among them, (as they were introduced with difficulty
enough, there was need of the Authority of Acts of Parliament to constrain them
for their own good) lived plentifully, and in convenient Houses, had their
share of the current Coin, and proportion of all other Necessaries, to the life
and well-being of Man, which now they want; insomuch that several of them have
been heard to Curse my Lord Tyrconnel; for to his Government they attribute
their Misery, and acknowledge, they never lived so well as under the Direction
of the English Rulers, nor expected to do so again, till they were restored to
the Helm. See the force of Truth, which compels a consession of it, even from
the mouths of its Adversaries!

One may easily perceive by our Author's manner of arguing, where the Shoe
pinches; he is really concerned that Ireland is not altogether an independent
Kingdom, and in the hands of its own Natives: he longs till the day, when the
English Yoke of Bondage shall be thrown off: Of this he gives us broad hints,
when he tells us, that [ England is the only Nation in the World that impedes
their Trade:] That [a man of English interest will never Club with them (as he
phrases it) or Project any thing which may tend to their advantage, that will
be the least bar, or prejudice to the Trade of England.] Now why a man of
English interest (unless he will allow none of that Nation to be an able and
just Minister to his Prince) should be partial, to ruin one Kingdom, [to avoid
the least inconveniency of the other] contrary to the positive Commands of his
King, I cannot imagine: For since [it is the Governor's Duty to Rule by Law,
and such Orders as he shall receive from His Majesty] I know no grounds for our
Author's Arraigning the whole English Nation, in saying, That no one man among
them, of what Persuasion soever, will be true either to the Laws, or his
Majesty's positive Orders, which shall seem repugnant to the smallest
Conveniences of England. This is a glory reserved only (as it seems) for his
Hero, my Lord Tyrconnel.

The Imbargo upon the West India Trade, and the Prohibition of Irish Cattle,
are the two Instances given.

It were to be wished indeed, for the good of that Kingdom, that both were
taken off; and I question not but to see a day wherein it shall seem proper to
the King, and an English Parliament, to Repeal those Laws; a day wherein they
will consider us as their own Flesh and Blood, a Colony of their Kindred and
Relations, and take care of our Advantages with as little grudging and repining
(I am sure they have the same and no stronger Reason) as Cornwall does at
Yorkshire: There are instances in several Islands in the East Indies, as far
distant as Ireland is from England, that make up but one Kingdom, and Governed
by the same Laws; but the Wisdom of England will not judge it time sitting to
do this, till we of Ireland be one Man's Children, either in Reality or
Affection; we wish the latter, and have made many steps and advances toward
it, if the Natives will not meet us half way, we cannot help it, let the Event
lie at their own Doors.

But after all, I see not how those Instances have any manner of relation to
the English Chief Governors in Ireland; they were neither the Causes,
Contrivers, nor Promoters of those Acts. The King and an English Parliament did
it without consulting them; if they had, it is sorty to one, My Lord of Ormond
and the Council, whose stake is so great in Ireland, would have hindered it as
much as possible. Our Author's Argument proves indeed, That it is detrimental to
Ireland, to be a subordinate Kingdom to England (and it is plain, it is that he
drives at, let him disguise it as much as he will) but the Conclusion he would
prove, cannot at all be deduced from it: Shortly, I expect, he will speak
plainer, and in downright terms propose, That the two Kingdoms may be governed
by different Kings; Matters seem to grow ripe for such a ^ Proposition.

^ Acts (and not the subjection to an ^ ^) were the Grievances, they would be
so ^ British there, as well as to the Natives: but though we wish them
Repealed, we do not repine; in the mean time, if the British who are the most
considerable Trading part of that Nation, and consequently seel the ill effects
of those Acts more sensibly, can be contented, why the Natives should not
acquiesce in it, (unless it be for the forementioned Reasons) I cannot see.

Our Author allows that there are different ways of obeying the King: it is a
Point gained for us, and proves there may be such a partiality exercised in
executing His Majesty's Commands, as may destroy the very intent of them; and
yet (taking the matter strictly [the King is obeyed] but a good Minister will
consider his Masters Intention, and not make use of a word that may have a
double sense to the ruin of a Kingdom, nor of a latitude of power, wherewith
he is entrusted, to the destruction of the most considerable Party in it: Far
be it from us to think it was His Majesty's Intentions to depopulate a
flourishing Country, to undo multitudes of laborious thriving Families in it,
to diminish and destroy his own Revenue, to put the Sword into Mad-mens hands,
who are sworn Enemies to the British: No! His Majesty, who is willing that
liberty of Trade as well as Conscience, should equally flourish in all parts of
his Dominions, that recommends himself to his Subjects by his impartiality in
distributing Offices of Trust; and from that practice raises his greatest
Argument to move his people to Repeal the Penal Laws; never intended that some
general Commands of his should be perverted to the destruction of that people,
his intention is to protect. His Majesty (Great as he is) cannot have two
Consciences, one calculated for the Latitude of England, another for Ireland.
We ought therefore to conclude, (in respect to the King.) that His Commands
have been ill understood, and worse executed; and this may be done (as our
Author confesses) and the King [undoubtedly obeyed] but such an Obedience is no
better than a Sacrifice of the best Subjects the King has in this Kingdom.

Our Author has given very good Reasons why the Natives may be well content
with their present Governor, but I cannot forbear laughing at those he has
found out to satisfy the poor British with My Lord Tyrconnel's most Excellent,
Charitable English Lady: His high sounding Name ^ in great Letters, a Name that
no less frightens ^ Poor English in Ireland, then it once ^ ^ French; a Name
which because he is in possession of, I will not dispute his Title to, but I
have been credibly informed, that he has no relation to the most Noble Family
of Shrewsbury, (though ^ Lord Tyrconnel presumes to bear the same Cost ^ Arms):
a Name in short, which I hope in ^ ^ and ^ ^.

A Second Reason is drawn from his [Education We have heard (and it has never
yet been contradicted) that my Lord Tyrconnel from his Youth ^, has constantly
born Arms against the British If our Author will assure us of the contrary, I ^
apt to believe his Excellency will give him no ^ who lays the foundation of his
Merit upon the ^ of his constant adherence to the Irish Party: ^ use of
Consolation can be drawn from this head ^ the British, is beyond my skill to
comprehend.

A third Reason is drawn from his Stake in England, the Author would do well to
show us, in what Country this lies, that we may know where to find Reprisals
hereafter; for since he offers this for our Security, it is fit to enquire into
the Title and Value of the Land, before we give so valuable a Consideration.

Thus this great heap of substantial Reasons, together with a large Panegyric
upon his: Excellency's fair Face and good Shapes, telling us by the by, now he
[was not killed at Drogheda, because he run away,] is enough, and more than
enough to demonstrate, that [the British have not the least cause to be
dejected, because they are sufficiently secure]: But I will agree with the
Author in this, That he seems to have been reserved by Heaven against the most
critical occasion, that should happen in this Age, reserved as one of the Vials
of God's Wrath to plague the People.

It Is well known [Self-preservation is allowed by God and Man;] and sines he
tells us, we are ^ People of a contrary Inurest,] he gives us right to provide
for our selves and our Families, as well as we may; it is like a generous
Aggressor: first he declares who are his Enemies, then gives them warning to
put themselves into a posture of Defense. We are beholding to him so this
hint, and, ^ hope, shall make the right use of it. It Is below ^ to take notice
of the ^ of the Expression of [an honest Man's losing his Head in a ^,] and the
nonscence of the other, [The most men bite at the stone, etc.] Dogs indeed ^ to
do so with us; but this is only to let the World know what Country man our
Author is, ^ it may be it is the custom here for these Men to ^ these more
rational Creatures.

Our Author seems sensible, that many hard things ^ been done, which occasioned
Clamours ^ the present Governor; though I think our Grievances (how
intolerable soever) have been ^ more silently, then any Peoples since the
Creation: since I do not remember any one Pamphlet ^ hitherto come out, to
represent them; ours ^ of that nature, as ^ as, and takes away ^ use of the
Tongue and Pen: Cura lives, ^, ^ stupent: I say he is not willing this ^ of
Calumny should rest on my Lord Tyrconnel, ^ casts it all on His Majesty,
imagining that the ^ we beat (and justly) to our King, ought ^ tender us ^-^ in
relation to the Male-^ of his Minister. But I have ^ shown, how the King's
Orders may be stretched, ^ perverted. The very best and most cautiously ^ Laws
have a double edge, and (if the Executive - Power be lodged in ill Hands) have
the worst Effect, even to the Punishment of Well-doers, and the Encouragement
of them that do Ill; and I question not, in the least, but this is our Case,
and as little doubt that our Grievances would be redressed, did not one of His
Majesty's most Eminent Virtues interpose between us and His Grace, I mean his
Constancy to his old Servants; and our Condition is so much the more
deplorable, that His Majesty cannot be a Father of His Country without seeming
to desert His Minister; but it is to be hoped that at long running, the Groans
of a distressed Nation will prevail over all private Considerations.

Whether the Employment His Majesty has given my Lord Tyrconnel, has not proved
the occasion of the Augmentation of his Fortune, (as our Author insinuates it
has not) shall neither prove the subject of this Discourse, nor object of our
Envy. I shall only say, if the report be true, that my Lord owes all his Estate
to the King's bounty, it is ungratefully done to rob His Majesty of the Honor
and Thanks due to him, by denying it; much less is it our business to find
fault with the advancement of five Relations. In this point Authors differ, for
some speak 55 at least: If there had not been the greatest Partiality in the
World showed, we should never have opened our mouths, if in an Army of about
9000 English Officers and Soldiers, there be not 200 left, (in a Country where
the English have so much cause to fear) and those turned out for the most part,
without any cause assigned, after the most ignominious disgraceful manner
imaginable, stripped naked in the Field, their Horses, Boots, Buffcoats, etc.
taken from them, giving them Bills to receive so much Money in Dublin, as ^ ^
half the value of their Equipage, and ^ without Charge and Attendance; have ^
reason to fear? If in a Country, whose ^ was perfectly in the English hands, so
sudden an alteration was made, that both the Courts of Judicature, and Charters
of their Corporations were taken from them without any fault of theirs, have
they not reason to complain, and be afraid? If those very Arms which are taken
from them, be put into the hands of their sworn Enemies, and their just Debts
paid after a new Method, by beating or killing the Creditors, when they demand
their own, Have they not reason to fear, and desert the Kingdom? If these and
an hundred other things do not justify the retreat of several of the British
into England, I know not what shall be adjudged a sufficient Reason. This our
Author would insinuate, is caused by a sullen Combination; as if the Gentry of
a Nation could agree together, to do a thing so contrary to their visible
Interest, as desert their Houses and Estates, to the loss of one half of them,
merely out of spite to the Government.

But because our Author is so good at his Narratives, and would induce the
World to believe that there was but two Regiments disbanded [by his talking
only of two] and in another place speaking of [some Officers] that were
Cashiered. We shall hereafter give a faithful Account of the Proceedings in the
business of Disbanding; and in the mean time affirm, That his whole Account of
the Affair at Molingar is most unsincere. The English Soldiers were given to
understand, that they were all to be turned out, and the only Grace his
Excellency did them, was to declare before a long and tedious March, That such
as had a mind, or had Settlements in that Country might better quit then, than
hereafter. This is plainly shown by the turning out (afterward) all those
English who then actually continued in the Service; they were glad that any
would quit voluntarily, but those that did not, and after a public Trial, were
willing to serve His Majesty, they soon after turned out. Thus the false gloss
that our Author puts upon my Lord Tyrconnel's Speech is discovered: And I
assure the Reader, the Memoires I have by me are from such unquestionable
hands, and there are so many hundred living Witnesses to the truth of them,
that our Author will not have the Impudence to deny what may be proved before
His Majesty, if he require it. I shall only take notice of the ill Application
of our Author's Sea-Metaphor. Though in stress of Weather, the Owner is willing
to make use of all hands that may be helpful toward the saving the Vessel, yet
he takes care to call for none whose practice it has been to cut the
Tacklings, and to steer contrary to the Pilot's Directions; he thinks such
safer by far shut up under Hatches, then set at liberty or employed to do
mischief: As for his supposition of 30000 men to be sent out of Ireland, into
Flanders, I cannot tell what to make on it. Let them crack the Shell that hope
to find a Kernel in it. For my part I despair: though the readiness of the
English Soldiers of Ireland, who at twenty four hours warning came into England
to serve His Majesty in the time of Monmouth's Rebellion, ought to have been
remembered to their advantage, and might serve (to any unprejudiced person) as
a Pattern of the Loyalty, and good Inclinations of all the Protestants in that
Kingdom, if His Majesty had had occasion ^ them. Whether the Parliament will
Repeal ^ Test for those several weighty Reasons our Author says [are fitter for
Contemplation then Discourse tho methinks it would be pleasant to see a House
of Commons sit like the Brethren at a silent Meeting, is not my Province to
determine: As likewise Whether they will so much consider that ^ Reason [the
King will have it so] (for his Conscience and theirs may differ) or what the
Dissenters will do, I cannot tell. One thing I am sure ^ there will be no such
Stumbling Block in the ^ of the King's desires, when they meet, as the present
condition of Ireland; they will be apt (^ His Majesty tells them; they shall
have their ^ shares in Employments, when they have Repealed the Laws) to say,
Look at Ireland, see what is done there, where the Spirit of Religion appears ^
faced! and accordingly compute what may become of us, when we have removed our
own legal ^; Since they now leap over those Hedges, what may we expect when
they are quite taken away!

Poyning's Law is a great grievance to our Author and here in one word, he
discovers that it is the dependence this Kingdom has on England, he quarrel at:
It Is fit the Reader should understand, that Law (enacted when Poynings was Lord
Deputy) make all the English Acts of Parliament of force in Ireland; we are
therefore so fond of that Law, and cover so much to preserve our dependence on
England that all the Arguments our Author can bring shall not induce us to part
with it.

I will not reflect in the least on the Courage of the Irish, I know there are
several brave men among them, but they have had the misfortune to fall under
the Consideration of (as our Author softens ^ but the plain sense is, been
beaten by) a Warlike Nation: and, I question not, unless they behave themselves
modestly in their Prosperity, they will again fall under the Consideration of
the same Nation: it is better we should live in peace and quietness, but the
Choice is in their hands, and if they had rather come under our Consideration
again than avoid it, let them look to the Consequence.

Another Advantage which may accrue to Ireland, by a Native, as Governor, our
Author ^ to be, His personal knowledge of the Tories, and their Harbourers, and
his being thereby better capacitated to suppress them. Malicious People would
be apt to infer from this Suggestion, that his Excellency had occasion formerly
to be familiarly acquainted with such sort of Cattle. I have heard indeed, that
one of our bravest English Princes, ^ the during the Extravagancies of his
Youth, ^ company with public Robbers, and often shared both in the Danger and
Booty: But as soon as the Death of his Father, made way for his Succession to
the Crown, he made ^ of his former acquaintance of their Persons and ^, to the
extirpating and dissolving the greatest knot of Highway-men, that ever troubled
England. My Lord therefore (in imitation of his great Prince, no doubt) will
make use of his Experience that way, to the same end: and I really assent to
the Author, that no English Governor can be so fit to clear that Kingdom of
Tories, and that for the same reason he gives us.

There are two other Advantages remaining; one is, his Excellency's having
already made different Parties in that Kingdom, the Objects of his Love and
Hatred, let the Offenses of the one, or the Merits of the other, be never so
conspicuous: Whether the British can draw any comfort from his Excellency's
knowledge of them this way, is fit to be debated. The other is, the probability
of his getting the Statute for benefit of Clergy, in favor of Cow-Stealers,
and House-Robbers Repealed; and where, by the way, there is a severe Rebuke
given to our English Priests, for their ill-placed Mercy to Irish Offenders: A
fault I hope they will be no more guilty of.

Whether these Advantages be so considerable as to move His Majesty to continue
a Man (for other more weighty Reasons) absolutely destructive to this Kingdom,
or whether some of them might not be performed by an English Governor, His
Majesty is the only Judge: Only this I am sure of, The King (if he were under
any Obligations to His Minister) has fully discharged them all, and has showed
himself to be the best of Masters, in giving so great and honorable an
Employment to his Creature, and continuing him in it so long, notwithstanding
the decrease of his own Revenue, and the other visible bad effects of his
Management; the Impoverishment of that Kingdom, amounting to at least two
Millions of Money: And His Majesty may be now at liberty (without the least
imputation of Breach of Promise to his Servant) to restore us to our former
flourishing condition, by sending some English Nobleman among us, whose
contrary Methods will, no doubt, produce different effects.

To conclude, methinks the comparison between His Majesty and Phillip of
Mactdon, when he was drunk, is a little too familiar, not to say unmannerly,
and that between Antipater, and my Lord Tyrconnel, is as great a Complement to
the latter.

But provided my Lord be commended, which was our Author's chief design, he
cares not though the comparison does not hold good in all points; it is enough
that we know we are Governed by such a Prince that neither practices such
Debauches himself, nor allows of them in his Servants. But we are not beholding
to the Author for the knowledge of this; should a Forreigner read his Pamphlet,
or get it interpreted to him, he would be apt (and with reason) to conclude,
that His Majesty as much resembled Phillip in a Debauch, as my Lord Tyrconnel
does sober Antipater.

I have now done with all that seems of any weight in our Author's Pamphlet;
and can see nothing in his Postscript that deserves an Answer. All that I will
say is, That his Recipes bear no proportion to our desperate Disease, and he
will prove not to be a Physician, but a pretending Quack, who by ill applied
Medicines will leave us in a worse Condition then he found us.

I shall conclude with telling you, That your Letter which enclosed the
Pamphlet, whereof I have here given you my thoughts, was more than a Fortnight
on the way, or else you had received this sooner. I am,

Dublin, 1688. SIR, Your most humble Servant,

A LETTER from a Freeholder, to the rest of the Freeholders of ENGLAND, and all
Others, who have Votes in the Choice of Parliament Men.
THE Power of Parliaments, when they are duly Elected, and rightly Convened, is
so very Great, that every Man who has any share in the Choice of them, has the
weight of his whole Country lying upon him: For it is possible for my single
Vote to determine the Election of that Parliament Man, whose single Vote in the
Parliament House, may either save or sink the Nation.

And therefore it belioves Men, who thus dispose both of themselves and their
Posterity, and of their whole Country at once, to see that they put all these
into safe hands, and to be as well advised, as much in earnest when they choose
Persons to serve in Parliament, as they usually are when they make their Last
Will and Testament. And if this is to be done at all times, certainly a much
greater proportion of Care is to be taken at this time, when endeavors have
been used, not only to sorestal the Freedom of Elections, but even the Freedom
of Voting in the Parliament House: and when the Counties of England have been
practiced upon, to be made Repealers, both within doors and without: They have
been Catechized, whether, if they were Parliament Men, they would Repeal the
Penal Laws and Tests; or, if they were not chosen themselves, whether they
would choose such as would. And as for the Boroughs, they have been all of them
Sifted to the very Bran: Nay, some Persons have been wrought upon to enter into
Engagements beforehand, in their Addresses: But, I suppose, those that have
been so very forward to promise themselves to serve a Turn, will never be
thought worthy to serve in Parliament. And at the same time others have made it
their business, to render these Laws very odious to the People, and to hoot
them out of the World; they have been Arraigned and Condemned as Draconicks, as
Bloody and Canibal Laws, as Ungodly Laws, and contrary to the Divine Principle
of Liberty of Conscience, without the common Justice of ever being heard: For
the preambles of these Laws, which show the Justice and Equity of them, and the
reasonableness both of their Birth and Continuance, have been industriously
suppressed. This indeed has been a very bold Adventure, for I am apt to think
there is much Truth in my Lord Chief Justice Coke's Observation, That never any
Subject ^ a Fall with the Laws of England, but they always broke his Neck: And
therefore, according to the Courtesy of England, I shall wish Friend Will.
Pen, and his Fellow-Gamesters, a good Deliverance. But while they have taken
the liberty to say their Pleasure of these Laws, which are now in as full Force
as the day they were made, I shall take leave, according to the Duty of a Loyal
Subject, (with whom the Laws of the Land are a Principle, and who must always
own the Majesty and Authority of them, till such time as they are Repealed) to
offer a few words in their behalf, which shall be dictated by nothing but Law,
Truth, and Justice; and if every word that I say, do not appear to be such, I ^
content to have this whole Paper go for nothing, and be as if it had never been
Written.

And to proceed the more clearly and distinctly I shall first consider the
Penal Laws, (as they are called) against the Papists, and the two Tests And
secondly, the Penal Laws against the Dissenters.

In the Statute 3 Iacobi c. 1. which is Read ^ very Fifth of November in our
Churches, the Law made against the Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time and the
Confirmation of them 1 Iacobi, (^ which the great Outcry is now made, and for
the sake of which, they then attempted to blow ^ both the King and Parliament)
are called Necessary and Religious Laws: And it I prove them to be undoubtedly
such, I hope the good People of England will look upon them an hundred times,
before they part with them once.

First, The Laws against the Papists are Religious Laws; they are Laws made for
the high Honor of God, as well as for the common Profit of the Realm, which is
the old Title of all our Laws, and is the right End to which all Laws ought to
be directed. But why are they called Penal Laws for have not all Laws a Penalty
annexed to them Perhaps they mean, that these are Laws which interpose in
Matters indifferent, such as the Eating ^ Flesh on Frydays. But is not Popery
Malum is ^ Is Idolatry an Evil only by chance, and by happening to be
prohibited? Is not the Worship of a ^-God, an Onion-God, or a Red-cloth-God, an
unspeakable Dishonor to the God of Heaven, in ^ Places, in every Season of the
Ear, every Day of the Week, and all Hours of the Day? Is it not ^ ternally
Evil? The Laws of the Land found Idolatry prohibited to their hands, by the ^
Law of God, and even antecedently to that, it ^ prohibited by the Law of
Nature; and no Muncipal Laws in the World need desire a ^ Warrant: And
therefore to Repeal the Law made against the Idol of the Mass, Agnus ^
Blocks-Almighty, and the infinite Idolatry which interwoven with Popery, is
neither more nor ^ than to undertake to Repeal the Laws of God.

Secondly, The Laws made against the Seminary Priests, and Romish Missioners,
are Religious Laws, because they are made in pursuance of ^ John's Precept, a
Epist. 10. 11. If there come ^ unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive ^
not into your house, neither bid him God-speed: ^ ^ that bids him God-speed,
is partaker of his ^ deeds. But do the Seminaries come and bring ^ the true
Doctrine of Christ? Do they not bring ^ another Gospel? As Dr. Sherlock has
unanswerably proved upon them, in the Second Part of his Preservative against
Popery. And therefore as every private Man is bound to shut his Doors against
these Deceivers and Seducers, by the same reason ^ Community is bound to expel
and drive them ^ of the Nation. And I think there were never ^ errant Cheats
and Impostors as these are: for ^, by their Masses, can fetch Souls out of ^,
of their own putting in; they can forgive ^, in the Sacrament of Confession;
they can ^ away the Devil, with Crosses and Holy ^; and they can make their
God, in the Sacrament. They make a God! they make a ^!

Again, The Laws against the Papists, are ^ Necessary Laws, and so they were to
the very ^ of the Kingdom. In the first of Elizabeth, ^ Oath of Supremacy was
absolutely necessary to ^ off the Romish Yoke, and that intolerable ^ and
Tyranny of the Pope, under which ^ the Crown and Kingdom were perfect Slaves: ^
afterward, was it not time to look after the ^ Chaplains, when they had raised
a Rebellion ^ the North, and he himself had sent a Bull to ^ the Queen, and to
Absolve her Subjects from ^ Allegiance? I do not mention the continual ^ of the
Queen of Scots, in which the ^ Party always joined with her; and besides, ^
drawn in several deluded Protestants; which ^ a great Jest to the Papists, That
Protestants ^ be so insatuated, as to assist the Queen of Scots to their own
Destruction; as is to be seen in ^ Francis Walsingham's Letter, written from ^,
still extant in the Cebala of Letters. In short, ^ appears by the Preambles of
all those Statutes in ^ Reign, that the Kingdom made every one of ^ in their
own Defense, and to preserve ^ from Popish Attempts, and that the Nation ^
utterly perished without them.

And then in King James's time, did not the ^ dig under the very Pillars of the
Kingdom, ^ make them shake, when they laid so many ^ of Gunpowder under the
Parliament House? ^ was it not high time to tie their Hands by the ^ which
followed; by more closely consining ^ to their Houses, by banishing them ten
Miles ^ London, by disabling them not only from all ^, but from being in any
Public Employment, and by thoroughly disarming them, so much ^ from wearing a
Sword.

And was it not time, in the late King's Reign, to put new life into the
Disabling Acts, by the addition of a Test, when several Papists had gotten the
greatest Offices of the Kingdom into their hands? And then as for the
Parliament-Test, that the Papists may not be our Lawgivers, besides the
perpetual necessity of such a Law, the Occasion of it is still upon Record,
both in Men's Minds, and very largely in the Journal of the House of Lords, and
in other inferior Courts of Record.

And if these were all of them Necessary Laws when they were made, they are
become ten times more necessary since: for now Popery has beset us, and hemmed
us in on every side. We have an Army of Priests and Jesuits, the true
Forerunners of Antichrist, in the Bowels of the Kingdom; nay, the Pope
himself, who by several Laws is declared to be the Public Enemy of the
Kingdom, has arrived some time since in his Nuncio, and is now compassing the
Land in his Four Apostolic Vicars. And therefore to talk of Repealing Laws,
when we want the strictest Execution of them, is talk only fit for Bedlam: and
that Nation which Repeals Necessary Laws, when it has the greatest necessity
for them, must be concluded to be weary of its own Life, and is Felo de se!

Secondly, I am now come to the Penal Laws against the Dissenters, concerning
which, I shall say the less, because God's time for the Repealing of those Laws
is not yet come. For if they cannot be Repealed in this Juncture of time,
unless the Dissenters put forth their hands to the setting up of Idolatry, when
they cannot be Repealed: and therefore what cannot be now done without manifest
Impiety, must even be let alone till it can be done with a good Conscience. As
for the good Disposition which is in the Conformists, to Repeal those Laws,
with the first opportunity, that is always to be measured by Actions rather
than Words, and therefore I shall give them an instance of it in the Bill for
Repealing the 25th of Elizabeth, which passed both Houses of a Church of
England Parliament, though the Dissenters lost the benefit of that Pledge, and
Earnest of their Good Will, and are not ignorant which way it was lost. But in
the mean time, if our Dissenting Brethren should endeavor to get these Laws
Repealed, by parting on their side with the Laws against Popery, then I beg of
them to mind the plain English of such Conditions. It is as if the Dissenters
should say thus to the Papists: Do you help us to set up Meeting Houses, and we
will do as much for your Mass-Houses: Let but the pure Worship of God be
Established without Ceremonies, and we are content that Idolatry itself shall
go share and share-like in the same Establishment: to make a Magna Charta which
shall be equal, let Christ have his part in it, and Antichrist shall be sure to
have his: Our business is, to receive the Sacramext without Kneeling; and upon
that Condition, we will join in the making of Laws, which shall Authorize the
Deisying a bit of Bread, the Worshipping of it for a God, the Praying to it,
Idolatry, Blasphemy, any thing in the World for them that like it.

Now is not this a very fair Speech, and does it not well become the mouths of
Protestants! I would fain press this home upon the Consciences, both of those
Dissenters who are hired, and of those who are not hired, to labor the Repeal
of our Laws: Do you fear the Informers more than God? Will you for the sake of
your little Conventicles, do the greatest Evils, which you know to be such? You
know in your very Hearts, that the Worship of Images, Crosses, and of a Wafer,
is abominable Idolatry; that the Half-Communion is Sacrilege; and that many
other Points of Popery are blasphemous Fables: And will you set up this for one
of your Religions, as by Law Established? Will you do all that hands can do, to
entail Idolatry upon the Nation, not only Removendo prohibens, as Divines
distinguish, by pulling down the Laws which hinder it, but also Promovendo
adjuvans, by making a perpetual Magna Charta for it? The Laws and Constitution
of a Country do denominate that Country; if Atheism were Authorized by Law,
this would be an Athiestical Nation; and if Idolatry be set up by Law, it is an
Idolatrous Nation; and all that have any hand in it, make it the Sin of the
Nation, as well as their own. Think therefore of these things in time, before
you have involved both your selves and your Country in a miserable Estate; and
remember poor Francis Spira, who went against Light.

But Secondly, There is just as much Prudence as Conscience in these
Proceedings; for by Repealing the Laws against Popery, you Reverse the
Outlawry, and take of those legal Disabilities which the Papists now lie under,
and which have hitherto tied their Hands from destroying Heretics. When
Papists shall be right Justices and Sheriffs, and not Counterseits, when they
shall be Probi and legales homines, and pass Muster in Law, when they shall be
both our legal Judges, and our lawful Juries, and when Protestants shall come
to be Tried by their Country, that is to say, by their Twelve Popish
Godfathers, they may easily know what sort of Blessing they are to expect. The
Papists want nothing but these Advantages to make a fair riddance of all
Protestants; for we see by several of their late Pamphlets, that if any thing
be said against Popery, they have a great dexterity in laying it Treason. Now
this is a civil way of answering Arguments, for which we are bound to thank
them, because it so plainly discovers what they would be at, if it were in
their Power. But how comes it to be Treason, to speak against a Religion which
is itself High Treason and is Proscribed by so many Laws? Why, their Medium is
this, That Popery is the King's Religion, and therefore, by an Inuendo, what is
said against that, is meant against him. But is there any Law of England, that
Popery shall be the King's Religion? Or is it declared by any Law, that Popery
either is, or can be his Religion? On the other hand, we are enabled by an Act
in this very Reign, to pronounce Popery to be a False Religion, and to assert
the Religion which is now professed in the Church of England, and Established
by the Laws of this Realm, to be the True Christian Religion. [Act for building
St. Ann's Church, p. 133.] But these Gentlemen, it seems, are for Hanging Men
without Law, or against Law, or any how; and therefore we thank them again, for
being thus plain with us before hand. Now if they be thus insolent, when they
are so very abnoxious themselves, and have Halters about their own Necks, with
what a Rod of Iron will they Rule us, when they are our Masters? What havoc
will they then make of the Nation, when we already see Magdalen College, which
was lately a flourishing Society of Protestants, now made a Den of Jesuits; and
that done to in such a way, as shakes all the Property in England? Or who can
be safe after our Laws are Repealed, when Endeavors have been lately used, to
extract Sedition even out of Prayers and Tears, and the Bishops Humble Petition
was threatened to be made a Treasonable Libel.

But here the Dissenters have a plausible excuse for themselves; for say they,
We have now an opportunity of getting the Laws which are against us Repealed,
which is clear gain; and as for our refusing to Repeal the Laws against Popery,
there is nothing gotten by that, either to us or to any body else; for they are
already as good as Repealed by the Dispensing Power: and therefore such
Discourse as this, only advises us to stand in our own light, without doing any
good to the Nation at all; for there will be Popish Justices, Sheriffs, Judges,
and Juries, whether we will or no, for whatsoever we refuse to do, the
Dispensing Power will supply.

To which I answer, Do you keep your hands off from Repealing the Laws, let who
will contravene or Transgress them, for then you are free from the Blood of all
Men, you have no share in the guilt of those Mischiefs which befall your
Country, which would, sooner or later, be a heavy burden, and a dead weight
upon the Conscience of any Protestant. But besides, let the Laws alone and they
will defend both themselves and us too; for if the Law says, That a Papist
shall not, nor cannot have an Office, then he shall not nor cannot; for who can
speak Louder than the Laws?

As for a Dispensing-Power, inherent in the King, which can set aside as many
of the Laws of the Land as he pleases, and Suspend the Force and Obligation of
them, (which has been lately held forth by many False and Unlawful Pamphlets)
the Dissenters know very well, that there is no such thing; but that no body
may pretend Ignorance, I shall here prove, in very few words, That by the
Established Laws of the Land, the King cannot have such a Dispensing-Power,
unless Dispensing with the Laws, and Executing the Laws be the same thing; and
unless both keeping the Laws himself, and causing them to be kept by all
others, be the English of Dispensing with them: For in the Statute of
Provisors, 25 Eaw. 3. c. 25. we have this laid down for Law, That the King is
bound to Execute those Statutes which are Unrepealed, and to cause them to be
kept as the Law of this Realm: The words are these, speaking of a Statute made
in the time of Edward the First, Which Statute holds always his Force, and
was never Defeated or Annulled in any point. And by so much our Sovereign Lord
the King is bound by his Oath to do, the same to be kept as the Law of this
Realm, although by Sufferance and Negligence it has since been attempted to
the contrary. So that the Coronation Oath, and the Dispensing-Power, are here
by King Edward the Third, and his Parliament, Declared to be utterly
Inconsistent. Now the Coronation Oath is a Fundamental Law of this Kingdom, for
it is antecedent to the Oath of Allegiance. Accordingly if you look upon the
Coronation Oath in the Parliament-Roll, 1 H. 4. you shall there find, that in
the third Branch of it, the King Grants and Promises upon his Oath, That the
Laws shall be kept and protected by him, secundum Vires suas, to the utmost of
his Power; and therefore he has no Power lest him to Dispense withal.

By which it appears, that those men are the wretched Enemies both of the King
and Kingdom, who would fain persuade the King, that he has this
Dispensing-Power; because therein they endeavor to persuade him, that Perjury
is his Prerogative. Heretofore, in Trisilian's time, some of the Oracles of the
Law were consulted, Whether it could stand with the Law of the Kingdom, that
the King might Obviatt and Withstand the Ordinances concerning the King and the
Kingdom, which were made in the last Parliament, by the Peers and Commons of
the Realm, with the King's Assent, though (as the Courtiers said) forced in
that behalf? And they made Answer, That the King might Annul such Ordinances,
and Change them at his pleasure, into a better fashion, because he was above
the Laws, Knyghton, Col. 2693. Now this was very False Law, as those Judges
found afterward to their Cost; and it was grounded on the worst Reason that
could be: For they must needs know from all their Books, and from the Mirror in
particular, p. 282. That the first and Sovereign Abusion of the Law, (that is,
the chief Contrariety and Repugnency of it) is for the King to be Above the
Law, whereas he ought to be Subject to it, as is contained in his Oath Neither
could they be ignorant of that Argument which the Peers used, to show the
Absurdity of such a Supposition; it is recorded in the Annals of Rurton, set
forth, as I take it, by Mr. Obadiah Walker. Si Rex est supra Legem, tunc est
extra Legem; Number Rex Angliae est Exlex? If the King be above the Law, then he
is without the Law. What! is the King of England an Outlaw? And as for the
words of Bracton, they were too plain either to need a Comment or Translation,
Rex habet Superiorem Deum, item Legem per quam sactus est Rex, item Curiam
suam, seil. Comites and Baronts. As likewise those other words of his Ubi
Voluntas Imperat and non Lex, ibi non est Rex, Where he makes it the very
Essence of our King, to Govern according to Law.

Having therefore shown, that the Laws are always in full Force till they are
Revoked by the same Authority which made them, and that all Persons whatsoever
bound to the Laws, and that the Laws themselves were never in Bondage to any
Man; we know from thence, what we are to conclude, concerning those Papists,
who pretend to be in Office in Desiance to the Laws. We had once a mischievous
Distinction of Sheriffs de Jure, and Sheriffs de Facto; But those, who pretend
to be in Office without taking the TEST, are no Officers either in Right or in
Fact: for the 25 Car. 2. says, That their Offices are ipso facto, void, and
then those Officers are ipso facto, no Officers, and can do us no more hurt
than if they were under Ground; and therefore we need not trouble our Heads
about them, though they may in all likelihood fall under the Care and
Consideration of a Parliament.

After all, some persons may possibly be so far deluded, as to think there is
somewhat of Equity in the Toleration of Papists, and that it is the Christian
Rule, Of doing as one would be done by. Now for any Papist to plead this Rule
of Equity himself, or any body else in his behalf, is just as if a Highway Man
should thus urge it upon his Judge; My Lord, if you hang me, you break the
Golden Rule; for I am sure you are not willing to be so served yourself, nor to
hang with me. Now the Equity of the Judge in this case does not lie, either in
forbearing to punish the Offender, or in Hanging with him for Company, but in
being content to submit to the same Law, if he himself should commit the same
Crime. And so are we willing to lie under all the Penal Laws, whenever we turn
Papists: And therefore no body can tax us with want of Equity; because we do no
otherways to the Papists, than we are willing to be done by, in the same case.
But it may be said, that our Conscience does not serve us to be Papists, though
theirs does. Neither does the Judge's Conscience serve him to rob, though it
seems the Highway Man's did; and therefore take heed of Liberty of Conscience.
Still it may be further replied, That this is properly a Judicial Cause,
because Robbery is a breach of the Peace and of Property, and therefore ought
to be Punished: whereas the worship and Service of God according to a Man's
Conscience, though it be amiss, yet it ought not to be punished by Hamane Laws,
but is to be reserved to the Judgment of God alone, who is Lord of Conscience.

Now this is the New Doctrine which I shall prove to be False, by positive and
express Scripture. For Job says, Chap. 31. Ver. 28. That is his Heart had been
secretly persuaded, and he had thereupon kissed his Hand to the Sun or Moon,
This were an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge, because he had therein Lied
against the God above. So that though a Man's Heart and Conscience lead him to
Idolatry, yet Job tells us, this is inditable; it is Avon Pelili, a Judicial
Crime, and as Punishable by Humane Laws, as Adultry with another Man's Wise is;
as you have it in the same Phrase in the 11th Verse of the same Chapter.

The Second Instance of a Punishable Conscience in the Service of God, is that
which our Savior gives us, John 16. 2. Yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think he does God service. Now I would sain know, whether
such a Conscience as this ought not to be Restrained and Punished: And whether
it be Sacrilege for Humane Laws to control Conscience, I mean such a one as
Kills and Murders for God's sake? And I ask again, Whether there be no
Consciences of this Stamp now in the World? And whether there has not been an
Holy Inquisition, Religious Crusadoes, and Meritorious Massacres, to extirpate
Heretics, and abundance of this Divine Service in the Church of Rome? Whether
they have not offered up whole Hecatombs of these Sacrifices in most Countries?
And whether a Neighboring Prince has not been highly extolled, and had all his
most Christian Titles double Gilt with the Flatteries of his Clergy, for the
late Merit of his Religious Service in this kind? And therefore if men will do
things in order, let them first send for a breed of Irish Wolves, and give them
English Liberties; let them dig down their Walls, and let in the Sea; let them
begin with some of these Preliminaries, before they think of Repealing the Laws
against Popery, and of letting loose such Consciences as these upon us.

To Conclude therefore, It highly Concerns you, in the Choice of
Parliament Men, to decline all those Men, who are willing to Consent to so
Great and so Fatal a Revolution, as the Repeal of so many Laws at once; which
would plainly expose the Protestant Religion to be swallowed up. You want Men
like their Ancestors, who had the Courage and Resolution to declare in
Parliament, Nolumus. Leges Angliae mutari: We will not have the Laws of England
altered. Choose such as will not Betray the Great 'Frust you repose in them. The
Writ for Elections says, That you Empower your Representatives: Tell them
therefore for what you Empower them; For the Maintenance and Presirvation of
the Protestant Religion, and of our good Laws, and not for their Destruction.
And when you have done this, and taken all the care you can, you have done your
Duties: And I have nothing more to add, but, GOD speed your Elections.

An ENQIRY into the Reasons for Abrogating the TEST imposed on all Members of
Parliament. Offered by Sa. Oxon.
WHEN the Cardinals in Rome go abroad without Fiocco's on their Horses heads,
it is understood, that they will be then incognito, and they expect nothing of
that Respect which is paid them on other Occasions. So since there is no
Fiocco at the Head of this Discourse, no Name nor Designation, it seems the
Writer offers himself to be examined without those nice regards, that may be
due to the Dignity he bears: and indeed when a Man forgets what he is himself,
it is very natural for others to do itlikewise.

It is no wonder to see those of the Roman Communion bestir themselves, so much
as they do, to be delivered from the Test, and every thing else, that is
uneasy to them: and though others may find it very reasonable to oppose
themselves, in all the Just and Legal Ways, that agree with our Constitution,
to this Design, yet it is so natural to all, that are under any Pressure, to
desire to get free from it, that at the same time that we cannot forbear to
withstand them, we cannot much condemn them: But it raises Nature a little, to
see a Man that has been so long fatned with the Spoils of our Church, and who
has now got up to a degree so disproportioned to his Merit, to turn so
treacherously upon it. If he is already weary of his comfortable importance,
and will give her into the bargain, and declare himself, no body will be
surprised at the change of his Masque, since he has taken much pains to
convince the World, that his Religion goes no deeper than his Habit: yet though
his Confidence is of a piece with all his other Virtues, few thought it could
have carried him so far; I confess I am not surprised, but rather wonder to
see, that others should be so: for he has given sufficient Warning what he is
capable of; he has told the World what is the worst thing that Dr. Burnet can
do, page 50. but I am sure the Doctor cannot be quit with him, to tell what is
the worst thing that he can do; it must needs be a very fruitful Fancy, that
can find out all the Degrees of Wickedness to which he can go: and though this
Pamphlet is a good Essay of his Talent that way, yet that Terra Incognia is
boundless. In the Title Page it is said, that this was first writ for the
Author's own Satisfaction, and now Published for the Benefit of all others whom
it may concern. But the words are certainly wrong placed; for the truth of the
matter is, That it was written for the Author's own Benefit, and that it is now
Published for the Satisfaction of all others whom it may concern: In some sense
perhaps it was written for the Author's own Satisfaction: for so petulant and
so depraved a mind as His, is capable of being delighted with His Treachery:
and a poor Bishopric with the addition of a Presidentship being too low a
Prize for his Ambition and Avarice, He resolved to assure Himself of the first
great Bishopric that falls; the Litge Letter lets us see how far the Jesuits
were assured of him, and how much courted by him: and that he said, that none
but Atheists supported the Protestant Religion now in England; yet how many
soever of these may be among us, He is upon the point of lessening their
number, by one at least: and he takes care to justify the Hopes which these
Fathers conceived of him.

They are severe Masters, and will not be put off with Secret Civilities, Lewd
Jests, Entertainments, and Healths drank to their good Success; so now the
Price of the Presidentship is to be paid, so good a Morsel as this deserved
that Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Burnet, and some other Divines
should be ill used, and he to preserve the Character of Drawcansir, which is as
due to him as that of Bays, falls upon the Articles of the Church, and upon
both Houses of Parliament. It is Reproach enough to the House of Lords, that he
is of it; but it is somewhat new, and a Character becoming Sa. Oxon, to arraign
that House, with all the Insolence to which he can raise his wanton Pen. Laws
that are in being, are treated with respect even by those who move for their
Repcal; but our Drawcansir scorns that modest strain, He is not contented to
arraign the Law, but calls it Barbarous, and says, that nothing can be more
Barbarous and Profane, then to make the renouncing of a Mystery, so
unanimously received, a State Test, p. 133. p. 64. But he ought to have avoided
the word Profane, since it leads Men to remember, that he had taxed the
Praying for the King, as under God and Christ, as Crude, not to say Profane:
when in the Prospect he had then of a Bishopric he raised the King above
Christ, but now another Prospect, will make him sink him beneath the Pope, who
is but at best Christ's Vicar. But this is not all, there comes another Flower
that is worthy of him, he tells us, That the TEST was the first born of Oats's
Plot, and brought sorth on purpose to give Credit and Reputation to the
Perjury, p. 5. and because this went in common between the two Houses, he
bestows a more particular mark of his Favor, on the House of Lords: and tells
them, That this was a Monument erected by themselves in honor of so gross an
Imposture, (ibid.) But after all, the Royal Assent was added; and here no doubt
it itched somewhere, for if it had not been for the manner of the late King's
Death, and the Papers published since his Death, he would have wreaked his
Malice upon his Memory, for he will never forgive his not advancing him: And
the Late King being so true a Judge of Wit, could not but be much taken with
the best Satyr of our Time; and saw that Bays's Wit, when measured with
another, was of a piece with his Virtues, and therefore judged in favor of
the Rebearsal Transprosed: this went deep, and though it gave occasion to the
single piece of Modesty, with which he can be charged, of withdrawing from the
Town, and not importuning the Press more for some years, since even a Face of
Brass must grow red, when it is so burnt as his was then; yet his Malice
against the Elder Brother was never extinguished but with his Life: But now a
strange Conjuncture has brought him again on the Stage; and Bays will be Bays
still.

He begins his Prologue with the only soft word in the whole piece, I humbly
Conceive, but he quickly repents him of that Debonarity, and so makes Thunder
and Lightning speak the rest, as if his Designs were to Insult over the two
Houses, and not to convince them. He who is one of the Punies of his Order, and
is certainly one of its justest Reproaches, tells us page 8. That to the Shame
of the Bishops, this Law was consented to by them in the House of Lords: But
what Shame is due to him, who has treated that Venerable Bench, and in
particular his Metropolitan, in so scurrilous a manner. The Order has much more
cause to be ashamed of such a Member: though if there are two or three such as
he is among the twenty Six, they may Comfort themselves with this, that a dozen
of much better Men, had one among them, that I confess was not much worse, if
it was not for this, that he let the Price of his Treachery fall much lower
than Sa. Oxon does, who is still true to his old Maxim, that he delivered in
Answer to one who asked him, What was the best Body of Divinity? which was,
That that which could help a man to keep a Coach and Six Horses was certainly
the best. But now I come to Examine his Reasons for abrogating the Test.

The first is, That it is contrary to the Natural Rights of Peerage, and turns
the Birthright of the English Nobility, into a Precarious Title: which is at
the mercy of every Faction and Passion in Parliament, and that therefore, how
useful soever the TEST might have been in its Season, it some time must prove a
very ill President against the Right of Peerage: and upon this he tells a Story
of a Protestation made in the House of Lords, against the TEST, that was
brought in, in 1675. together with the Resolution of the House against that
Penalty upon the Peers, of losing their Votes in case of a Refusal; be
represents this, as a Test or Oath of Loyalty, against the Lamfulness of taking
Arms upon any pretense whatsoever against the King.

But in Answer to all this, one would gladly know what are the Natural Rights
of Peerage, and in what Chapter of the Law of Nature they are to be found, for
if those Rights have no other Warrant, but the Constitution of this Government,
then they are still subject to the Legislative Authority, and may be regulated
by it. The Right of Peerage is still in the Family, only as the exercise of it
is limited by the Law to such an Age, so it may be suspended as ost as the
Public Safety comes to require it: even the indelible Character it self, may
be brought under a total Suspension, of which our Author may, perhaps, afford
an instance at some time or other.

2. Votes in either House of Parliament, are never to be put in Balance with
Established Laws: These are the Opinions of one House, and are changeable.

3. But if the TEST might have been useful in its Season, one would gladly see
how it should be so soon out of Season: for its chief Use being to secure the
Protestant Religion in 1678. it does not appear, That now in 1688. the Dangers
are so quite dissipated, that there is no more need of securing it. In one
sense we are in a safer Condition than we were then: for some false Brethren
have showed themselves, and have lost that little Credit which some unhappy
Accidents had procured them.

4. It was not the Loyalty in the TEST of the Year 1675 that raised the
greatest Opposition to it: but another part of it, That they should never
Endeavor any Alteration in the Government, either in the Church or State. Now
it seemed to be an unreasonable Limitation on the Legislative Body, to have the
yenbers engaged to make no Alteration: And it is that which would not have much
pleased those, For whose satisfaction this Book is published.

The second Reason was already hinted at, of its dishonorable Birth and
Original, p. 10. which according to the decency of his style, he calls the
first Sacrament of the Otesian Villainy, p 9. This he aggravates as such a
Monstrous and Inhuman piece of Barbarity as could never have entered into the
thoughts of any Man but the infamous Author of it: This piece of Elegance,
though it belongs to this Reason, comes in again in his Fourth Reason, page 6.
and to let the House of Lords see their Fate, if they will not yield to his
Reasons, he tells them that this will be not only an Eternal National Reproach,
but such a blot upon the Peers, that no length of time could wear away, nothing
but the Universal Constagration could destroy, which are the aprest Expressions
that I know to mark how deeply, the many blots with which he is stigmatized are
rooted in his Nature. The wanton man in his Drawcansir humor thinks that
Parliaments and a House of Peers are to be treated by Him with as much Seorn as
is justly due to himself. But to set this matter in its true Light, it is to be
remembered that in 1678. there were besides the Evidences of the Witnesses, a
great many other Discoveries made of Letters and Negotiations in Foreign
Pares, chiefly in the Courts of France and Rome, for Extirpating the Protestant
Religion; upon which the Party that was most united to the Court, set on this
Law, for the Test, as that which was both in itself a just and necessary
Security for the Established Religion, and that would probably lay the
fermentation which was then in the Nation: and the Act was so little acceptable
to him, whom he calls its Author, that he spoke of it then with Contempt, as a
Trick of the Court to lay the Nation too soon asleep. The Negotiations beyond
Sea were too evidently proved to be denied; and (which is not yet generally
known) Mr. Coleman when Examined by the Commit? of the House of Commons, said
plain enough to them, that the Late King was concerned in them; but the
Committee would not look into that Matter, and so Mr. Sacheverill, that was
their Chairman, did not report it; yet the thing was not so secret but that one
to whom it was trusted, gave the Late King an Account of it; who said, That he
had not heard of it any other way, and was so fully convinced that the Nuion
had cause given them to be jealous, that he himself set forward the Act, and
the rather because he saw that the E. of S. did not much like it. The
Parliament as long as it was known, that the Religion was safe in the King's
Negative, had not taken any great Care of its own Constitution, but it seemed
the best Expedient that could be found, for laying the Jealousies of his Late
Majesty, and the Apprehensions of the Successor, to take so much Care of the
Two Houses, that so the Dangers with which Men were then alarmed, might seem
the less formidable, upon so effectual a Security: And thus all the stir that
he keeps with Perjury and Imposture, ought to make no other impression, but the
wantonness of his own temper, that meddles so boldly with things of which he
knew so little the true Secret. For here was a Law passed, of which all made
great use that opposed the Bill of Exclusion, to demonstrate to the Nation that
there could be no danger of Popery, even under a Prince of that Religion; but
as he would turn the matter, it amounts to this, That that Law might be of good
use in that Season, to lay the Jealousies of the Nation, till there were a
Prince on the Throne of that Communion, and then when the turn is served, it
must be thrown away, to open the only door that is now shut upon the
Re-establishment of that Religion. This is but one hint among a great many more
of the state of Affairs at the time that this Act of the TEST was made, to show
that the Evidence given by the Witnesses, had no other share in that matter,
but that it gave rise to the other Discoveries; and a fair opportunity to those
who knew the Secret of the late Kings Religion, and the Negotiation at Dover,
to provide such an effectual Security, as might both save the Crown, and secure
the Religion: and this I am sure some of the Bishops knew, (who to their
Honor) were faithful to both.

The Third Reason he gives for Repealing the Act, is the Incompetent Authority
of those who Enacted it; for it was of an Ecclesiastical nature: and here he
stretches out his Wings to a top-flight, and charges it with nothing less than
the Deposing of Christ from his Throne, the disowning, neglecting and
assronting his Commission to his Catholic Church, and entrenching upon this
Sacred Prerogative of his holy Catholic Church: and then that he might have
occasion to seed his Spleen with railing at the whole Order, he makes a
ridiculous Objection of the Bishops being present in the House of Lords, that
he might show his respect to them, by telling in a Parenthesis, That (to their
shame) they had consented to it. But has this Scaramuchio no Shame left him?
Did the Parliament pretend by this Act to make any Decision in those two points
of Transubstantiation and Idolatry? Had not the Convocation desined them both
for above an Age before? In the 28th Article of our Church these words are to
be found: Transabstantiation (or the change of the substance of bread and Wine)
in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy writ; but it is repugnant
to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions; and for the Idolatry of the Church of
Rome, that was also declared very expressly in the same Body of Articles; since
in the Article 35. the Homilies are declared To contain a godly and wholesome
Doctrine necessary for those times; and upon that it is judged that they should
be read in the Churches, by the Ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they
may be understood of the people. And the second of these, which is against the
Peril of Idolatry, aggravates the Idolatry of that Church in so many
particulars, and with such severe expressions, that those who at first made
those Articles, and all those who do now sign them, or oblige others to sign
them, must either believe the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry, or that
the Church of England is the Impudentest Society that ever assumed the name of
a Church, if she proposes such Homilies to the People, in which this Charge is
given so home, and yet does not believe it her self. A man must be of Bay's
pitch to rise up to this degree of Impudence. Upon the whole matter then, these
points had been already determined, and were a part of our Doctrines enacted by
Law; all that the Parliament did, was only to take these out of a great many
more, that by this Test it might appear, whether they who came into either
House were of that Religion or not; and now let our Reasoner try what he can
make out of this; or how he can justify the Scandal that he so boldly throws
upon his Order, As if they had as much in them lay, destroyed the very being of
a Christian Church, and had profanely pawned the Bishop to the Lord; and
betrayed the Rights of the Church of England as by Law established in
particular, as well as of the Church Catholic in general, p. 8, 9. All this
shows to whom he has pawned both the Bishop and the Lord, and something else
too, which is both Conscience and Honor, is he has any lest. When one reflects
on two of the Bishops, that were of that Venerable Body, while this Act passed,
whose Memory will be blessed in the present and following Ages, those two great
and good men that filled the Sees of Chester and Oxford, he must conclude, that
as the World was not worthy of them, so certainly their Sees were not worthy of
them, since they have been plagued with such Successors; that because Bays
delights in Figures taken from the Roman Empire, I must tell him, that since
Commodus succeeded to Marcus Aurelius, I do not find a more incongruous
Succession in History. With what sensible regret must those who were so often
edified with the Gravity, the Piety, the Generosity, and Charity, of the late
Bishop of Oxford, look on, when they see such a Harleguin in his room.

His Fourth Reason is taken from the uncertainty and falsehood of the matters
contained in the Declaration itself, page 9. For our Comedian maintains his
Character still, and scorns to speak of Established Laws with any Decency; here
he puts in a Paragraph, as was formerly marked, which belonged to his Second
Reason; but it seems some of those to whom he has pawned himself, thought he
had not said enough on that head, and therefore to save blottings, he put it in
here. After that, he tells the Gentry, That Transubstantiation was a Notion
belonging to the Schoolmen, and Metaphysicians: And that he may bespeak their
Favor, he tells them in very soft words: That their Learning was more polite
and practicable in the Civil Affairs of Human Life, to understand the Rules of
Honor, and the Laws of their Country, the Practice of Martial Discipline, and
the Examples of Great Men informer Ages, and by them to square their Actions in
their respective Stations: And the like. But sure the Bishop is here without
his Fiocco, yet at least for Decencies sake, he should have named Religion and
Virtue among the proper Studies of the Gentry: and if he dares not trust them
with the Reading the Scriptures, yet at least they might read the Articles of
our Church, and hearken to the Homilies; for though it has been long one of the
first Maxims that he has infused into all the Clergy that come near him, That
the People ought to be brought into an Ignorance in matters of Religion; that
Preaching ought to be laid aside, for a Preaching Church could not stand; that
in Sermons no Points of Doctrine ought to be explained, and that only the Rules
of Human Life ought to be told the People; yet after all, they may read the
short Articles: and though they were as blindly implicit, as he would wish
them to be, yet they would without more enquiry, find Transubstantiation to be
condemned in them. Next, he triumphs over the renouncing of it, page, 11. As too
bold and too profane an Affront to Almighty God: when Men abjure a thing,
which it is morally impossible for them to understand. And he appeals to the
Members of both Houses (whom in a fit of Respect he calls Honorable, after he
had reproached them all he could) If they have any distinct Idea or Notion in
their minds, of the thing they here so solemnly renounce. I do verily believe
none of them have any distinct Notion of Transubstantiation, and that it is not
only Morally, but Physically impossible for them to understand it: But one
would think that this is enough for declaring that they do not believe it,
since the TEST contains no declaration concerning Transubstantiation itself,
whether it is a true or a false Doctrine; but only concerning the belief of him
that takes it. And if one can have no distinct Notions of it, so that it is
morally impossible for him to understand it, he may very well declare, That he
does not believe it. After a Farce of a slight Story, he concludes, That there
seems to be nothing but a Profane Levity in the whole matter; and a shameless
abuse put upon God and Religion, to carry on the Wicked Designs of a
Rebel-Faction. For he cannot for his heart abate an ace of his Insolence, even
when he makes the King, Lords, and Commons, the subject of his scorn. Certainly
whatever his Character is, it ought not to be expected that a Man who attacks
all that is Sacred, under God and Christ, should not be treated as he deserves:
it were a seeble weakness, to have so great a regard to a Character that is so
prostituted by him. He tells us, page 47. That all Parties agree in the thing,
and that they differ only in the word and manner: and here he makes a long
excursion to show his Learning, in tacking a great many things together, which
passes with ignorant Readers, as a mark of his great Reading: whereas in this,
as well as in all his other Books, in which any shows of Learning appear, those
who have searched into the Fountains, see that he does nothing but gather from
the Collection of others: only he spoils them with the Levities of his
Buffoon-Stile, and which is worse, with his Dis-ingenuity. I leave all thse
matters to be Examined, by those who have leisure for it, and that think him
worth their Pains: But as for Transubstantiation, the Words that I have cited
from one of our Articles, show plainly that it is rejected in our Church, so
that he is bound either to renounce it, or to renounce our Church: therefore
all that show he makes with our History, comes to nothing, since whatever he
may say with relation to Edward the Sixth's Reign, it cannot be denied but they
were Enacted by the Convocation in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
and they have been ever since the Doctrine of our Church: so that without going
further, 'this is now our Doctrine, and since Sa. Oxon carries the Authority of
the Convocation so high, he will find the Original Record of these Articles in
Corpus-Christi College in Cambridge, subscribed by the Members of both Houses,
in which there is a much more positive Decision then is in the Prints, not only
against Transubstantiation, but against any Corporeal or Real Presence of the
Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament: And if he will give himself scope,
to rail at those who suppressed this, I leave him to his Liberty. But here is
the formal decision of this Church, and the pretending that there was no
Evidence of Cranmer's Opinion, but in an unknown Manuscript, or a famous
Invisible Manuscript, p. 46. 47. when there are two Books writ on this matter
by Cranmer himself, and when all the Disputes in Queen Mary's Time, besides,
those that were both in Oxford, and Cambridge, in King Edwards time, show so
clearly, that this was his Doctrine, is a strain becoming his Sincerity, that
gives this among many other Essays of the Trust that is due to him.

But it seems he thought that Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Burnet,
besides some others whom he does not Name, had not Reputation enough in the
World, and therefore he intended to raise it, by using them ill: which is all
the Effect that his Malice can have. He had set on one of his poor
under-work-men, some years ago, to decry the Manuscript which Dr. Stillingfleet
had in his keeping for above twenty years, and which Dr. Burnet had in his
Hands for many Months, and which they showed to as many as desired to see, but
that had turned so much to his Shame that first vented the Calumny, that it
seems he summoned Sa. Oxon to appear his Second in the Slander: and he whose
Brow is of so peculiar a Composition, will needs bring it here, tho never so
impertinently. But I forgive the Hatred that he bares both to that Manuscript,
and to those Doctors, since nothing could be less to the Satisfaction of those
for whom he published his Book, then to see the Nature and Regular Methods in
which the Reformation was advanced. For the Bishops and Divines were appointed,
to Examine all Points with much Care, and to bring every man his Opinion in
Writing, all which were compared very faithfully, and upon these the Decisions
were made.

There any many other Papers yet extant which by comparing the Hands, shows
these to be Originals: and they were in the Salisbury Family probably ever
since they were at first brought together. Their Ancestor the Lord Burghly who
was Secretary of State, in Edward the Sixth's time, gathered them up; and as
appears in a Letter under his own Hand yet extant, he had six or seven Volumes
of them, of which Dr. Stillingfleet had only two: but Dr. Burnet saw two more
of these Volumes.

The History of the Reformation sells still so well, that I do not believe Mr.
Chiswell the Printer of it has made any Present to this Reasoner, to raise its
Price: for to attack it with so much Malice, and yet not to offer one Reason to
lessen its Credit, is as effectual a Recommendation, as this Author can give it.

He pretends that Dr. Burnet's Design was to make Cranmer appear a mere
Sacramentarian as to Doctrine, as he had made him appear an Erastian, as to
Discipline: and he thinks the vain Man was flattered into all the Pains he
took, that he might give Reputation to the Errors of his Patrons, and that
those two grand Forgeries are the grand Singularities of his History: and the
main things that gave it Popular Vogue and Reputation with his Party. So that
were these two blind Stories, and the Reasons depending upon them retrenched,
it would be like the Shaving off Sampson's hair, and destroy all the Strength
peculiar to the History. But to all this Stuff I shall only say, 1. That the
Charge of Forgery falls back on the Reasoner, since as to Cranmer's Opinion of
the Sacrament, his own Books, and his Dispute at Oxford are such plain
Evidences, that none but Bays could have questioned it: and for his being an
Erastian, Dr. Burnet had clearly proved that he had changed his Opinion in that
point, so that though he showed that he had been indeed once engaged in those
Opinions, yet he proved that he had forsaken them: Let the Reader judge to whom
the charge of Forgery belongs. 2. Dr. Burnet has indeed some Temptations to
Vanity now, since he is ill used by Bays, and put in such Company: but I dare
say, if he goes to give him his Character, he will never mention so slight a
one as Vanity, in which how excessive soever he may be; yet it is the smallest
of all his Faults. 3. These two Particulars here mentioned, bear so
inconsiderable a share in that History, and have been so little minded, that I
dare say of an hundred that are pleased with that Work, there is not one that
will assign these as their Motives.

He censures Dr. Burnet, for saying, he had often head it said that the
Articles of our Church were framed by Cranmer and Ridly; as if it were the
meanest Trade of an Historian to stoop to bear-say, p. 55. But the best of all
the Roman Historians (Salust. in bello Katil.) does it, and in this Dr. Burnet
maintains the Character of a sincere Historian, to say nothing that was not
well grounded: and since it has been often said by many Writers, that these two
Bishops prepared our Articles, he finding no particular Evidence of that,
delivers it with its own doubtfulness. It is very like Sa. Oxan would have been
more positive upon half the Grounds, that Dr. Burnet had, but the other chose
to write exactly: yet he adds, That it is probable that they penned them: and
if either the Dignity of their Sees, or of their Persons be considered, the
thing will appear reasonable enough. But I do not wonder to see any thing that
looks like a modesty of Style offend our Author, he is next so kind to Dr.
Burnet, as to offer him some Counsel, ( p. 50.) That he would be well advised
to employ his Pain in writing Lampoons upon the present Princes of Christendom
(especially his own) which he delights in most; because it is the worst thing
that himself can do, then collecting the Records of former times: for the first
will require Time and Postage, to pursue his Malice: but the second is easily
traced in the Chimney corner.

One would think that this period was Writ by Mr. Louth, it is so obscure and
ill expressed, that nothing is plain, but the malice of it: but he of all men
should be the furthest from reproaching any for Writing Lampoons, who has now
given so rude a one, on the Late King and the Lords and Commons; if bold
Railing without either Wit or Decency, deserves that Name. I will only say this
further, that if one had the ill Nature to write a Lampoon on the Government,
one of the severest Articles in it, would be, That it seems Writers are hard to
be found, when such a Baboon is made use of. It is Lampoon enough upon the Age,
that he is a Bishop: but it is downright Reproach that he is made the Champion
of a Cause, which if it is bad of it self, must suffer extremely by being in
such hands.

And thus I think enough is said in answer to his impertinent digression upon
Transubstantiation, let him renounce the Article of our Church, and all that he
possesses in Consequence to his having signed it, and then we will argue all
the rest with him upon the square: but as long as he owns that, he is bound
likewise to own the first Branch of the Test, which is the renouncing of
Transubstantiation. In this Discourse he makes his old Hatred to Calvin and the
Calvinists return so often, that it appears very Conspicuously. I believe it is
stronger now than ever, and that for a particular reason: When the Prince and
Princess of Orange were Married, he was perhaps the only Man in England that
expressed his Uneasiness at that happy Conjunction, in so clownish a manner,
that when their Highnesses past through Canterbury he would not go with the
rest of that Body, to which he was so long a Blemish, to pay his Duty to them,
and when he was asked the Reason, he said, He could have no regard to a
Calvinist Prince. Now this Calvinist Prince has declared his mind so openly and
fully against the Repeal of the Test, that no doubt this has increased Bays's
Distemper, and heightened his Choler against the whole Party.

The second Branch of the Test, is the Declaration made of the Idolatry
committed in the Roman Church: upon which he tells us, p. 71, 72. That Idolatry
is a Stabbing and Cutthroat Word, and that it is an Inviting and Warranting
the Rabble whenever Opportunity favors, to destroy the Roman Catholics: and
here Bays will out do himself, since this was a Masterpiece of Service,
therefore he makes the taxing the Church of Rome with Idolatry, a piece of
Inhumanity that outdoes the Savages of the Canibals themselves: and damns at
once both Body and Soul. He charges Dr. Stillingfleet as the great Founder of
this, and all other Anti-catholick and Antichristian, and Uncharitable
Principles among us, and that the Test is the Swearing to the Truth of his
unlearned and Phanatick Notion of Idolatry, p. 130. 135. and the result of all
is, That Idolatry made the Plot, and then the Plot made Idolatry, and that the
same persons made both. He has also troubled the Reader with a second
Impertinence to show his second-hand Reading again upon the Notion of Idolatry:
But all this falls off with a very short answer, if he is of the Church of
England and believes that the Homilies contain a Godly and wholesome Doctrine,
all this Clamor against Idolatry, turns against himself, for he will find the
Church of Rome charged with this, almost an Age before Dr. Stillingfleet was
born: and though perhaps none has ever defended the Charge, with so much
Learning as he has done, yet no Malice less impudent than his is, could make
him the Author of the Accusation. It will be another strain of our Author's
Modesty, if he will pretend that our Church is not bound to own the Doctrine
that is contained in her Homilies; he must by this make our Church as
treacherous to her Members, as Sa. Oxon is to her, for to deliver this Doctrine
to the People; if we believe it not our selves, is to be as impudent as he
himself can pretend to be. A Church may believe a Doctrine which she does not
think necessary to propose to all her Members: but she were indeed a Society
sit for such Pastors as he is, if she could propose to the People, a Doctrine,
chiefly one of so great Consequence as this is, without she believed it
herself. So then he must either renounce our Church and her Articles, or he
must answer all his own Plea for clearing that Church of this Imputation, which
is so slight, that it will be no hard matter even for such a trifling Writer as
himself is, to do it. As for what he says of Stabbing and Cutthroat Words, he
may charge us with such Words, if he will, but we know who we may charge with
the Deeds; I would gladly see the List of all that have been murdered by these
Words, to try if they can be put in the Balance, either with the Massacre of
Ireland, or that of Paris, upon which I must take Notice of his slight way of
mentioning Coligny and his Faction, and telling us in plain Words, p. 45. That
they were Rebels. This is perhaps another instance of his kindness to the
Calvinist Prince, that is descended from that Great Man.

If Idolatry made our Plot, it was not the first that it made: but his
Malignity is still like himself, in his charging Dr. Stillingfleet, who he says
is the Author of the Imputation of Idolatry, as if he had suborned the Evidence
in our Plot. I should congraulate to the Doctor, the Honor that is done him by
the Malice of one who must needs be the Object of the Hatred of all good Men,
if I did not look upon him as so comtemptible a Person, that his Love and his
Hatred are equally insignificant. If he thinks our Church worse than Canibals,
I wish he would be at the pains to go and make a trial, and see whether these
Salvages will use him as we have done. I dare say they would not eat him, for
they would find so much Gall and Choler in him, that the first bit would quite
disgust them.

REFLECTIONS on a Late PAMPHLET, Entitled, PARLIAMENTUM PACIFICUM. Licensed by
the Earl of Sunderland, and Printed at London in March, 1688.
I. PEace is a very desirable thing, yet every state that is peaceable is not
blindly to be courted: An Apoplexy is the most peaceable state into which a
man's Body can be laid, yet few would desire to pacific the Humors of the Body
at that rate; an Implicit Faith, and Absolute Slavery are the two peaceablest
things that can be, yet we Confess we have no mind to try so dangerous an
Experiment; and while the Remedies are too strong, we will choose rather to bear
our Disease than to venture on them. The Instance that is proposed to the
Imitation of the Nation, is that Parliament which called in the late King; and
yet that cannot so much as be called a Parliament, unless it be upon a
Commonwealth Principle, That the Sovereign Power is radically in the People,
for its being Chosen without the King's Writ, was such an Essential Nullity,
that no subsequent Ratification could take it away: For all People saw that
they could not depend upon any Acts passed by it, and therefore it was quickly
Dissolved: and ever since it has been called by all the Monarchical Party a
Convention, and not a Parliament. But now in order to the Courting the
Commonwealth Party, this is not only called a Parliament, but is proposed as a
Pattern to all others, from the beginning to page 19.

II. But since this Author will send us back to that time, and since he takes
so ill, That the Memory of the late King should be forgotten; let us Examine
that Transaction a little, and then we shall see whether it had not been more
for his Honor to let it be forgotten. The King did indeed in his Declaration
from Breda, promise Liberty of Conscience, on which he insisted in a large and
wise Declaration, set out after he was settled on the Throne: But after that he
had got a Parliament chosen all of Creatures depending on himself, who for many
years Granted him every thing that he desired, a severe Act of Uniformity was
passed; and the Kings Promise was carried off by this; That the King could not
refuse to comply with so Loyal a Parliament. It is well enough known, that
those who were then secretly Papists, and who disguised their Religion for many
years after this, as the King himself did to the last, animated the Chief Men
of our Church, to carry the Points of Uniformity as high as was possible, and
that both then, and ever since, all that proposed any Expedients for uniting us
(or as it was afterward termed, for Comprehending the Dissenters) were
represented as the Betrayers of the Church. The Design was then clear to some;
that so by carrying the Terms of Conformity to a great rigidity, there might be
many Non-Conformists, and great occasion given for a Toleration, under which
Popery might insensibly creep in: For if the Expedients that the King himself
proposed in his Declaration, had been stood to, it is well known, that of the
2000 Conscientious Ministers, as he calls them, page 14. by an Affectation too
gross to pass on them, that were turned out, above 1700 had staid in. Their
Practices had but too good Success on those who were then at the Head of our
Church: whose Spirits were too much soured by their ill usage during the War,
and whose Principles led them to so good an Opinion of all that the Court did,
that for a great while they would suspect nothing. But at the same time, that
the Church Party, that carried all before them in that Parliament, were
animated to press things so hard, the Dissenters were secretly encouraged to
stand out: and were told, That the Kings Temper and Principle, and the
consideration of Trade would certainly procure them a Toleration: and ever
since, that Party, that thus had set us together by the ears, has shifted fides
dexterously enough; but still they have carried on the main Design, which was to
keep up the Quarrel in the Intervals of Parliament, Liberty of Conscience was
in vogue: but when a Session of Parliament came, and the King wanted Money,
then a new severe Law against the Dissenters, was offered to the angry men of
the Church-party as the price of it; and this seldom sailed to have its effect;
so that they were like the Jewels of the Crown, pawned when the King needed
Money, but redeemed at the next Prorogation. A Reflection then that arises
naturally out of the Proceedings in the Year 1660. is, That if a Parliament
should come, that would copy after that pattern, and repeal Laws and Tests; The
King's Offers of Liberty of Conscience, as may indeed be supposed, will bind
him till after a short Session or two such a meritorious Parliament should be
dissolved, according to the precedent in the Year 1660. and that a new one were
brought together by the same Methods of changing Charters, and making Returns;
and then the Old Laws de Heretico Comburtedo might be again revived, and it
would be said, that the Kings Inclinations are for keeping his Promise, and
Granting still a Liberty of Conscience, yet he can deny nothing to a Loyal and
Catholic Parliament.

III. We pay all possible respect to the King; and have witnessed how much we
depended on his promises, in so signal a manner, that after such real Evidence
all words are superfluous. But since the King has showed so much zeal, not only
for his Religion in general, but in particular for that Society, which of all
the other Bodies in it, we know is animated the most against us, we must crave
leave to speak a little freely, and not suffer our selves to be destroyed by a
Complement. The Extirpation of Heretics, and the Breach of Faith to them, have
been Decreed by two of their General Councils, and by a Tradition of several
Ages; the Pope is possessed of a power of dissolving all Promises, Contracts,
and Oaths; not to mention the prviate Doctrines of that Society, that is so
much in favor, of doing Ill that Good may come of it, of using Equivocations
and Reservations, and of ordering the Intention. Now these Opinions as they
have never been renounced by the Body of that Church, so indeed they cannot be,
unless they renounce their Infallibility, which is their Basis, at the same
time. Therefore though a Prince of that Communion, may very sincerely resolve
to maintain Liberty of Conscience, and to keep his Word, yet the blind
Subjection into which he is brought by his Religion, to his Church, must force
him to break through all that, as soon as the Doctrine of his Church is opened
to him; and that Absolution is denied him, or higher Threatenings are made him;
if he continues firm to his merciful Incliations. So that, supposing His
Majesty's Piety to be as great as the Jesuits Sermon, on the Thirtieth of
January, lately printed, carries it, to the uttermost possibility of Flesh and
Blood, then our Fears must still grow upon us, who know what are the Decrees of
that Church; and by consequence we may infer to what his Piety must needs carry
him, as soon as those things are fully opened to him, which in respect to him,
we are bound to believe are now hid from him.

IV. It will further appear, that these are not injust Inferences, if we
consider a little what has been the Observation of all the Promises made for
Liberty of Conscience to Heretics by Roman Catholic Princes, ever since the
Reformation. The first was, the Edict of Passaw in Germany, procured chiefly by
Ferdinand's means, and maintained indeed religiously by his Son Maximilian the
Second, whose Inclinations to the Protestant Religion made him be suspected for
one himself: but the Jesuits insinuated themselves so far into his Younger
Brother's Court, that was Archduke of Grats, that this was not only broken by
that Family, in their Share, but though Rodolph and Mathias were Princes of
great Gentleness, and the latter of these, was the Prorector of the States, in
the beginning of their War with K. Philip the Second; yet the violence with
which the House of Grats was possessed, overturned all that: so that the
breaking off the Pacificatory Edicts was begun in Rodolph's time, and was so
far carried on in Mathias's time, that they set both Bahemia and Hungary in a
Flame, and so begun that long War of Germany. 2. The next Promise for Liberty
of Conscience was made by Queen Mary of England; but we know well enough how it
was observed: The Promises made by the Queen Regent of Scotland, were observed
with the same Fidelity: after these came the Pacificatory Edicts in France,
which were scarce made when the Triumvirat was formed to break them. The famous
Massacre of Paris was an instance never to be forgot of the Religious
Observance of a Treaty, made on purpost to lay the Party asleep, and to bring
the whole Heads of it into the Net: This was a much more dreadful St.
Partholomew, than that on which our Author beflows that Epithere, page 15. and
when all seemed settled by the famous Edict of Nantes, we have seen how restless
that Party, and in particular the Society, were, till it was broken; by a
Prince, that for thirty years together had showed as great an aversion to the
Shedding of Blood, in his Government at home, as any of his Neighbors can
pretend to: and who has done nothing in the whole Tragedy that he has acted,
but what is exactly conform to the Doctrine and Decrees of his Church: so that
it is not himself, but his Religion that we must blame for all that has fallen
out in that Kingdom. I cannot leave this without taking notice of our Author's
Sincerity, who, page 18. tells us of the Protestants entering into their League
in France, when it is well known that it was a League of Papists against a
Protestant Successor, which was afterward applied to a Popish King, only
because he was not zealous enough against Heretics. But to end this List of
Instances at a Country to which our Author bears so particular a kindness;
when the Duchess of Parma granted the Edict of Pacification, by which all that
was past, was buried; and the Exercise of the Protestant Religion was to be
connived at for the future, King Philip the Second did not only ratify this,
but expressed himself so fully upon it to the Count of Egmont, who had been
sunt over to him, that the easy Count returned to Flanders, so assured of the
King's Sincerity, that he endeavored to persuade all others to rely as much on
his Word, as he himself did. It is well known how fatal this Confidence was to
him: and (see Mettren lib. 3.) that two years after this that King sent over
the Duke of Alva, with that severe Commission, which has been often Printed: in
which, without any regard had to the former Pacification or Promises, the King
declared, That the Provinces had forfeited all their Liberties, and that every
man in it had forfeited his Life: and therefore he authorized that numerciful
man to proceed with all possible rigor against them. It is also remarkable,
that that bloody Commission is founded on the King's Absolute Power, and his
Zeal for Religion. This is the only Edict that I know, in which a King has
pretended to Absolute Power, before the two Declarations for Scotland in the
year 1687. so whether they who penned them, took their pattern from this, I
cannot determine it. I could carry this view of History much further, to show in
many more Instances, how little Protestants can depend on the Faith of Roman
Catholics: and that their condition is so much the worse, the more pious that
their Princes are. As for what may be objected to all this, from the present
State of some Principalities or Towns in Germany, or of the Switsirs and
Grisons: it is to be considered, that in some of these, want of Power in the
Roman Catholioks to do mischief, and the other Circumstances of their affairs,
are visibly the only Securities of the Protestants: and whenever this Nation
departs from that, and gives up the Laws, it is no hard thing to guess, how
short-lived the Liberty of Conscience, even though seiled into a Magna Charta
would be.

V. All that our Author says upon the General Subject of Liberty of Conscience,
is only a severe Libel upon that Church, whose Principles and Practices are so
contrary to it. But the proposition lately made, has put an end to all this
dispute; since by an Offer of Repealing the Penal Laws, reserving only those of
the Test, and such others as secure the Protestant Religion, the question is
now no more, which Religion must be tolerated, but which Religion must Reign
and prevail. All that is here offered in opposition to that, is that by this
means such a number of persons must be ruined, page 64. which is as severe a
way of forcing People to change their Religion, as the way of Dragoons. I will
not examine the particulars of this matter, but must express my joy to find,
that all the difficulty which is in our way to a happy quiet, is the supplying
such a number of men with the means of their subsistence, which by the
execution of the Law for the Test, must be taken from them. This, by all that I
can learn, will not come to near an hundred thousand pound a year: and indeed
the supplying of those of the King's Religion, that want it, is a piece of
Charity and Bounty so worthy of him, that I do not know a man, that would envy
them the double of this, in Pensions: and if such a Sum would a little charge
the King's Revenue, I dare say, when the settlement of the Nation is brought to
that single point, there would not be one Negative found in either House of
Parliament for the Reimbursing the King. So far are we from desiring, either
the Destruction, or even the Poverty of these that perhaps wait only for all
occasion to burn us. I will add one bold thing further, That though I will be
no Undertaker for what a Parliament may do, yet I am confident that all Men are
so far from any desire of Revenge; but most of all, that the Heroical Minds of
the next Successors are above it; that if an Indemnity for that bold Violation
of the Law, that has been of late both Practiced and Authorized amongst us,
would procure a full settlement, even this could be obtained: Though an
impunity after such Transgressions is perhaps too great an Encouragement to
offend for the future. But since it is the Preservation of the Nation, and not
the Ruin of any Party in it that is aimed at, the hardiness of this
Proposition will, I hope, be forgiven me. It is urged ( page 63.) That
according to the Dutch Pattern at least, the Roman Catholics may have a share
in Military Employments; but the difference between our Case and theirs, is
clear, since some Roman Catholic Officers, where the Government is wholly in
the hands of the Protestants, cannot be of such dangerous consequence, as it
must needs be under a King that is not only of that persuasion, but is become
nearly allied to the Society, as the Liege Letter tells us.

VI. It is true, our Author would persuade that the King's Dispensing Power
has already put an end to this Dispute, and that therefore it is a seeming
sort of Perjury (see page 48.) to keep the Justices of Peace still under an
Oath of executing those Laws which they must consider no more. Some Precedents
are brought from former times, ( p. 22, 23, 24.) of our King's using the
Dispensing Power, in Edward 3d, Richard 2d, Henry 7th, Henry 8th, Edward 6th,
and Queen Elizabeth's time. It is very true, that the Laws have been of late
broke through amongst us, with a very high hand; but it is a little too
dangerous to upbraid the Justices of Peace with their Oaths, lest this oblige
them to reflect on so Sacred an Engagement. For the worthy Members of Magdalen
College, are not the only Persons in England, who will make Conscience of
observing their Oaths: So that if others are brought to reflect too much upon
what they do, our Author's officiousness in suggesting this to them, may prove
to be no acceptable piece of Service. I will not examine all his Precedents, we
are to be governed by Law, and not by some of the Excesses of Government; nor
is the latter end of Edward the Third, a time to be much imitated; and of all
the parts of the English History, Richard the Second's Reign should be least
mentioned, since those Excesses of his produced so Tragical a Conclusion, as
the loss of his Crown and Life. Henry the Sixth's seeble and embroyled Reign,
will scarce support an Argument. And if there were some Excesses in Henry the
Eighth's time, which is ordinary in all great Revolutions, he got all these to
be either warranted, or afterward to be confirmed in Parliament. And Queen
Elizabeth's power in Ecclesiastical Matters was founded on a special Act of
Parliament, which was in a great measure Repealed, in 1641, and that Repeal was
again ratified by another Act in the late King's time. We are often told of the
late King's Acts concerning Carts and Wagons, but all Lawyers know some Laws
are understood to be abrogated without a special Repeal, when some visible
inconvenience inforces it, such as appeared in that mistaken Act concerning
Wagons. So the King in that Case only declared the inconvenience which made
that Law to be of itself null, because it was impracticable. It is true the
Parliament never questioned this: A Man would not be offended if another pulled
up a Flower in his Garden, that yet would take it iil if he broke his Hedge.
And in Holland, to which our Author's Pen leads him often, when a River changes
its course, any Man may break the Dyke that was made to resist; yet that will
be no Warrant to go and break the Dyke that resists the Current of the same
River. So if a Dispensing Power well applied to smaller Offenses, has been past
over as an Excess of Government, that might be excusable, though not
justifiable, this will by no means prove that Laws made to Secure us against
that which we esteem the greatest of Evils, may be suspended, because Twelve
Men in Scarlet have been tried, or practiced on to say so. The Power of
Pardoning is also unreasonably urged for justifying the Dispensing Power, the
one is a Grace to a particular Person for a Crime committed, and the other is a
Warrant to commit Crimes: In short, the one is a Power to save Men, the other
is a Power to destroy the Government. But though they swagger it now with a
Dispensing Power, yet Read Caper Vitem, etc. may come to be again in Season,
and a time may come in which the whole Party may have reason to wish, that some
hair-brained Jesuits had never been born, who will not only expose them to the
Resentments, but even to the Justice of another Season, in which as little
regard will be had to the Dispensing Power, as they have to the Laws at present.

VII. Our Author's kindness to the States of Holland is very particular, and
returns often upon him, and it is no wonder that a State settled upon two such
hinges, as the Protestant Religion, and the Public Liberty, should be no small
Eyesore to those who intend to destroy both. So that the slackning the Laws
concerning Religion, and the moderating that State by invading it, seem to be
terms that must always go together. In the first War began the first slackning
of them; and after the Triple Alliance had laid the Dutch asleep, when the
Second War was resolved on, it was begun with that Heroical Attempt on the
Smyrna Fleet (for our Author will not have the late King's Actions to be
forgotten) at the same time the famous Declaration for Suspending the Laws in
1672, came out. And now again with another Declaration to the same purpose, we
see a return of the same good inclinations for the Dutch, though none before
our Author has ever ventured, as in a Book Licensed by my Lord President of the
Council, to call their Constitution ( page 68) a Revolt that they made from
their Lawful Prince; and to raise his style to a more sublime strain, he says (
page 66.) that their Commonwealth is nothing else but the result of an
absolute Rebellion, Revolt, and Defection from their Prince, and that the Laws
that they have made, were to prevent any casual return to their natural
Allegiance; and speaking of their obligation to Protect a Naturalized Subject,
he bestows this honor on them, as to say ( p. 57. 58.) Those that never yet
dealt so fairly with Princes, may be suspected for such a superfluous Faith, to
one that puts himself upon them for a Vassal. Time will show how far the States
will resent these Injuries, only it seems our Author thinks that a Sovereign's
Faith to protect the Subject is a superfluous thing. A Faith to Heretics is
another superfluous thing. So that two Superfluities one upon another must be
all that we are like to trust to. But I must take Notice of the variety of
Methods that these Gentlemen use in their Writings here in England, we are
always upbraided with a Revolt of the Dutch, as a scandalous imputation on the
Protestant Religion: And yet in a late Paper, Entitled, An Answer to
Pensionary Fagel's Letter, the Services that the Roman Catholics did in the
beginning of the Commonwealth, are highly extolled as Signal and Meritorious,
upon which the Writer makes great Complaints that the Pacification of Gaunt,
and the Union of Utrecht, by which the free Exercise of Religion was to be
continued to them, was not observed in most of the Provinces: But if he had but
taken pains to examine the History of the States, he would have found that soon
after the Union made with Utrecht, the Treaty of Collen was set on foot between
the King of Spain and the States, by the Emperor's Mediation, in which the
Spaniards studied to divide the Roman Catholics in those Provinces from the
Protestants, by offering a Confirmation of all other Privileges of those
Provinces, excepting only the Point of Religion: which had so great an effect,
that the Party of the Malcontents was formed upon it, and these did quickly
Capitulate in the Walloon Provinces, and after that not only Brabant and
Flanders Capitulated, but Reenenburg that was Governor of Groening declared
for the King of Spain, and by some places that he took both in Friesland and
Over-Issel, he put those Provinces under Contribution. Not long after that,
both Daventer and Zutphen were betrayed by Popish Governors, and the War was
thus brought within the Seven Provinces, that had been before kept at a greater
distance from them. Thus it did appear almost every where, that the Hatred with
which the Priests were inspiring the Roman Catholics against the Protestants,
disposed them to Betray all again to the Spanish Tyranny. The New War that
Reenenburgh's Treachery had brought into these Provinces changed so the State
of Affairs, that no wonder if this produced a Change likewise with relation to
the Religion, since it appeared that these Revolts were catried on and
justified upon the principles of the Church: and the general Hatred under which
these Revolts brought the Roman Catholics in those Out-Provinces, made the
greater part of them to withdraw, so that there were not left such numbers of
them as to pretend to the Free-Exercise of their Religion: But the War not
having got into Holland and Utrecht, and none of that Religion having Revolted
in these Provinces, Roman Catholics continued still in the Country; and
though the ill inclinations that they showed, made it necessary for public
Safety to put them out of the Government, yet they have still enjoyed the
common Rights of the Country, with the free Exercise of their Religion. But it
is plain that some men are only waiting an Opportunity to renew the Old Delenda
est Carthago: and that they think it to be no small step to it to possess all
the World with the odious impressions of the Dutch, as a Rebellious and a
Persidious State, and if it were possible they would make their own Roman
Catholic Subjects fancy that they are persecuted by them. But though men may
be brought to believe Transubstantiation in spite of the Evidence of Sense to
the contrary; Yet those that feel themselves at Ease, will hardly be brought to
think that they are persecuted, because that they are told so in an ill-writ
Pamphlet. And for their Rebellion, the Prince that is only concerned in that,
sinds them now to be his best Allies, and chief support: as his Predecessors
acknowledged them a Free State almost an Age ago. And it being Consest by
Historians on all sides, That there was an Express Proviso in the Constitution
of their Government, That if their Prince broke such and such Limits, they were
no more bound to Obey him, but might Resist him: And it being no less certain,
That King Philip the Second Authorized the Duke of Alva to seize upon all their
Privileges; their resistieg him and maintaining their Privileges, was without
all dispute a justisiable Action, and was so esteemed by all the States of
Europe, and in particular here in England, as appears by the preambles of
several Acts of Subsidy that were given to the Queen in order to the Assisting
the States. And as for their not dealing fairly with Princes, when our Author
can find such an instance in their History, as our Attempt on their Smyrna
Fleet was, he may employ his Eloquence in setting it out; and if
notwithstanding all the failures they have felt from others, they have still
maintained the Public Faith, our Author's Rhetoric will hardly blemish there.
The Peace of Nimeguen, and the abandoning of Luxemburgh, are perhaps the single
instances in their History that need to be a little excused: But as the vast
Expense of the last War brought them into a Necessily that either knows no Law,
or at least will hearken to none; so we who forced them to both, and first sold
the Triple Alliance, and then let go Luxembuogh, do with very ill grace
reproach the Dutch for these unhappy steps, to which our Conduct drove them.

VIII. If a strain of pert boldness runs through the whole Pamphlet, it appears
no where more eminently than in the Reflections the Author makes on Mr. Fagel's
Letter, he calls it ( p. 62.) a pretended piece, and a presumption not to be
soon pardoned, in prefixing to a surreptitious and unauthorized Pamphlet, the
reverend Name of the Princess of Orange, which in another place ( p. 72.) he
had reason to imagine was but a counterfeit Coin, and that those Venerable
Characters were but politically feigned, and a sacred Title given to it,
without their Authority. All this coming out with so solemn a License, has made
me take some pains to be rightly informed in this matter. Those whom consulted,
tell me they have discoursed the Pensioner himself on this Subject, who will
very shortly take a sure method to clear himself of those imputations, and to
do that Right to the Prince and Princess, as to show the World, That in this
matter he acted only by their ^ For as Mr. Steward's Letter drew the
Pensioner's Answer from him, so this Paper (Licensed as it is) will now draw
from him a particular recital of the whole progress of the matter. Mr.
Alloville knows that the Princess explained her self so sully to him in the
Month of May, and June, 1687. upon the Repeal of the Test, that he himself has
Acknowleged to several Persons, That though both the Prince and Princess were
very stiff in that matter, yet of the two ^ found the Princess more inflexible.
Afterward when Mr. Steward by many repeated Letters pressed his Friend to
renew his importunities to the Pensioner for an Answer, he having also said in
his Letters that he writ by the King's Order and Direction: Upon this the
Pensioner having consulted the Prince and Princess, drew his Letter first in
Dutch, and communicated it to them, and it being approved by them, he turned it
into Latin; but because it was to be showed to the King, he thought it was fit
to get it put into English, that so their Highnesses might see the Translation
of that Letter which was to be offered to his Majesty; and they having approved
of it, sent it with his own in Latin, and it was delivered to the King. This
Account was given me by my Friend, who added, That it would appear ere long in
a more Authentical manner. And by this I suppose the impudence of those men
does sufficiently appear, who have the Brow to publish ^ stuff, of the Falsehood
of which they themselves are well assured, and therefore I may well conclude
that my Lord President's License was Granted by him with that Carelessness with
which most Books are Read and Licensed. Our Author pretends that he cannot
Believe that his Letter could flow from a Princess of so sweet a temper ( page
62.) and yet others find so much of the sweetness of her temper in it, ^ for
that very reason they believe it the more easily to have come from her. No
Passion nor indiscreet Zeal appears in it; and it expresses such an extended
Charity and Nobleness of Temper, that those Characters show it comes from one
that has neither a narrowness of Soul, for a sowerness of Spirit. In short, She
proposes nothing in it, but to preserve that Religion ^ Believes the true one,
and that being ^, she is willing that all others Enjoy all the Liberties of
Subjects, and the Freedom of Christians: Here is Sweetness of Temper and
Christian Charity in their fullest Extent. The other Reason is so mysteriously
expressed, that I will not wrong our Author by putting it in any other words
but his own ( page 62.) She is ^ as little pleased to promote any thing to the
disturbance of a State to which she still seems so ^ related, [She seems still]
are two significant ^, and not set here for nothing: She ^ (in his Opinion)
only related to the ^, that is, she is not really so. But ^ is something that
these Gentlemen have in reserve to blow up the seeming Relation; and she seems,
still imports, that though this seeming relation is suffered to pass at
present, yet it must have its period, for this Seems still, can have no other
meaning, But in what does she promote the disturbance of the State, or
Patronize the Opposers of her Parents, as he says afterward ( ibid.)? Did she
ossiciously interpose in this matter? Or was not her Sense asked? And when it
was Asked, must she not give it according to her Conscience? She is too perfect
a Pattern in all other things, Not to know well how great a Respect and
Submission she ows her Father; But she is too good a Christian not to know,
that her Duty to God must go first. And therefore in matter of Religion, when
her mind was asked, she could not avoid the giving it according to her
Conscience. And all the invidious Expressions which he fastens on this Letter,
and which he makes so many Arguments to show that it could not flow from her,
are all the Malicious, and soon discovered Artifices of one that knew, That she
had ordered the Letter, and that thought himself safe in this Disguise, in the
discharging of his Malice against her. So ingratefully is she required by a
party for whom she had expressed so much Compassion and Charity. This Author (
page 53.) thinks it an indiscreet forecast, to be always Erecting such
Horoscopes for the next Heir, both in Discourse and Writing, as seem almost to
Calculate the Nativity of the present: and he would almost make this
High Treason. But if it is so, there were many Traitors in England a few Years
ago; in which the Next Heir, though but a Brother, was so much considered, That
the King himself looked as one out of countenance, and abandoned, and could
scarce find Company enough about him for his Entertainment, either in his
Bedchamber, or in his Walks, when the whole dependence was on the Successor.
So if we by turns look a little on the Successor, those who did thus in so
scandalous a manner, ought not to take it so very ill from us. In a melancholy
state of things it is hard to deny us the Consolation of hoping that we may see
better Days. But since our Author is so much concerned that this Letter should
not be in any manner imputed to the Princess, it seems a little strange that
the Prince is so given up by him, thaa he is at no pains to clear him of the
imputation. For the happy Union that is between them, will readily make us to
conclude, That if the Prince Ordered it, the Princess had likewise her share in
it. But I find but one glance at the Prince in the whole Book ( page 52.) when
the Author is pleasing himself with the hopes of protection from the Royal
Heir, out of a sense of Filial Duty, (He concludes) Especially when so nearly
Allied to the very Bosom of the Prince, whose Way of Worship neither is the
same with the National here, and in whose Countries all Religions have ever
been alike Tolerated. The phrase of so near an Alliance to the very Bosom of a
Prince, is somewhat extraordinary. An Author that will be florid, scorns so
simple an Expression as Married; he thought the other was ^ lofty; but the
matter of this period is more remarkable. It intimates as if the Prince's way
of Worship was so different from ours, though we hear that he goes frequently
with the Princess to her Chapel, and expresses no aversion to any of our
Forms, though he thinks it decent to be more constantly in the Exercises of
Devotion that are Authorized in Holland. And as for that, That all Religions
have been equally alike Tolerated there, it is another of our Author's slights.
I do not hear that there are either Bowzis, or Bramans in Holland; or that the
Mahometans have their Mosques there: and surely his Friends the Roman
Catholics will tell him, that all Religions are not alike Tolerated there.
Thus I have followed more largely in this Article than in any other, it being
that of the greatest importance, by which he had endeavonred to blast all the
good Effects which the Pensioner's Letter has had amongst us.

IX I have now gone over that which I thought most important in this Paper, and
in which it seemed necessary to inform the public aright, without insisting on
the particular slips of the Author of it, or of the Advantages that he gives to
any that would Answer more particularly. I cannot think that any man in the
Nation can be now so weak as not to see what must needs be the Effects of the
Abolition of the TESTS. After all that we see and hear, it is too great an
Affront to mankind to offer to make it out, That ^ man's Understanding may
really mislead him so far (as to make him change his Religion, ^ remaining
still an Honest man) that betrays the Legal, and now the only Visible Defenses
of that Religion which he prosesses. The taking away the Tests for public
Employments, is to set up an Office at F. Peter's for all pretenders, and
perhaps a pretender will not be so much as received, till he has first ahjur'd
^ so that every Vacancy will possibly make five or six Proselytes, and those
Protestants who are already in Employments, will feel their ground quickly fail
under them, and upon the first Complaint they will see what must be done to
restore them to Favor. And as for the Two Houses of Parliament, as a great
Creation will presently give them the Majority in the House of Lords, so a new
set of Charters, and bold Returns, will in a little time give them likewise the
Majority in the House of Commons, and if it is to be supposed that Protestants
who have all the Security of the Law for their Religion, can throw that up, Who
can so much as doubt that when they have brought themselves into so naked a
Condition, it will be no hard thing to overturn their whole Establishment; and
then perhaps we shall be told more plainly what is now but darkly insinuated by
this Author, That the next Heir seems still to be so nearly related to this
State, etc.

A LETTER to a Dissenter, upon occasion of His Majesty's late Gracious
Declaration of Indulgence.
SIR,
SInce Addresses are in fashion, give me leave to make one to you. This is
neither the Effect of Fear, Interest, or Resentment; therefore you may be sure
it is sincere: and for that reason it may expect to be kindly received. Whether
it will have power enough to Conscience, depends upon the Reasons, of which
you are to judge; and upon your preparation of Mind, to be persuaded by Truth,
whenever it appears to you. It ought not to be ^ less welcome, for coming
from a friendly ^, one whose kindness to you is not ^ by difference of Opinion,
and who will not let his thoughts for the Public be so tied ^ confined to this
or that Sub-division of Protestants, as to stifle the Charity, which, besides
all other Arguments, is at this time become necessary to preserve us.

I am neither surprised nor provoked, to see that in the condition you were put
into by the Laws, and the ill circumstances you lay under, by having the
Exclusion and Rebellion laid to your Charge, you were desirous to make your
selves less uneasy and obnoxious to Authority. Men who are sore, run to the
nearest Remedy with too much have, to consider all the consequences: Grains of
allowance are to be given, where Nature gives such strong Influences. When to
men under Sufferings it offers Ease, ^ present Pain will hardly allow time to
examine the Remedies; and the strongest Reason ^ hardly gain a fair Audience
from our Mind, whilst so possessed, till the smart is a little alayed.

I do not know whether the Warmth that naturally belongs to new Friendships,
may not make it a harder Task for me to persuade you. It is like telling
Lovers, in the beginning of their Joys, that they will in a little time have an
^. Such an unwelcome Style does not easily find credit: but I will suppose you
are not so ^ gone in your new Passion, but that you will ^ ^; and therefore I
am under the less discouragement, when I offer to your consideration two
things. The first is, the Cause you have to suspect your new Friends. The
second, the Duty incumbent upon you, in Christianity and Prudence, not to
hazard the public Safety, neither by Desire of Ease, nor of Revenge.

To the first: Consider that notwithstanding the smooth Language which is now
put on to engage you, these new Friends did not make you their Choice, but
their Refuge: They have ever made their first Courtships to the Church of
England, and when they were rejected there, they made their Application to you
in the second place. The Instances of this, might be given in all times. I do
not repeat them, because whatsoever is unnecessary, must be tedious, the truth
of this Assertion being so plain, as not to admit a Dispute. You cannot
therefore reasonably flatter your selves, that there is any Inclination to you.
They never pretended to allow you any Quarter, but to usher in Liberty for
themselves under that shelter. I refer you to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and to the
Journals of Parliament, where you may be convinced, if you can be so mistaken,
as to doubt; nay, at this very hour, they can hardly forbear, in the height of
their Courtship, to let fall hard words of you. So little is Nature to be
restrained; it will start out sometimes, disdaining to submit to the Usurpation
of Art and Interest.

This Alliance, between Liberty and Infallibility, is bringing together the Two
most contrary things that are in the World. The Church of Rome does not only
dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its Principles it cannot do it. Wine is
not more expressly forbidden to the Mahometans, than giving Heretics Liberty is
to Papists: They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, than Men
Married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their kindness, would be a habit of Sin, of which they are
to repent, and their Absolution is to be had upon no other terms, than their
Promise to destroy you. You are therefore to be hugged now, only that you may
be the better squeezed at another time. There must be something Extraordinary,
when the Church of Rome sets up Bills, and offers Plasters for tender
Consciences: By all that has hitherto appeared, her skill in Surgery lies
chiefly in a quick Hand, to cut off Limbs; but she is the worst at Healing, of
any that ever pretended to it.

To come so quick from another extreme, is such an unnatural motion, that ye
ought to be upon your Guard; the other day you were Sons of Belial, Now you are
Angels of Light. This is a violent change, and it will be fit for you to pause
upon it, before you believe it: If your features are not altered, neither is
their opinion of you, whatever may be pretended. Do you believe less than you
did, that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome? sure you do not. See then,
how they treat both in Words and Writing, those who entertain that opinion.
Conclude from hence, how inconsistent their favor is with this single Article,
except they give you a Dispensation for this too, and by a Non Obstante, secure
you that they will not think the worse of you.

Think a little how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of Parodoxes.
Popery now is the only friend to Liberty, and the known enemy to Persecution:
The men of Taunton and Tiverton, are above all other eminent for Loyalty. The
Quakers from being declared by the Papists not to be Christians, are now made
Favorites, and taken into their particular Protection; they are on a sudden
grown the most Accomplished men of the Kingdom, in good Breeding, and give
Thanks with the best Grace, in double refined Language. So that I should not
wonder, tho a man of that Persuasion, in spite of his Hat, should be Master of
the Ceremonies. Not to say harsher words, these are such very new things, that
it is impossible not to suspend our Belief, till by a little more Experience we
may be informed whether they are Realities or Apparitions: We have been under
shameful mistakes, if these Opinions are true; but for the present, we are apt
to be incredulous; except we could be convinced, that the Priests words in this
Case too, are able to make such a sudden, and effectual change; and that their
Power is not limited to the Sacrament, but that it extends to alter the
nature of all other things, as often as they are so disposed.

Let me now speak of the Instruments of your Friendship, and then leave you to
judge, whether they do not afford matter of Suspicion. No Sharpness is to be
mingled where Healing only is intended; so nothing will be said to expose
particular men, how strong so ever the Temptation may be, or how clear the
Proofs to make it out. A word or two in general, for your better caution, shall
suffice: Suppose then, for Argument's sake, that the Mediators of this new
Alliance should be such as have been formerly employed in Treaties of the same
kind, and there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been Empowered to
give Encouragements and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to suspect them?

If they should plainly be under Engagements to one side, their Arguments to
the other, ought to be received accordingly; their fair Protences are to be
looked upon as part of their Commission which may not improbably give them a
Dispensation in the case of Truth, when it may bring a prejudice upon the
Service of those by whom they are employed.

If there should be men who having formerly had Means and Authority to persuade
by Secular Arguments, have in pursuance of that Power sprinkled Money amongst
the Dissenting Ministers; and if those very men should now have the same
Authority, practice the same Methods, and Disburse, where they cannot otherwise
^ It seems to me to be rather an Evidence than a Presumption of the Deceit.

If there should be Ministers amongst you, who by having fallen under
Temptations of this kind are in some sort engaged to continue their Frailty by
the awe they are in least it should be exposed The Persuasions of these
unfortunate men must sure have the less force, and their Arguments tho never so
specious, are to be suspected, when they come from men who have Mortgaged
themselves to severe Creditors that expect a rigorous observation of the
Contract, let it be never so unwarrantable.

If these, or any others, should at this time Preach up Anger and Vengeance
against the Church of England; may it not without Injustice be suspected, that
a thing so plainly out of season springs rather from Corruption than Mistake
and that those who act this Choleric part, do not believe themselves, but only
pursue higher Directions, and endeavor to make good that part of their
Contract which obliges them, upon a Forfeiture, to make use of their inflaming
Eloquence They might apprehend their Wages would be retrenched if they should
be Moderate: And therefore whilst Violence is their Interest, those who have
not the same Arguments, have no reason to allow such a Partial Example.

If there should be men who by the load of their Crimes against the Government,
have been ^ down to comply with it against their Conscience; who by incurring
the want of a ^, have drawn upon themselves the necessary of an entire
Resignation: Such men are to ^ lamented, but not to be believed. Nay, they
themselves, when they have discharged their Unwelcome Task, will be inwardly
glad that their forced Endeavors do not succeed, and are pleased when men
resist their Insinuations; which are far from being Voluntary or Sincere, ^ are
Squeezed out of them by the weight of their being so Obnoxious.

If in the height of this great dearness by comparing things, it should happen,
that at this instant, there is much a surer Friendship with those who are so
far from allowing Liberty, that they allow no Living to a Protestant under
them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the Argument will
come home, and sure it will afford sufficient ground to suspect. Apparent
Contradictions must strike us; neither Nature nor Reason can digest them:
Self-Flattery, and the desire to Deceive our selves, to ^ a present Appetite,
with all their Power, which is Great, cannot get the better of such broad
Conviction, as some things carry along with them. Will you call these vain and
empty suspicions? have you been at all times so void of Fears and Jealousies as
to justify your being so unreasonably Valiant in having none upon this
occasion? Such an extraordinary Courage it this unseasonable time, to say no
more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended.

If then for these and a thousand other Reasons, there is cause to suspect,
sure your new Friends are not to Dictate to you, or Advise you; for instance,
The Addresses that fly abroad every Week, and Murder us with another to the
same; ^ first Draughts are made by those who are not very proper to be
Secretaries to the Protestant Region; and it is your part only to Write them ^
fairer again. Strange! that you who have been formerly so much against
Set-Forms, should ^ be content the Priests should Indite for you. The nature of
Thanks is an unavoidable consequence of being Pleased or Obliged; they grow ^
the Heart, and from thence show themselves ^ in Looks, Speech, Writing, or
Action: No man was ever Thankful because he was bid to be so, but because he
had, or thought he had some Reason for it. If then there is cause in this Case
to pay such extravagant Acknowledgments, they will flow naturally, without
taking such pains to procure them; and it is unkindly done to Tire all the
Posthorses with carrying Circular Letters to solicit that which would be
done without any trouble or constraint: If it is really in it self such a
Favor, what needs so much pressing men to be Thankful, and with such eager
circumstances, that where Persuasions cannot delude, Threatenings are employed
to fright them into a Compliance? Thanks must be voluntary, not only
unconstrained, but unsollicited, else they are either Trisles or Snares, they
either signify nothing, or a great deal more than is intended by those that
give them. If an inference should be made, That whosoever Thanketh the King for
his Declaration, is by that engaged to Justify it in point of Law; it is a
greater Stride than, I presume, all those care to make who are persuaded to
Address: If it shall be supposed, that all the Thankers will be Repealers of
the TEST, whenever a Parliament shall Meet. Such an Expectation is better
prevented before, than disappointed afterward; and the surest way to avoid the
lying under such a Scandal, is not to do any thing that may give a color to
the Mistake: These Bespoken Thanks are little less improper than Love Letters
that were Solicited by the Lady to whom they are to be Directed: so, that
besides the little ground there is to give them, the manner of getting them
does extremely lessen their Value. It might be wished that you would have
suppressed your impatience, and have been content for the sake of Religion, to
enjoy it within your selves, without the Liberty of a public Exercise, till a
Parliament had allowed it; but since that could not be, and that the Artifices
of some amongst you have made use of the Well-meant Zeal of the Generality to
draw them into this Mistake; I am so far from blaming you with that sharpness
which, perhaps, the Matter in strictness would bear, that I am ready to err on
the side of the more gentle construction.

There is a great difference between enjoying quietly the advantages of an Act
irregularly done by others, and the going about to support it against the Laws
in being: the Law is so Sacred, that no Trespass against 'it is to be Defended;
yet Frailties may in some measure be Excused, when they cannot be justified.
The desire of enjoying a Liberty from which men have been so long restrained,
may be a Temptation that their Reason is not at all times able to resist. If in
such a case, some Objections are leapt over, indifferent men will be more
inclined to lament the Occasion, than to fall too hard upon the Fault, whilst
it is covered with the Apology of a good Intention; but where to rescue your
selves from the Severity of one Law, you give a Blow to all the Laws, by which
your Religion and Liberty are to be protected; and instead of silently
receiving the benefit of this Indulgence, you set up for Advocates to support
it, you become voluntary Aggressors, and look like Council retained by the
Prerogative against your old Friend Magna Charta, who has done nothing to
deserve her falling thus under your Displeasure.

If the case then should be, that the Price expected from you for this Liberty,
is giving up your Right in the Laws, sure you will think twice, before you go
any further in such a losing Bargain. After giving Thanks for the breach of one
Law, you lose the Right of Complaining of the breach of all the rest; you will
not very well know how to defend your selves, when you are pressed; and having
given up the question, when it was for your advantage, you cannot recall it,
when it shall be to your prejudice. If you will set up at one time a Power to
help you, which at another time by parity of Reason shall be made use of to
destroy you, you will neither be pitied, nor relieved against a Mischief you
draw upon your selves, by being so unreasonably thankful. It is like calling in
Auxiliaries to help, who are strong enough to subdue you: In such a case your
Complaints will come too late to be heard, and your Sufferings will raise Mirth
instead of Compassion.

If you think, for your excuse, to expound your Thanks so as to restrain them
to this particular case, others, for their ends, will extend them further; and
in these differing Interpretations, that which is backed by Authority will be
the most likely to prevail; especially when by the advantage you have given
them, they have in truth the better of the Argument, and that the Inferences
from your own Concessions are very strong, and express against you. This is so
far from being a groundless Supposition, that there was a late instance of it,
the last Session of Parliament, in the House of Lords, where the first Thanks,
though things of course, were interpreted to be the Approbation of the King's
whole Speech, and a Restraint from the further Examination of any part of it,
though never so much disliked; and it was with difficulty obtained, not to be
excluded from the liberty of objecting to this mighty Prerogative of
Dispensing, merely by this innocent and usual piece of good Manners, by which
no such thing could possibly be intended.

This shows, that some bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and that
the Constitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured upon a
Complement. Now that you have for some time enjoyed the benefit of the End, it
is time for you to look into the Danger of the Means: The same Reason that made
you desirous to get Liberty, must make you sollicitous to preserve it; so that
the next thought will naturally be, not to engage your self beyond Retreat, and
to agree so far with the Principles of all Religions, as not to rely upon a
Deathbed Repentance.

There are certain Periods of Time, which being once past, make all Cautions
ineffectual, and all Remedies desperate. Our Understandings are apt to be
hurried on by the first Heats; which if not restrained in time, do not give us
leave to look back, till it is too late. Consider this in the case of your
Anger against the Church of England, and take warning by their Mistake in the
same kind, when after the late King's Restoration, they preserved so long the
bitter taste of your rough usage to them in other times, that it made them
forget their Interest, and sacrifice it to their Revenge.

Either you will blame this Proceeding in them, and for that reason not follow
it, or if you allow it, you have no reason to be offended with them, so that
you must either dismiss your Anger, or lose your Excuse; except you should
argue more partially than will be supposed of men of your Morality and
Understanding.

If you had now to do with those Rigid Prelates, who made it a matter of
Conscience to give you the least Indulgence, but kept you at an uncharitable
distance, and even to your more reasonable Scruples continued stiff and
inexorable, the Argument might be fairer on your side; but since the Common
Danger has so laid open that Mistake, that all the former Haughtiness towaods
you is for ever extinguished, and that it has turned the Spirit of
Persecution, into a Spirit of Peace, Charity, and Condescension; shall this
happy Change only affect the Church of England? and are you so in love with
Separation, as not to be moved by this Example ^ It ought to be followed, were
there no other reason than that it is a Virtue, but when ^ sides that, it is
become necessary to your preservation, it is impossible to fail the having its
Effect upon you.

If it should be said, that the Church of England is never Humble, but when she
is out of Power, and therefore loses the Right of being Believed when she
pretends to it; the Answer is, first, it would be an uncharitable Objection,
and very much mistimed; an unseasonable Triumph, not only ungenerous, but
unsafe: So that in these respects it cannot be urged, without Scandal, even tho
it could be said with Truth. Secondly, This is not so in Fact, and the Argument
must fall, being built upon a false Foundation; for whatever may be told you,
at this very hour, and in the heat and glare of your present Sunshine, the
Church of England can in a Moment bring Clouds again; and turn the Royal
Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if she would
give but a Smile or a kind Word; the least Glimpse of her Compliance, would
throw you back into the state of Suffering, and draw upon you all the Arrears
of Severity, which have accrued during the time of this kindness to you, and
yet the Church of England, with all her Faults, will not allow her self to be
rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the weight of Power,
rather than lie under the burden of being Criminal.

It cannot be said, that she is Unprovoked; Books and Letters come out every
day, to call for Answers, yet she will not be stirred. From the supposed
Authors, and the Style, one would swear they were Undertakers, and had made a
Contract to fall out with the Church of England. There are Lashes in every
Address, Challenges to draw the Pen in every Pamphlet; in short, the fairest
occasions in the World given to quarrel; but she wisely distinguishes between
the Body of Dissenters, whom she will suppose to Act, as they do, with no ill
intent; and these small Skirmishers picked and sent out to Picqueer, and to
begin a Fray amongst the Protestants, for the entertainment, as well as the
advantage of the Church of Rome.

This Conduct is so good, that it will be Scandalous not to Applaud it. It is
not equal dealing, to blame our Adversaries for doing ill, and not commend them
when they do well.

To hate them because they Persecuted, and not to be reconciled to them when
they are ready to Suffer, rather than receive all the Advantages that can be
gained by a Criminal compliance, is a Principle no sort of Christians can own,
since it would give an Objection to them never to be Answered.

Think a little, who they were that promoted your former Persecutions, and then
consider how it will look to be angry with the Instruments, and at the same
time to make a League with the Authors of your Sufferings.

Have you enough considered what will be expected from you? Are you ready to
stand in every Borough by Virtue of a Conge d' eslire, and instead of Election,
be satisfied if you are Returned?

Will you in Parliament, justify the Dispensing Power, with all its
consequences, and Repeal the Test, by which you will make way for the Repeal of
all the Laws, that were made to preserve your Religion, and to Enact others
that shall Destroy it?

Are you disposed to change the Liberty of Debate, into the Merit of Obedience,
and to be made Instruments to Repeal or Enact Laws, when the Roman Consistory
are Lords of the Articles.

Are you so linked with your new Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament shall offer you, if it shall not be so Comprehensive as to include
the Papists in it?

Consider that the implied Conditions of your new Treaty are no less, than that
you are to do every thing you are desired, without examining, and that for this
pretended Liberty of Conscience, your real Freedom is to be Sacrificed: Your
former Faults hang like Chains still about you, you are let loose only upon
Bayl; the first Act of Noncompliance, sends you to Gaol again.

You may see that the Papists themselves do not rely upon the Legality of this
Power, which you are to Justify, since the being so very earnest to get it
Established by a Law, and the doing such very hard things in order, as they
think to obtain it, is a clear Evidence, that they do not think, that the
single Power of the Crown is in this Case a good Foundation; especially when
this is done under a Prince, so very tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty,
that he would think it a diminution to his Prerogative, where he conceives it
strong enough to go alone, to call in the Legislative help to strengthen and
support it.

You have formerly blamed the Church of England, and not without reason, for
going so far as they did in their Compliance; and yet as soon as they stopped,
you see they are not only Deserted, but Prosecuted: Conclude then from this
Example, that you must either break off your Friendship, or resolve to have no
Bounds in it. If they do not succeeded in their Design, they will leave you
first; if they do, you must either leave them, when it will be too late for
your Safety, or else after the squeaziness of starting at a Surplice, you must
be forced to swallow Transubstantiation.

Remember that the other day those of the Church of England were Trimmers for
enduring you; and now by a sudden Turn, you are become the Favorites; do not
deceive your selves, it is not the Nature of lasting Plants thus to shoot up in
a Night; you may look gay and green for a little time, but you want a Root to
give you a Continuance. It is not so long since, as to be forgotten, that the
Maxim was, It is impossible for a Dissenter, not to be a REBEL. Consider at
this time in France, even the new Converts are so far from being employed, that
they are Disarmed; their sudden Change makes them still to be distrusted,
nothwithstanding that they are Reconciled: What are you to expect then from
your dear Friends, to whom, when ever they shall think sit to throw you off
again, you have in other times given such Arguments for their excuse?

Besides all this, you act very unskilfully again your visible Interest, if you
throw away the advantages, of which you can hardly fail in the next probable
Revolution. Things tend naturaly to what ye would have, if you would let them
alone, and not by an unseasonable Activity lose the Influences of your good
Star, which promises you every things that is prosperous.

The Church of England convinced of its Error in being Severo to you; the
Parliament, when ever it meets, sure to be Gentle to you; the next Heir bred
in the Country which you have so often Quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence; a
general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selve, off
from the Protestants abroad, but ^ enlarge the foundations upon which we are to
build our Defenses against the Common Enemy; so that in Truth, all things seem
to conspire to give you Ease and Satisfaction, if by too much have to
anticipate your good Forture, you do not destroy it.

The Protestants have but one Article of Humane Strength, to oppose the Power
which is now against them, and that is, not to lose the advantage of their
numbers, by being so unwary as to let themselves be divided.

We all agree in our Duty to our Prince, our Objections to his Belief, do not
hinder us from seeing his Virtues; and our not complying with his Religion,
has no effect upon our Allegiance; we are not to be Laughed our of our Passive
Obedience, and the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, tho even those who perhaps owe
the best part of their Security to that Principle, are apt to make a Jest of it.

So that if we give no advantage by the fatal Mistake of misapplying our Anger,
by the natural course of things, this Danger will pass away like a Shower of
Hail; fair Weather will succeed, as lowering as the Sky now looks, and all by
this plain and easy Receipt. Let us be still, quiet, and undivided, firm at the
same time to our Religion, our Loyalty, and our Laws, and so long as we
continue this method, it is next to impossible, that the odds of two hundred to
one should lose the Bett; except the Church of Rome, which has been so long
barren of Miracles, should now in her declining Age, be brought to Bed of One
that would outdo the best she can brag of in her Legend.

To Conclude, the short Question will be, Whether you will join with those who
must in the end run the same Fate with you. If Protestants of all sorts, in
their Behavior to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more
equal terms, and for that very reason it is sitter for them now to be
reconciled. Our Disunion is not only a Reproach, but a Danger to us; those who
believe in modern Miracles, have more Right, or at least more Excuse, to
neglect all Secular Cautions; but for us, it is as justifiable to have no
Religion, as wilfully to throw away the Humane Means of preserving it. I am,

Dear SIR, Your most Affectionane Humble Servant, T. W.

The ANATOMY of an EQUIVALENT.
I. THE World has of late years never been without some extraordinary Word to
furnish the Coffee-houses and fill the Pamphlets. Sometimes it is a new one
invented, and sometimes an old one revived. They are usually fitted to some
present Purpose, with Intentions as differing as the various Designs several
Parties may have, either to delude the People, or to expose their Adversaries:
They are not of long continuance, but after they have passed a little while,
and that they are grown Nauseous by being so often repeated, they give place to
something that is newer. Thus, after Whig, Tery, and Trimmer, have had their
time, now they are dead and forgotten, being supplanted by the word Equivalent,
which reigns in their stead.

The Birth of it is in short this: After many repeated Essays to dispose Men to
the Reperl of Oaths and Tests, made for the security of the Protestant
Religion, the general aversion to comply in it was found to be so great, that
it was thought advisable to try another manner of attempting it, and to see
whether by putting the ^ thing into another Mould, and softening an ^
Proposition by a plausible Term, they might not have better success.

To this end, instead of an absolute quitting of those Laws, without any
Condition, which was the first Proposal; Now it is put into ^ Language, and
runs thus; If yiu will take ^ the Oaths and Tests, you shall have as good a
thing for them. This put into the fashionable Word, is now called an Equivalent.

II. So much to the Word it self. I will now endeavor in short to examine and
explain, in order to the having it fully understood,

First, What is the nature of a true Equivalent; and

In the next place, What things are not to be admired under that denomination.

I shall treat these as general Propositions; and ^ I cannot undertake how far
they may be convincing, I may safely do it, that they are ^ of which there
canbe no greater evidence than that I make neither Inference, nor Application,
but leave that part entirely to the Reader, according as his own Thoughts shall
direct and dispose him.

III. I will first take notice, that this Word, by the Application which has
been made of it in some modern instances, lies under some Disadvantage, not to
say some Scandal. It is transmitted hither from France; and if as in most other
things that we take from them, we carry them beyond the Pattern, it should
prove so in this, we should get into a more partial Style than the Principles
of English Justice will I hope ever allow us to be guilty of.

The French King's Equivalents in Flanders, are very extraordinary Bargains;
his manner of proposing and obtaining them, is very differing from the usual
methods of equal dealing. In a later Instance, Denmark, by the encouragement as
well as by the example of France, has proposed things to the Duke of Holstein,
which are called Equivalents, but that they are so, the World is not yet
sufficiently convinced, and probably the Parties concerned do not think them to
be so, and consequently do not appear to be at all disposed to accept them.
Princes enjoin and prescribe such things when they have Strength and Power to
supply the want of Arguments; and according to practice in these Cases, the
weaker are never thought to have an ill Bargain, if they have any thing left
them. So that the first Qualification of an Equivalent, must be, that the
Appraisers be indifferent, else it is only a Sound, there can be nothing real
in it: For, where the same party that proposes a Bargain, claims a Right to
set the Value; or which is worse, has power too to make it good; the other may
be forced to submit to the Conditions, but he can by no means ever be persuaded
to treat upon them.

IV. The next thing to be considered is, that to make an Equivalent in reality
an equal thing in the Proposer, it must be a better thing than that which is
required by him; just as good is subject to the hazard of not being quite so
good; It is not easy to have such an even hand as to make the Value exactly
equal; besides, according to the Maxim in Law, Melior coriditio pessidentis,
the Offer is not fair, except the thing offered is better in value than the
thing demanded. There must be allowance for removing what is fixed, and there
must be something that may be a justification for changing. The value of things
very often depends more upon other circumstances, than upon what is merely
intrinsic to them; therefore the calculation must be made upon that soot,
perhaps in most cases; and particularly the want which one of the parties may
have of the thing he requires, makes it more valuable to him than it is in it
self. If the party proposing does not want the thing he would have in Exchange,
his requiring it is impertinent: If he does, his want of it must go into the
apprasement, and by consequence every Proposer of an Equivalent must offer a
better thing, or else he must not take it unkindly to be refused, except the
other party has an equal want of the same thing, which is very improbable,
since naturally he that wants most, will speak first.

V. Another thing necessary to the making a fair Bargain is, that let the
parties who trear, be they never so unequal in themselves, yet as to the
particular thing proposed, there must be an exact-aquality, as far as it
relates to the full Liberty of taking or refusing, concurring or objecting,
without any consequence of Revenge, or so much as Dissatisfaction; for it is
impossible to treat where it is an Affront to differ; in that case there is no
mean between the two extremes, either an open Quarrel or an entire Submission;
the way of Bargaining must be equal, else the Bargain it self cannot be so: For
example, the Proposer is not only to use equal terms as to the matter, but fair
ones in the manner too. There must be no intimations of Anger in case of
refusal, much less any open Threatening. Such a Style is so ill suited to the
usual way of Treating, that it looks more like a Breach of the Peace, than
the making a Bargain. It would be yet more improper and less agreeing with the
nature of an Equivalent, if whilst two men are chassering about the Price, one
of them should actually take the thing in question at his own rate, and
afterward desire to have his possession confirmed by a formal Agreement; such
a proceeding would not only destroy that particular contract, but make it
impossible to have any other, with the party that could be guilty of such a
practice.

VI. Violence preceding destroys all Contract, and even tho the party that
offers it should have a right to the thing he so takes, yet it is to be
obtained by legal means, else it may be forfeited by his irregularity in the
pursuit of it: The Law is such an Enemy to Violence, and so little to be
reconciled to it, that in the case of a Rape, the Punishment is not taken off,
tho the party injured afterward consents. The Justice of the Law has its
eye upon the first act, and the Maxim of Volenti non fit injuria, does not in
this case help the Offender, it being a plea subsequent to the Crime, which
makes it to be rejected as a thing wrong dated and out of time.

In taking away Goods or Money it is the same thing. The party robbed, by
giving them afterward to the taker, does not exempt him from the Punishment of
the Violence: Quite contrary, the Man from whom they were taken is punishable,
if he does not prosecute. If the case should be, that a Man thus taking away a
thing without price, claims a right to take it, then whether it is well or
ill founded is not the Question; but sure, the party from whom it is so taken,
whilst he is treating to Sell or Exchange it, can never make a Bargain with so
arbitrary a Chapman, there being no room left after that to talk of the Value.

VII. To make an equal Bargain there must be a liberty of differing, not only
in every thing that is really essential, but in every thing that is thought so
by either party, and most especially by him who is in possession of the thing
demanded: His Opinion must be a Rule to him, and even his Mistake in the Value,
tho it may not convince the Man he has to deal with, yet he will be justified
for not accepting what is offered till that Mistake is fairly rectified and
overruled.

When a Security is desired to be changed, that side which desires it must not
pretend to impose upon the other, so as to dictate to them and tell them
without debate, that they are safe in what is proposed, since of that the
Counsel on the other side must certainly be the most competent Judges. The hand
it comes from is a great Circumstance, either to invite or discourage in all
matters of Contract; the Qualifications of the Party offering, must suit with
the Proposition it self, else let it be never so fair there is ground for
Suspicion.

VIII. When Men are of a tempet, that they think they have wrong done them, if
they have not always the better side of a Bargain: If they happen to be such as
by experience have been found to have an ill Memory for their Word. If the
Character they bear, does not recommend their Justice, where ever their
Interest is concerned. In these cases, thinking Men will avoid dealing, not
only to prevent surprise, but to cut off the occasions of difficulty or dispute.

It is yet more discouraging, when there are, either a precedhnt Practice, or
standing Maxims of gross Partiality, in assuming a privilege of exemption from
the usual methods of equal dealing.

To illustrate this by an Instance. Suppose that in any case, the Church of
Rome should have an Interest to promote a Bargain; let her way of dealing be a
little examined, which will direct those with whom she treats, how far they
are to rely upon what she proposes to them. We may begin with the Quality in
the World, the least consisting with equal dealing, viz. An incurable
Partiality to herself; which, that it may arrive to its full perfection, is
crowned with Infallibility. At the first setting out, she makes her self
incapable of dealing upon terms of Equality, by the Power she claims of
binding and loosing, which has been so often applied to Treatics, as well as
to Sins.

If the definition of Justice is to deal equally, she cannot be guilty of it
without betraying her Prerogative, and according to her Principles, she gives
up the Superiority derived to her by Apopostolical Succession, if she degradeth
her self so as to be judged by the Rules of common Right, especially if the
Bargain should be with Heretics, who in her Opinion have forfeited the claim
they might otherwise have had to it.

IX. Besides, her Taste has been so spoiled by unreasonable Bargains, that she
can never bring down her Palate to any thing that is fair or equal. She has
not only judged it an Equivalent, but a great Bargain for the other side, to
give them Absolutions and Indulgences for the real Payment of great Sums, for
which she has drawn Bills to have them repayed with Interest in Purgatory.

This Spiritual Bank has carried on such a Trade upon these advantageous
Tirms, that it can never submit to the small Prosits an ordinary Bargain would
produce.

The several Popes have in exchange for the Peter Pence, and all their other
Rents and Fines out of England, sent sanctified Roses, Relics, and other such
Wonder-working Trifles. And by virtue of their Character of Holy Fathers, have
used Princes like Children, by sending them such Rattles to play with, which
they made them buy at extravagant Rates; besides which, they were to be
thankful too, into the bargain.

A Chip of the Cross, a piece of St. Laurence's Gridiron, a Hair of St. Peter,
have been thought Equivalents for much more substantial things. The Popes being
Masters of the Jewel-House, have set the Rates upon them, and they have passed;
though the whole Shop would not take up the value of a Bodkin in Lombardstreet
upon the credit of them.

They are unconscionable Purchasers, for they get all the Money from the living
by praying for them when they are dead. And it is observable, that the Northern
part of Christendom, which best understands Trade, were the first that
refused to make any more Bargains with them; so that it looks as if the chief
quarrel, to the Hercticks was not as they were ill Christians, but as they were
unkind Merchants, in so discourteously rejecting the Commodities of the growth
of Rome.

To conclude this Head, There is no bartering with Infallibility, it being so
much above Equality, that it cannot bear the Indignity of a true Equivalent.

X. In all Bargains there is a necessity of looking back, and reflecting how
far a present proposal is reconcilable with a former practice; For Example, if
at any time a thing is offered, quite differing from the Arguments used by the
Proposer, and inconsistent with the Maxims held out by him at other times. Or
in a Public case, if the same men who promote and press a thing with the
utmost violence, do in a little time after with as much violence press the
contrary, and profess a detestation of the very thing, for which they had
before employed all their Interest and Authority. Or if in the case of a Law
already made, there should be a privilege claimed to exempt those from the
obligation of observing it, who yet should afterward desire and press to have
a new Law made in exchange for the old one, by which they would not be bound;
and that they should propose a security by a thing of the very same nature as
that which they did not allow to be any before. These Incoherences must
naturally have the effect of raising suspicion; or rather they are a certain
proof, that in such circumstances it is irrational for men to expect an
effectual Equivalent.

XI. If whatsoever is more than ordinary is suspicious, every thing that is
unnatural is more so: It is not only unnecessary but unnatural too to persuade
with violence what it is folly to refuse; to push men with eagerness into a
good Bargain for themselves, is a style very much unsuitable to the nature of
the thing. But it goes further and is yet more absurd, to grow angry with men
for not receiving a Proposal that is for their advantage; Men ought to be
content with the Generosity of offering good Bargains, and should give their
compassion to those who do not understand them: but by carrying their good
nature so far as to be Choleric in such a case, they would follow the example
of the Church of Rome, where the definition of Charity is very extraordinary.
In her Language, the Writ de Haeretico Comburtedo is a Love-Letter, and burning
men for differing with them in Opinion, howsoever miscalled Cruelty, is as they
understand it, the perfection of flaming Charity.

When Anger in these cases lasts long, it is most probable that it is for our
own sakes; Good nature for others is one of those Diseases that is cured by
time, and especially where it is offered and rejected; but for our selves it
never fails, and cannot be extinguished but with our life. It is fair if men
can believe that their friends love them next to themselves, to love them
better is too much; the Expression is so unnatural that it is cloying, and men
must have no sense, who in this case have no suspicion.

XII. Another Circumstance necessary to a fair Bargain is, That there must be
openness and freedom allowed, as the effect of that equality which is the
foundation of Contracting. There must be full liberty of objecting, and making
doubts and scruples: If they are such as can be answered, the party convinced
is so much the more conformed and encouraged to deal, instead of being hindered
by them; but if instead of an answer to satisfy, there is nothing but anger
for a reply, it is impossible not to conclude that there is never a good one to
give; so that the objection remaining without being fully ^, there is an
absolute bur put to any further Treaty.

There can be no dealing where one side assumeth a privilege to impose, so as
to make an offer and not bear the examination of it; this is giving judgment,
not making a bargain. Where is called unmannerly to object, or criminal to
refuse, the surest way is for men to stay when they are, rather than treat upon
such disadvantages.

If it should happen to be in any Country where the governing power should
allow me Liberty of Conscience in the choice of their Religion it would be
strange to deny them liberty of ^ in making a bargain. Such a contradiction
would be so discouraging, that they must be unreasonably sanguine, who in that
case can entertain the hopes of a fair Equivalent.

XIII. An equal Bargain must not be a Mystery nor a Secret, The purchaser or
proposer is to tell directly and plainly, what it is he intends to give in
Exchange for that which he requires. It must be viewed and considered by the
other party that he may judge of the value; for without knowing what it is, he
cannot determine whether he shall take or leave it. An assertion in general,
that it shall be as good or a better thing, not in this a sufficient excuse for
the mistake of dealing upon such uncertain terms. In all things that are dark
and not enough explained, suspicion naturally follows: A secret generally
implied a defect or a deceit; and if a false light is an objection, no light at
all is yet a greater. To pretend to give a better thing, and to refuse to show
it, very near saying, it is not so good, a one; at least so it will be taken in
common construction. A Mystery is yet a more discouraging thing to Protestant;
especially if the Proposition should come from a Papist; it being one of his
great Objections to that Church, that there are so many of them Invisible and
Impossible, which are violently thrust upon their understandings; that they are
overlaid with them. They think that rational creatures are to be convinced only
^ reason and that reason must be visible and ^, else they will think themselves
used with ^ instead of equality, and will never allow such a suspected secrecy
to be a fit Preface ^ ^ Equivalent.

XIV. In matters of Contract not only the present value, but the contingencies
and consequences, far as they can be fairly supposed, are to be considered. For
Example, if there should be a possibility, that one of the parties may be
ruined by accepting, and the other only disappointed by ^ refusing; the
consequences are so extremely unequal, that it is not imaginable, a man should
take that for an Equivalent, which has such a fatal possibility at the heels
of it.

If it should happen in a public; case, that such ^ proposal should come from
the minor part of an Assembly or Nation, to the greater; It is very must, that
the hazard of such a possibility should more or less likely fall upon the
lesser part, rather than upon the greater; for whose sake and advantage things
are and must be calculated in all publiok Constitutions. Suppose in any mixed
Government, the chief Magistrate should propose upon a condition, in the
Senate, Diet, or other Supreme Assembly, either to Enact or Abrogate one or
more Laws, by which a possibility might be let in of destroying their Religion
and Property, which in other language signifies no less than Soul and Body;
where could be the Equivalent in the case, not only for the real loss, but even
for the fear of losing them? Men can fall no lower than to lose all, and if
losing all destroys them, the venturing all must fright them.

In an instance when Men are secure, that how far soever they may be overrun
by Violence, yet they can never be undone by Law, except they give their
assistance to make it possible; though it should neither be likely nor
intended, still the Consequence which may happen is too big for any paesent
thing to make amends for it. Whilst the word Possible remains, it must forhid
the Bargain. Where ever it falls out therefore, that in an Example of a
public nature, the Changing, Enacting, or Repealing a Law, may natu^rally tend
to the misplacing the Legislative power in the hands of those who have a
separate interest from the body of a People, there can be no treating, till it
is demonstrably made out, that such a consequence shall be absolutely
impossible; for if that shall be denied by those who make the proposal, if it
is because they cannot do it, the motion at first was very unfair. If they can
and will not, it would be yet less reasonable to expect that such partial
dealers would ever give an Equivalent fit to be accepted.

XV. It is necessary in all dealing to be assured in the first place, that the
party proposing is in a condition to make good his Offer; that he is neither
under any former Obligations or pretended claims, which may render him
incapable of performing it; else he is so far in the condition of a Minor, that
whatever he disposes by sale or exchange may be afterward resumed, and an
Contract becomes void, being originally defective, for want of a suffistent
legal power in him that made it.

In the case of a strict Settlement, where the party is only Tenant for life,
there is no possibility of treating with one under such fetters; no purchase or
exchange of Lands, or any thing else can be good, where there is such an
incapacity of making out a Title; the interest vested in him being so limited,
that he can do little more than pronounce the words of a Contract, he can by no
means perform the effect of it.

In more public instances, the impossibility is yet more express; as suppose
in any Kingdom, where the people have so much liberty left them, as that they
may make Contracts with the Crown, there should be some peculiar rights claimed
to be so fixed to the Royal Function, that no King for the time being could
have power to part with them, being so fundamentally tied to the Office, that
they can never be separated. Such Rights can upon no occasion be received in
exchange for any thing the Crown may desire from the People: That can never be
taken in payment, which cannot lawfully be given, so that if they should part
with that which is required upon those terms; it must be a gift, it cannot be a
bargain.

There is not in the whole Dictionary a more untractable word than inherent,
and less to be reconciled to the word Equivalent.

The party that will Contract in spite of such a Claim, is content to take
what is impossible to grant, and if he complains of his Disappointment, he
neither can have Remedy, nor deserves it.

If a Right so claimed happens to be of so comprehensive a nature, as that by a
clear inference it may extend to every thing else, as well as to the particular
matter in question, as often as the Supreme Magistrate shall be so disposed,
there can in that case be no treating with a Prerogative that swalloweth all
the Right the People can pretend to; and if they have no right to any thing of
which they are possessed, it is a Jest and not a Bargain, to observe any
Formality in parting with it.

A Claim may be so stated, that by the power and advantage of interpreting, it
shall have such a murdering eye, that if it looks upon a Law, like a
Basilisk, it shall strike it dead: Where is the possibility of Treating, where
such a Right is assumed? Nay, let it be supposed, that such a Claim is not well
founded in Law, and that upon a free disquisition it could not be made out; yet
even in this case, none that are well advised will conclude a Bargain, till it
is fully stated and cleared, or indeed, so much as engage in a treaty, till by
way of preliminary all possibility shall be removed of any trouble or dispute.

XVI. There is a collateral circumstance in making a Contract, which yet
deserves to be considered, as much as any thing that belongs to it; and that
is the character and figure of the parties contracting; if they treat only by
themselves, and if by others, the Qualifications of the Instruments they employ.

The Proposer especially, must not be so low as to want credit, nor so raised
as to carry him above the reach of ordinary dealing. In the first, There is
scandal, in the other danger. There is no Rule without some Exception, but
generally speaking, the means should be suited to the end; and since all Men
who treat, pretend an equal bargain, it is desirable that there may be equality
in the persons, as well as in the thing.

The manner of doing, things has such an influence upon the matter, that Men
may guess at the end by the insteuments that are used to obtain it, who are a
very good direction how far to rely upon or suspect the sincerity of that which
is proposed. An Absurdity in the way of carrying on a Treaty in any one
Circumstance, if it is very gross, is enough to persuade a thinking Man to
break off, and take warning from such, an ill appearance. Some things are so
glaring that it is impossible not to see, and consequently not to suspect them;
as suppose in a private case there should be a Treaty of Marriage between two
Honorable Families, and the proposing side should think sit to send a Woman
that had been Carted to persuade the young, Lady to an approbation and consent;
the unsitness of the Messenger must naturally dispose the other party to
distrust the Message, and to resist the temptation of the best Match that could
be offered, when conveyed by that hand, and ushered in by such a discouraging
preliminary.

In a public instance the suspicion arising from unfit Mediators, still
grows more reasonable in proportion, as the consequence is much greater of
being deceived. If a Jew should be employed to solicit all sorts of Christians
to unite and agree; the contrariety of his profession, would not allow men to
stay till they heard his Arguments, they would conclude from his Religion, that
other the Man himself was mad, or that he ^ those to be so, whom he had the
Impudence endeavor to persuade.

Or suppose an Adamite should be very sollicitous and active, in all places,
and with all sort of Persons, to settle the Church of England in particular,
and a fair Liberty of Conscience for ^ Dissenters; though nothing in the World
^ more to be said for it than Naked Truth, yet such a Man should run up and
down without Clothes, let his Arguments be never so good, of his Commission
never so Authentic, his Figure would be such a contradiction to his business,
that how serious soever that might be in it self, but interposition would make
a Jest of it.

Though it should not go so far as this, yet ^ Men have contrarieties in their
way of living ^ to be reconciled; as if they should pretend infinite ^ for
liberty, and at that time be in great savor, and employed by those who will
not endure it.

If they are affectedly singular, and conform to the generality of the World in
no one thing, but in playing the knave.

If demonstration is a familiar word with them most especially where the thing
is impossible.

If they quote Authority to supply their want of sense, and justify the value
of their Arguments, not by reason, but by their being paid for them, (in which,
by the way, those who pay them have probably a very melancholy Equivalent.) If
they brandish a Prince's Word like a Sword in a Crowd, to make way for their
own impertinence ^ and in dispute, as Criminals formerly sled to the Statue of
the Prince for Sanctuary; if they should now, when baffled, creep under the
protection of a Kings Name, where out of respect they are no farther to be
pursued.

In these cases, Though the propositions should be really good, they will be
corrupted by passing through such Conduits, and it would be a sufficient
Mistake to enter into a Treaty; but it would be little less than Madness from
such hands to expect an Equivalent.

XVII. Having touched upon these particulars as necessary in order to the
stating the nature of an equal Bargain, and the Circumstances belonging to it,
let it now be examined in two or three instances, what things are not to be
admitted by way of Contract, to pass under the Name of an Equivalent.

First, Though it will be allowed, that in the general corruption of mankind,
which will not ^ Justice alone to be a sufficient tie to make ^ a Contract,
that a Punishment added for ^ breach of it, is a fitting or rather a necessary
circumstance; yet it does not follow, that in ^ cases, a great Penalty upon the
party offending ^ absolute and an entire Security. It must be considered in
every particular case, how far the circumstances may rationally lead a Man to
rely more or less upon it.

In a private instance, the Penalty inflicted upon the breach of Contract must
be, First, such a ^ as the party injured can enforce, and Secondly, such a one
as he will enforce, when it is in his answer.

If the Offending Party is in a capacity of hindering the other from bringing
the Vengeance of the Law upon him. If he has strength or ^ sufficient to
overruled the Letter of the Contract; in that case a Penalty is but a Word,
there ^ no consequence belonging to it. Secondly, ^ forfeiture or punishment
must be such as the ^ aggrieved will take; for Example, if upon ^ Bargain, one
of the Parties shall stipulate to object himself, in case of his failure to
have his ^ cut, or his Nose stir by the other, with security given, that he
shall not be prosecuted for executing this part of the Agreement, the Penalty
is heavy enough to discourage a Man from breaking his Contract: but on the
other side it is of such a kind, that the other how much soever ^ may be
provoked, will not in cold blood ^ to inflict it. Such an extravagant Clause
would seem to be made only for show and sound, and no man would think himself
safer by a thing which one way or other is sure to prove ineffectual.

In a public Case, Suppose a Government so constituted that a Law may be made
in the nature of a Bargain, it is in it self no more than a dead ^, the life is
given to it by the execution of what it contains; so that let it in it self
be never so perfect, it depends upon those who are entrusted with seeing it
observed.

If it is in any Country where the chief Magistrate chooses the Judges, and
the Judges interpret the Laws; a Penalty in any one particular Law can have no
effect but what is precarious. It may have a loud voice to threaten, but it has
not an hand to give a blow; for as long as the Governing Power is in possession
of this Prerogative, but who will choose the Meat, if they choose the Cooks, it
is they that will give the taste to it. So that it is clear that the rigor of
a Penalty will not in all cases fix a Bargain, neither is it Universally a true
Position, that the increase of punishment for the breach of a new Law, is an
Equivalent for the consent to part with an old one.

XVIII. In most Bargains there is a reference to the time to come, which is
therefore to be considered as well as that which comes within the compass of
the present valuation.

Where the Party Contracting has not a full power to dispose what belongs on
him or them in Reversion, who shall succeed after bim in his Right; he cannot
make any part of what is so limited to be the condition of the Contract.
Further, he cannot enjoin the Heir or Successor to forbear the exercise of any
Right, that is inherent to him, as he is a Man: neither can he restrain him
without his own consent, from doing any act which in it self is lawful, and
liable to no objection. For Example, A Father cannot stipulate with any other
Man, that in Cousideration of such a thing done, or to be done, his Son shall
never Marry; because Marriage is an Institution Established by the Laws of God
and Man, and therefore no body can be so restrained by any power from doing
such an act, when he thinks fit, being warranted by an Authority that is not
to be controuled.

XIX. Now as there are Rights inherent in Men's persons in their single
capacities, there are Rights as much fixed to the Body Politic, which is a
Creature that never dies. For instance, There can be no Government without a
Supreme Power, that Power is not always in the same hands, it is in different
shapes and dresses, but still wherever it is lodged, it must be unlimited: It
has a jurisdiction over every thing else, but it cannot have it above it self.
Supreme Power can no more be limited than Infinity can be measured; because it
cease to be the thing, its very being is dissolved, when any bounds can be
put to it.

Where this Supreme Power is mixed, or divided, the shape only differs, the
Argument is still the same.

The present State of Venice cannot restrain those who succeed them in the same
prower, from having an entire and unlimited Sovereignty; they may indeed make
present Laws which shall retrench their present Power, if they are so disposed,
and those Laws if not repealed by the same Authority that enacted them, are to
be observed by the succeeding Senate till they think fit eto abrogate them, and
no longer; for if the Supreme Power shall still reside in the Senate, perhaps
composed of other Men, or of other minds (which will be sufficient) the
necessary consequence is, that one Senate must have as much right to alter such
a Law, as another could have to make it.

XX. Suppose the Supreme Power in any State should make a Law, to enjoin all
subsequent Lawmakers to take an Oath never to alter it, it would produce these
following Absurdities.

First, All Supreme Power being instituted to promote the safety and benefit,
and to prevent the prejudice and danger which may fall upon those who live
under the protection of it; the consequence of such an Oath would be, that all
Men who are so trusted, shall take God to witness, that such a Law once made,
being judged at the time to be advantageous for the public, though afterward
by the vicissitude of times, or the variety of accidents or interests, it
should plainly appear to them to be destructive, they will suffer it to have
its course, and will never repeal it.

Secondly, If there could in any Nation he found a set of Men, who having a
part in the Supreme legislative Power, should as much as in them lies, betray
their Country by such a criminal engagement, so directly opposite to the nature
of their Power, and to the Trust reposed in them. If these Men have their power
only for life, when they are dead such an Oath can operate no farther; and
though that would be too long a Lease for the life of such a Monster as an Oath
so composed, yet it must then certainly give up the ghost. It could bind none
but the first makers of it, another generation would never be tied up by it.

Thirdly, In those Countries where the Supreme Assemblies are not constant
standing Courts, but called together upon occasions, and composed of such as
the People choose for that time only, with a Trust and Character that remains
no longer with them than that Assembly is regularly dissolved; such an Oath
taken by the Members of a Senate, Diet, or other Assembly so chosen, can have
very little effect, because at the next meeting there may be quite another set
of Men who will be under no Obligation of that kind. The eternity intended to
that Law by those that made it, will be cut off by new Men who shall succeed
them in their power, if they have a differing Taste, or another Interest.

XXI. To put it yet farther, Suppose a Clause in such a Law, that it shall be
criminal in the last degree for any Man chosen in a subsequent Assembly, to
propose the repealing it; and since nothing can be Enacted which is not first
proposed, by this means it seems as if a Law might be created which should
never die. But let this be Examined.

First, such a clause would be so destructive to the being of such a
Constitution, as that it would be as reasonable to say, that a King had right
to give or sell his Kingdom to a foreign Prince, as that any number of Men who
are entrusted with the Supreme Power, or any part of it, should have a right to
impose such shackles upon the Liberty of those who are to succeed them in the
same Trust. The ground of that Trust is, that every Man who is chosen into such
an Assembly, is to do all that in him lies for the good of those who chose
him. The English of such a Clause would be, that he is not to do his best for
those that chose him, because though he should be convinced that it might be
very fatal to continue that Law, and therefore very necessary to repeal it, yet
he must not repeal it, because it is made a Crime, and attended with a Penalty.

But secondly, to show the emptiness as well as injustice of such a Clause, it
is clear, that although such an Invasion of Right should be imposed, it will
never be obeyed: There will only be Deformity in the Monster, it will neither
sting nor bite. Such Lawgivers would only have the honor of attempting a
contradiction which can never have any success; for as such a Law in it self
would be a madness, so the Penalty would be a Jest; which may be thus made out.

XXII. A Law that carries in it self Reason enough to support it, is so far
from wanting the protection of such a Clause, or from needing to take such an
extraordinary receipt for long Life, that the admitting it must certainly be
the likeliest and the shortest way to destroy it; such a Clause in a Law must
imply an opinion that the greatest part of mankind is against it, since it is
impossible such an exorbitance should be done for its own sake; the end of it
must be to force Men by a Penalty, to that which they could not be persuaded
to, whilst their Reason is left at liberty. This Position being granted, which
I think can hardly be denied, put the case that a Law should be made with this
imaginary Clause of Immortality, after which another Assembly is chosen, and if
the majority of the Electors shall be against this Law, the greater part of the
Elected must be so too, if the choice is fair and regular; which must be
presumed, since the supposition of the contrary is not to come within this
Argument. When these Men shall meet, the Majority will be visible beforehand
of those who are against such a Law, so that there will be no hazard to any
single Man in proposing the Repeal of it, when he cannot be punished but by the
Majority, and he has such a kind of assurance as comes near a Demonstration,
that the greater Number will be of his mind, and consequently, that for their
own sakes they will secure him from any danger.

For these Reasons, wherever in order to the making a Bargain, a Proposition
is advanced to make a new Law, which is to tie up those who neither can nor
will be bound by it, it may be a good Jest, but it will never be a good
Equivalent.

XXIII. In the last place, let it be examined how far a Promise ought to be
taken for a Security in a Bargain.

There is a great variety of Methods for the Security of those that deal,
according to their Dispositions and Interests; some are binding, others
inducing circumstances, and are to be so distinguished.

First, Ready Payment is without exception, so of that there can be no dispute;
in default of that, the good Opinion Men may have of one another, is a great
ingredient to supply the want of immediate Performances. Where the Trust is
grounded upon Inclination only, the Generosity is not always returned; but
where it springs from a long Experience it is a better foundation, and yet
that is not always secure. In ordinary dealing, one Promise may be an
Equivalent to another, but it is not so for a thing actually granted or
conveyed; especially if the thing required in exchange for it, is of great
value, either in it self or in its consequences. A bare Promise as a single
Security in such a case is not an equal proposal; if it is offered by way of
addition, it generally gives cause to doubt the Title is crazy, where so
slender a thing is brought in to be a suppliment.

XXIV. The Eearnest of making good a Promise, must be such a behavior
preceding as may encourage the party to whom it is made to depend upon it:
Where instead of that, there has been want of Kindness, and which is worse, an
Invasion of Right, a Promise has no persuading force; and till the Objection
to such a Proceeding is forgotten (which can only be the work of time) and the
skin is a little grown over the tender part, the wound must not be touched.
There must be some Intermission at least to abare the smart of unkind usage, or
else a Promise in the eye of the party injured is so far from strenthening a
Security, that it raises more doubts, and gives more justifiable cause to
suspect it.

A Word is not like a Bone, that being broken and well set again, is said to be
sometimes stronger in that very part: It is far from being so in a Word given
and not made good. Every single Act either weakeneth or improveth our Credit
with other men; and as an habit of being just to our Word will confirm, so an
habit of too freely dispensing with it must necessarily destroy it. A Promise
has its effect to persuade a man to lay some weight upon it, where the
Promiser has not only the power, but may reasonably be supposed to have the
will of performing it; and further, that there be no visible Interest of the
party promising to excuse himself from it, or to evade it.

All Obligations are comparative, and where they seem to be opposite, or between
the greater and the lesser, which of them ought to have precedence in all
respects every man is apt to be his own Judge.

XXV. If it should fall out that the Promiser with full intent at the time to
perform, might by the interposition of new Arguments, or differing Advice think
himself obliged to turn the matter of Conscience on the other side, and should
look upon it to be much a greater fault to keep his word than to break it; such
a Belief will untye the strictest Promise that can be made, and though the
Party thus absolving himself should do it without the mixture or temptation of
private Interest, being moved to it merely by his Conscience, as then informed;
yet how far soever that might diminish the Fault in him, it would in no degree
lessen the inconveniences to the party who is disappointed, by the breach of an
engagement upon which he relied.

XXVI. A Promise is to be understood in the plain and natural sense of the
words, and to be sure not in his who made it, if it was given as part of a
Bargain. That would be like giving a Man power to raise the value of his Money
in the payment of his Debt, by which, though he paid but half or less, he might
pretend according to the letter to have made good the contract. The

The power of interpreting a Promise entirely takes away the virtue of it. A
Merchant who should once assume that privilege, would save himself the trouble
of making any more Bargains.

It is still worse if this Jurisdiction over a Man's Promise, should be lodged
in hands that have Power to support such an extraordinary Claim; and if in
other Cases, forbearing to deal upon those terms is advisable, in this it
becomes absolutely necessary.

XXVII. There must in all respects be a full liberty to claim a Promise, to
make it reasonable to take it in any part of payment; else it would be like
agreeing for a Rent, and at the same time making it Criminal to demand it.

A superiority of Dignity or Power in the Party promising, makes it a more
tender thing for the other party to treat upon that security. The first makes
it a nice thing to claim, the latter makes it a difficult thing to obtain.

In some cases, a Promise is in the nature of a Covenant, and then between
equal parties the breach of it will bear a Suit; but where the greatness of the
Promiser is very much raised above the Level of equality, there is no
Forseiture to be taken. It is so far from the party grieved his being able to
sue or recover Damages, that he will not be allowed to explain or expostulate,
and instead of his being relieved against the breach of Promise, he will run
the hazard of being punished for breach of Good Manners. Such a difficulty is
putting all or part of the Payment in the Fire, where Men must burn their
Fingers before they can come at it.

That cannot properly be called good payment, which the party to whom it is
due, may not receive with ease and safety. It was a King's Brother of England
who refused to lend the Pope money, for this reason, That he would never take
the Bond of one, upon whom he could not distrain.

The Argument is still stronger against the Validity of a Promise, when the
Contract is made between a Prince and a Subject. The very offering a King's
Word in Mortgage, is rather a threatening in case of Refusal, than an inducing
Argument to accept it; it is unfair at first, and by that gives greater cause
to be cautious, especially if a thing of that value and dignity as a King's
Word ought to be, should be put into the hands of State-brokers to strike up a
Bargain with it.

XXVIII. When God Almighty makes Covenants with Mankind, His Promise is a
sufficient Security, notwithstanding his Superiority and his Power; because
first, he can neither err nor do injustice. It is the only Exception to his
Omnipotence, that by the Perfection of his being he is incapacitated to do
wrong. Secondly, at the instant of His Promise, by the extent of his Foresight,
which cannot fail, there is no room left for the possibility of any thing to
intervene, which might change his mind. Lastly, he is above the receiving
either Benefit or Inconvenience, and therefore can have no Interest or
Temptation to vary from his Word, when once he has granted it.

Now though Princes are God's Vicegerents, yet their Commission not being so
large, as that these Qualifications are devolved to them, it is quite another
case, and since the offering a Security implies it to be examined by the party
to whom it is proposed, it must not be taken ill that Objections are made to
it, even though the Prince himself should be the immediate Proposer.

Let a familiar Case be put; Suppose a Prince, tempted by a Passion too strong
for him to resist, should descend, so as to promise Marriage to one of his
Subjects, and as Men are naturally in great haste upon such occasions, should
press to take possession before the necessary Forms could be complied with;
would the poor Ladies Scruples be called Criminal for not taking the Security
of the Royal Word? Or would her Allegiance be tainted by her resisting the
sacred Person of her Sovereign, because he was impatient of delay? Courtesy in
this case might persuade her to accept it, if she was so disposed, but sure the
just exercise of Power can never claim it.

XXIX. There is one Case where it is more particularly a Duty to use very great
occasion in accepting the security of a Promise; and that is, when Men are
authorized and trusted by others to act for them. This puts them under much
greater restraints, than those who are at liberty to treat for themselves. It
is lawful, though it is not prudent for any man to make an ill Bargain for
himself, but it is neither the one nor the other where the party contracting
treats on behalf of another, by whom he is intrrsted. Men who will unwarily
accept an ill security, if it is for themselves, forfeit their own discretion,
and undergo the Penalty, but they are not responsible to any body else. They
lie under the Mortification and the loss of committing the error, by which
though they may expose their Judgment to some censure, yet their Morality
suffers ^ reproach by it.

But those who are deputed by others to treat for them, upon terms of best
advantage, though the Confidence placed in them should prevent the putting any
limits to their Power in their Commission, yet the Condition implied if not
expressed, is, that the Persons so trusted shall neither make an ill Bargain,
nor accept a slight Security.

The Obligation is yet more binding when the Trust is of a Public Nature. The
aggravation of disappointing a Body of Men that rely upon them, carries the
Fault as high as it can go, and perhaps no Crime of any kind can outdo such a
deliberate breach of Trust, or would more justly make Men forfeit the
protection of humane Society.

XXX. I will add one thing more upon this Head, which is, that it is not always
a true Proposition, that it is safe to rely upon a Promise, if at the time of
making it, it is the Interest of the Promiser to make it good. This, though
many times it is a good Inducement, yet it has these Exceptions to it. First,
if the Proposer has at other times gone plainly against his Visible Interest,
the Argument will turn the other way, and his former Mistakes are so many
Warnings to others, not to come within the danger any more: let the Inducements
to those Mistakes be never so great and generous, that does not alter the
Nature, they are Mistakes still.

Interest is an uncertain thing, It goes and comes, and varieth according to
times and circumstances; as good build upon a Quicksand, as upon a presumption
that Interest shall not alter. Where are the Men so distinguished from the rest
of Mankind, that it is impossible for them to mistake their Interest? Who are
they that have such an exemption from human Frailty, as that it can never
happen to them not to see their Interest for want of Understanding, or not to
leap over it by excess of Zeal.

Above all, Princes are most liable to Mistake; not out of any defect in their
Nature, which might put them under such an unfortunate distinction; quite
contrary, the blood they derive from wise and great Ancestors, does rather
distinguish them on the better side; besides that their great Character and
Office of Governing gives a noble Exercise to their Reason, which can very
hardly fail to raise and improve it. But there is one Circumstance annexed to
their Glorious Calling, which, in this respect is sufficient to outweigh all
those advantages; it is that Mankind, divided in most things else, agree in
this, to conspire in their endeavors to deceive and mislead them; which makes
it above the power of human understanding, to be so exactly guarded as never to
admit a surprise, and the highest applause that could ever yet be given to the
greatest Men that ever wore a Crown, is that they were no oftener deceived.

Thus I have ventured to lay down my thoughts of the Nature of a Bargain, and
the due Circumstances belonging to an Equivalent, and will now conclude with
this short word. Where Distrusting may be the cause of provoking Anger, and
Trusting may be the cause of bringing Ruin, the Choice is too easy to need the
being explained.

A LETTER from a Clergyman in the City, To his Friend in the Country.
Containing his REASONS for not Reading the DECLARATION.
SIR,
I Do not wonder at your concern for finding an Order of Council published in
the Gazette for Reading the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in all
Churches and Chapels in this Kingdom. You desire to know my Thoughts about it,
and I shall freely tell them; for this is not a time to be reserved.

Our Enemies who have given our Gracious King this Counsel against us, have
taken the most effectual way not only to ruin us, but to make us appear the
Instruments of our own Ruin, that what course soever we take, we shall be
undone; and one side or other will conclude that we have undone our selves, and
fall like Fools.

To lose our Livings and Preferments, nay our Liberties and Lives in a plain
and direct opposition to Popery, as suppose for refusing to read Mass in our
Churches, or to swear to the Trent-Creed, is an honorable way of falling, and
has the divine Comforts of suffering for Christ and his Religion; and I hope
there is none of us but can cheerfully submit to the Will of God in it. But
this is not our present Case; to read the Declaration, is not to read the Mass,
nor to prosess the Romish Faith; and therefore some will judge that there is no
hurt in reading it, and that to suffer for such a Refusal, is not to fall like
Confessors, but to suffer as Criminals for disobeying the Lawful Commands of
our Prince: but yet we judge, and we have the concurring Opinions of all the
Nobility and Gentry with us, who have already suffered in this Cause, that to
take away the Test and Penal Laws at this time, is but one step from the
introducing of Popery; and therefore to read such a Declaration in our
Churches, though it do not immediately bring Popery in, yet it sets open our
Church doors for it, and then it will take its own time to enter: So that
should we comply with this Order, all good Protestants would despise and hate
us, and then we may be easily crushed, and shall soon fall with great
dishonor, and without any Pity. This is the difficulty of our Case; we shall
be censured on both sides, but with this difference: We shall fall a little
sooner by not reading the Declaration, if our Gracious Prince resent this as an
act of an Obstinate and peevish or sactious Disobedience, as our Enemies will
be sure to represent it to him; We shall as certainly fall, and not long after,
if we do read it, and then we shall fall unpitied and despised, and it may be
with the Curses of the Nation, whom we have ruined by our Compliance; and this
is the way never to rise more: And may I suffer all that can be suffered in
this World, rather than contribute to the final Ruin of the best Church in the
World.

Let us then examine this matter impartially, as those who have no mind either
to ruin themselves, or to ruin the Church: I suppose no Minister of the
Church of England can give his consent to the Declaration. Let us then consider
whether reading the Declaration in our Churches be not an interpretative
Consent, and will not with great reason be interpreted to be so: For,

First, By our Law all Ministerial Officers are accountable for their Actions:
The Authority of Superiors, though of the King himself, cannot justify
inferior Officers, much less the Ministers of State, if they should execute
any illegal Commands; which shows, that our Law does not look upon the
Ministers of Church or State to be mere Machines and Tools to be managed wholly
by the Will of Superiors, without exercising any Act of judgment or Reason
themselves; for then inferior Ministers were no more punishable, than the
Horses are which draw an innocent Man to Tyburn: and if inferior Ministers are
punishable, then our Laws suppose that what we do in obedience to Superiors,
we make our own Act by doing it, and I suppose that signifies our Consent, in
the eye of the Law, to what we do. It is a Maxim in our Law, That the King can
do no wrong; and therefore if any wrong be done, the Crime and Guilt is the
Minister's who does it: for the Laws are the King's public Will, and therefore
he is never supposed to command any thing contrary to Law; nor is any Minister,
who does an illegal Action, allowed to pretend the King's Command and Authority
for it: and yet this is the only Reason I know, why we must not obey a Prince
against the Laws of the Land, or the Laws of God, because what we do, let the
Authority be what it will that commands it, becomes our own Act, and we are
responsible for it; and then as I observed be fore, it must imply our own
consent.

Secondly, The Ministers of Religion have a greater tie and obligation than
this, because they have the care and conduct of Men's Souls, and therefore are
bound to take care that what they publish in their Churches, be neither
contrary to the Laws of the Land, nor to the good of the Church: For the
Ministers of Religion are not looked upon as common Cryers, but what they Read,
they are supposed to recommend too, though they do no more than Read it; and
therefore to read any thing in the Church, which I do not consent to and
approve, nay which I think prejudicial to Religion, and the Church of God, as
well as contrary to the Laws of the Land, is to Mis-guide my People and to
Dissemble with God and Men; because it is presumed, that I neither do, nor
ought to read any thing in the Church, which I do not in some degree approve.
Indeed, let men's private opinions be what they will, in the nature of the
thing, he that Reads such a Declaration to his People, teaches them by it: For
is not Reading Teaching? Suppose then I do not consent to what I read, yet I
consent to teach my People what I read: and herein is the Evil of it; for it
may be it were no fault to consent to the Declaration, but if I consent to
teach my People what I do not consent to my self, I am sure that is a great
one: And he who can distinguish between consenting to read the Declaration, and
consenting to teach the People by the Declaration, when reading the Declaration
is teaching it, has a very subtle distinguishing-Conscience. Now if consenting
to read the Declaration be a consent to teach it my People, then the natural
Interpretation of Reading the Declaration is, That he who Reads it, in such a
solemn teaching-manner, Approves it. If this be not so, I desire to know, why I
may not read an Hornily for Transubstantiation, or Invocation of Saints, or the
Worship of Images, if the King sends me such good Catholic Homilies, and
commands me to read them? And thus we may instruct our People in all the points
of Popery, and recommend it to them with all the Sophistry and artificial
Insinuations, in obedience to the King, with a very good Conscience, because
without our consent: If it he said, this would be a contradiction to the
Doctrine of our Church by Law Established; so I take the Declaration to be: And
if we may read the Declaration contrary to Law, because it does not imply our
consent to it; so we may Popish Homilies, for the bare reading them will not
imply our consent, no more than the reading the Declaration does: But whether I
consent to the Doctrine or no, it is certain I consent to teach my People this
Doctrine; and it is to be considered, whether an honest man can do this.

Thirdly, I suppose no man will doubt, but the King intends, that our Reading
the Declaration should signify to the Nation, our Consent and Approbation of
it; for the Declaration does not want Publishing, for it is sufficiently known
already: but our Reading it in our Churches must serve instead of Addresses of
Thanks, which the Clergy generally refused, though it was only to Thank the
King for His Gracious Promises renewed to the Church of England, in His
Declaration, which was much more Innocent, than to publish the Declaration it
self in our Churches: This would persuade one, that the King thinks our reading
the Declaration, to signify our Consent, and that the People will think it to
be so. And he that can satisfy his Conscience, to do an action without
consent, which the Nature of the Thing, the Design, and intention of the
Command, and the Sense of the People expound to be a Consent, may, I think, as
well satisfy himself with Equivocations and mental Reservations.

There are two things to be answered to this, which must be considered.

I. That the People understand our Minds, and see that this is matter of Force
upon us, and mere Obedience to the King. To which I answer,

1. Possibly the People do understand that the matter of the Declaration is
against our Principles: But is this any excuse, that we read that, and by
reading recommend that to them, which is against our own Consciences and
Judgments? Reading the Declaration would be no Fault at all, but our Duty, when
the King commands it, did we approve of the matter of it; but to consent to
teach our People such Doctrines as we think contrary to the Laws of God, or the
Laws of the Land, does not lessen but aggravate the Fault, and People must be
very good natured to think this an Excuse.

2. It is not likely that all the people will be of a mind in this matter, some
may excuse it, others, and those it may be the most, the best, and the wisest
Men, will condemn us for it, and then how shall we justify our selves against
their Censures? when the World will be divided in their Opinions, the plain way
is certainly the best, to do what we can justify our selves, and then let men
judge as they please. No men in England will be pleased with our Reading the
Declaration, but those who hope to make great advantage of it against us, and
against our Church and Religion: others will severely condemn us for it, and
censure us as false to our Religion, and as Betrayers both of Church and State:
and besides that, it does not become a Minister of Religion, to do any thing,
which in the opinion of the most charitable men can only be excused; for what
needs an excuse, is either a fault or looks very like one; besides this, I say,
I will not trust men's Charity; those who have suffered themselves in this
Cause, will not excuse us for sear of suffering; those who are inclined to
excuse us now, will not do so when they consider the thing better, and come to
feel the ill consequences of it: when our Enemies open their eyes, and tell
them what our Reading the Declaration signified, which they will then tell us
we cught to have seen before, though they were not bound to see it; for we are
to guide and instruct them, not they us.

II. Others therefore think, that when we read the Declaration, we should
publicly profess, that it is not our own Judgment, but that we only Read it in
obedience to the King, and then our Reading it cannot imply our Consent to it:
Now this is only Protestatio contra factum, which all people will laugh at, and
scorn us for: for such a solemn Reading it in the time of Divine Service, when
all men ought to be most Grave and Serious, and far from dissembling with God
or Men, does in the nature of the thing imply our Approbation; and should we
declare the contrary, when we read it, what shall we say to those who ask us,
why then do you read it? But let those who have a mind try this way, which, for
my part, I take to be a greater and more unjustifiable provocation of the King,
than not to read it; and, I suppose those who do not read it, will be thought
plainer and honester men, and will escape as well as those who read it and
protest against it: and yet nothing less than an express Protestation against
it will salve this matter; for only to say, they read it merely in obedience to
the King, does not express their dissent: it signifies indeed, that they would
not have read it, if the King had not commanded it; but these words do not
signify, that they disapprove of the Declaration, when their reading it,
though only in Obedience to the King, signifies their approbation of it as much
as actions can signify a consent: let us call to mind how it fared with those
in King Charles the First's Reign, who read the Book of Sports, as it was
called, and then preached against it.

To return then to our Argument; if reading the Declaration in our Churches be
in the nature of the Action, in the intention of the Command, in the opinion of
the People, an interpretative consent to it, I think my self bound in
conscience not to read it, because I am bound in conscience not to approve it:

It is against the Constitution of the Church of England, which is Established
by Law, and to which I have subscribed, and thefore am bound in Conscience to
Teach nothing contrary to it, while this Obligation lasts.

It is to Teach an unlimited and universal Toleration, which the Parliament in
72. Declared illegal, and which has been condemned by the Christian Church in
all Ages:

It is to teach my People, that they need never come to Church more, but have
my free leave, as they have the King's, to go to a Conventicle, or to Mass:

It is to teach the dispensing Power, which alters, what has been formerly
thought, the whole Constitution of this Church and Kingdom: which we dare not
do, till we have the Authority of Parliament for it.

It is to recommend to our People, the choice of such persons to sit in
Parliament, as shall take away the Test and Penal-Laws, which most of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Nation have declared their judgment against:

It is to condemn all those great and worthy Patriots of their Country, who
forfeited the dearest thing in the World to them, next a good Conscience, viz.
The Favor of their Prince, and a great many honorable and profitable
Employments with it, rather than consent to that Proposal of taking away the
Test and Penal Laws, which they apprehend destructive to the Church of England
and the Protestant Religion; and he who can in Conscience do all this, I think
need scruple nothing.

For let us consider further, what the effects and consequences of our reading
the Declaration are likely to be, and I think they are matter of Conscience
too, when they are evident and apparent.

This will certainly render our Persons and Ministry infinitely contemptible,
which is against that Apostolic Canon, Let no man despise thee, Titus 2. 15.
That is, so to behave himself in his Ministerial Office, as not to fall under
contempt; and therefore this obliges the Conscience, not to make our selves
ridiculous, nor to render our Ministry, our Counsels, Exhortations, Preaching,
Writing, of no effect, which is a thousand times worse than being silenced: Our
Sufferings will Preach more effectually to the People, when we cannot speak to
them: but he who for Fear or Cowardice, or the Love of this World, betrays his
Church and Religion by undue compliances, and will certainly be thought to do
so, may continue to Preach, but to no purpose; and when we have rendered our
selves ridiculous and contemptible, we shall then quickly fall, and fall
unpitied.

There is nothing will so effectually tend to the final ruin of the Church of
England, because our Reading the Declaration will discourage, or provoke, or
misguide, all the Friends the Church of England has: can we blame any man for
not preserving the Laws and the Religion of our Church and Nation, when we our
selves will venture nothing for it? can we blame any man for consenting to
Repeal the Test and Penal Laws, when we recommend it to them by Reading the
Declaration? Have we not Reason to expect, that the Nobility and Gentry, who
have already suffered in this Cause, when they hear themselves condemned for it
in all the Churches of England, will think it time to mend such a fault, and
reconcile themselves to their Prince? and if our Church fall this way, is there
any any reason to expect that it should ever rise again? These Consequences are
almost as evident as Demonstrations, and let it be what it will in it self;
which I foreseee will destroy the Church of England and the Protestant Religion
and Interest, I think I ought to make as much conscience of doing it, as of
doing the most immoral Action in Nature.

To say, that these mischievous consequences are not absolutely necessary, and
therefore do not affect the Conscience, because we are not certain they will
follow, is a very mean Objection; Moral Actions indeed have not such necessary
consequences, as natural causes have necessary effects, because no moral causes
act necessarily: Reading the Declaration, will not as necessarily destroy the
Church of England, as fire burns Wood, but if the consequence be plain and
evident, the most likely thing that can happen, if it be unreasonable to expect
any other, if it be what is plainly intended and designed, either I must never
have any regard to Moral Consequences of my Actions, or if ever they are to be
considered, they are in this case.

Why are the Nobility and Gentry so extremely averse to the Repeal of the Test
and Penal Laws? why do they forfeit the King's Favor, and their Honorable
Stations, rather than comply with it? if you say that this tends to destroy the
Church of England and the Protestant Religion, I ask whether this be the
necessary consequence of it? whether the King cannot keep his promise to the
Church of England if the Test and Penal Laws be Repealed? We cannot say, but
this may be: and yet the Nation does not think fit to try it; and we commend
those great men who deny it; and if the same questions were put to us, we think
we ought in Conscience to deny them our selves: and are there not as high
probabilities, that our Reading the Declaration will promote the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws, as that such a Repeal will ruin our Constitution, and
bring in Popery upon us? Is it not as probable, that such a compliance in us,
will disoblige all the Nobility and Gentry, who have hitherto been firm to us,
as that when the power of the Nation is put into Popish Hands, by the Repeal of
such Tests and Laws, the Priests and Jesuits may find some salvo for the King's
Conscience, and persuade him to forget his Promise to the Church of England?
and if the probable ill consequences of Repealing the Test and Penal Laws, be a
good reason not to comply with it, I cannot see but that the as probable ill
consequences of Reading the Declaration, is as good a reason not to read it.

The most material Objection is, that the Dissenters, whom we ought not to
provoke, will expound our not Reading it, to be the effect of a Persecuting
Spirit: Now I wonder men should lay any weight on this, who will not allow the
most probable consequences of our Actions, to have any influence upon
Conscience: for if we must compare consequences, to disoblige all the Nobility
and Gentry by Reading it, is likely to be much more fatal, than to anger the
Dissenters: and it is more likely, and there is much more reason for it, that
one should be offended than the other: For the Dissenters who are wise and
considering, are sensible of the snare themselves, and though they desire Ease
and Liberty, they are not willing to have it with such apparent hazard of
Church and State: I am sure that though we were never so desirous that they might
have their Liberty, (and when there is opportunity of showing our inclinations
without danger, they may find that we are not such Persecutors as we are
represented) yet we cannot consent that they should have it this way, which
they will find the dearest Liberty that ever was granted.

This, Sir, is our Case in short, the Difficulties are great on both sides, and
therefore now if ever, we ought to besiege Heaven with our Prayers for Wisdom,
and Counsel, and Courage; that God would protect his Church and Reformed
Christianity, against all the devices of their Enemies: Which is the daily and
hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your Friend and Brother.
May 22. 1688.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have just now seen H. Care's Paper called, The Public Occurrences, which
came out to day, and cannot but set you right as to his News about the Reading
of the Declaration on Sunday: He tells you, That several Divines of the Church
of England, in and about this City, eminent for their Piety and Moderation, did
yesterday Read his Majesty's late Declaration in their Churches, according to
the Order in that behalf; but some (to the great surprise of their
Parishioners) were pleased to decline it. You in the Country are from this
Account to believe, that it was Read here by the generality of the Clergy, and
by the eminent Men among them: But I can, and do assure you, that this is one
of the most impudent Lies that ever was printed: For as to this City which has
above a Hundred Parishes in it, it was Read only in Four or Five Churches, all
the rest, and best of the Clergy refusing it every where. I will spare their
Names who read it; but should I mention them, it would make you, who knows this
City, a little heartily to deride H. C's Account of them. And for the Surprise
he talks of, the contrary of it is so true, that in Wood-street, where it was
Read by one Dr. M. the People generally went out of the Church. This I tell
you, that you may be provided for the future against such an impudent Liar,
who, for Bread, can vouch and put about the Nation, the falsest of things.

I am Yours.

An ANSWER to the City Minister's LETTER, from his COUNTRY FRIEND.
SIR,
IT is not for me now to acknowledge my private Debt to you for the favor of
your Letter, since the public is as much concerned in it as I: and if I may
judge of all by the compass of my Neighborhood and Acquaintance, I may assure
you, they are not insensible of your Obligation, though they are ignorant of
the Author

The Country as far as my Intelligence reaches, has followed the Example of the
City, and refused to read the Declaration of Indulgence according to a certain
Order said to be the Kings, which we in the Country can scarce believe to be
His. For it has neither been signified to the Ordinaries according to the usual
manner, nor could those that dispersed it give any Account whence it came to
them. I have heard indeed that an Act of Council concerning it has been
published in the Gazette, which I never saw, and if I had I should scarce have
thought Authentic: For I always took that Paper as for its Authority, to have
been all of a piece, and that we were no more bound to take notice of any Order
published there under any penalty, than we are to believe all the News from
Poland or Constantinople. Nay though this Order had come to us in due form, yet
had we had great reason to suspect something of surreption and surprise upon
his Majesty in this matter, and that it could not proceed from his Majesty's
free and full consent; for we cannot yet forget his repeated professions of
kindness to us, and of saitisfaction in cur Principles and Duty, and having
done nothing since which might forfeit his good Opinion, we are unwilling to
believe that it is His Majesty's own mind and pleasure to load us with such an
Order, as we cannot execute with any congruity, safety of good conscience. For

I. As to his Majesty's Declaration, We of all his Majesty's Subjects are the
least concerned in it; and with all duty be it spoken, we cannot see, that our
legal Establishment receives any Addition by this Declaration. For there are
yet, thanks be to God, no Penal Laws to which our Congregations are obnoxious,
and therefore we do not stand in need of any Toleration: Yet it is upon us
only that the Reading of it is imposed. An Act which cannot well be construed
otherwise than as a soliciting and tempting our own people to forsake our
Communion. If this Declaration must needs be read in any Religious Assemblies,
in reason surely it should be in those, that wholely owe their subsistence to
it. It would better have become the Roman than the Protestant Chapels. But in
the Roman Church Indulgence has another signification; and belongs to those
only that freequent their Churches, but not to such as leave them: for with
them this is the only sin that is not capable of Indulgence. But the Priests
desire to be excused, lest while they proclaim Toleration to others they bring
an Interdict upon themselves. Or why I pray, was not Father Pen Ordered to
publish it in his Meetings? Or the worthy Mr. Lob, the reputed Father of this
Project; why had not he the benefit of his own Invention, and a Patent for
being the sole Publisher of it within his own Pound? Or why was not my Lord
Mayor's private and elect Congregation thought worthy of so great a grace?
Surely it is not to draw upon us the envy of the Dissenters, that the honor of
publishing this Declaration is imposed upon us alone, when it belongs to all
other Communions in the Kingdom except our own: and if we refuse it, I hope it
will be imputed to our Modesty, for we are not ambitious of being impertinent
or busybodies in other men's matters.

A certain person much greater than he deserves, but perhaps not so high, is
said to have used the Words of Rabshakeh upon this occasion, That the Church of
England Clergy should eat their own Dung. Isa. 36. 12. This sentence might
better have beome a Messenger of the K of Assyria, than a pretended Counselor
of our own Prince, though some make a question to which King he belongs: but
God be thanked, we are not yet so straightly besieged as to be reduced to that
extremity, and though by the permission of God, We should be reduced to so
miserable a condition, We should I hope, by the grace of God, be content to
endure that and worse extremities if possible, rather than Betray or Surrender
the City of God. But before that comes, it is possible that the Throat that
belched out this Nasty Insolence, may be stopped with something which it cannot
swallow.

II. Besides there are some Passages in the Declaration, which in Conscience we
cannot Read to our People, though it be in the King's Name; for among others we
are to Read these Words: We cannot but heartily wish as will easily be
believed, that all the People of our Dominions were Members of the Catholic
Church. Our People know too well the English of this, and could not but be
strangely surpised to hear us tell them, that it would be an acceptable thing
to the King, that they should leave the Truth and our Communion, and turn
Papists. The Wish of a King when solemnly Declared, is no light insignificant
thing, but has real influence and effect upon the minds of Men. It was but a
Wish of Henry the Second that cut off T. Becket then Archbishop of Canterbury.
Councils and Courts of Justice too often bend to a King's Wishes, though
against their own Inclinations, as well as against their Rule: And can we
imagine that they can have no force at all upon the common people? therefore we
cannot in Conscience pronounce these words in the Ears of the People whose
Souls are committed to our Charge. For we should hereby lay a snare before
them, and become their Tempters instead of being their Instructers; and in very
fair and reasonable construction we shall be understood to solicit them to
Apostasy, to leave the Truth of the Gospel, for Fables, and the mistakes of
men; a reasonable and decent Worship, for Superstition and Idolatry; a true
Christian Liberty, for the most intolerable Bondage both of soul and body. If
any will forsake our Doctrine and Fellowship, which yet is not ours but
Christ's, at their own peril be it: But as for us, We are resolved by the grace
of God, to lay no stumbling block in their way, nor to be accessory to their
ruin, that we may be able to declare our integrity with S. Paul, That we are
pure from the blood of all men.

III. In the next place, We are to declare in the King's name, That from
henceforth the Execution of all, and all manner of Penal Laws, in matters
Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament, or
for any other Nonconformity to the Religion established, or for, or by reason
of the exercise of Religion, in any manner whatsoever, be immediately
Suspended, and the sarther Execution of the said Penal Laws, and every of them
is hereby Suspended. What! All, and all manner of Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical? What the Laws against Fornication, Adultery, Incest? For these
are in Ecclesiastical matters. What! All Laws against Blasphemy, Profaneness,
open Derision of Christian Religion? Yet these crimes are punishable by no
other Laws here, than such as have been made in favor of the Established
Religion: How shall the Lord's day be observed? What shall hinder covetous men
to Plow and Cart, and follow their several Trades upon that day? since all the
Laws, that secure this observance, and outward countenance of respect to the
Christian Religion, are by this general expression lade aside: Besides these
words, for not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament, or for any
other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, cannot in Conscience be read
by us in our Churches, because they may be a temptation to young unguided
people to neglest all manner of Religious Worship, and give them occasion of
deptiving themselves of such opportunities of grace and salvation, as these
Penal Laws did often oblige them to use. For being discharged attendance on our
Service, they are lest at liberty to be of any Religion or none at all: Nay
Christian Religion is by these general terms left at discretion, as well as the
Church of England. For men may forsake us to become Jews or Mahometans, or
Pagan Idolaters, as well as to be Papists or Dissenters for any care taken in
this Declaratoin to prevent it. And even of such as pretend to be Christians,
there either are or may be such Blasphemous Sects, so dishonorable to our
Common Lord and Master, as are incapable of all public encouragement and
allowance; for that would involve the Government in the Imputation of those
Blasphemies, and the whole Nation in that curse and vengeance of God, which
such provocations may extort. Wherefore it is not out of any unreasonable
opinion of our selves, nor disaffection to Protestant Dissenters that we resuse
to publish this Indulgence, but out of a tender care of the Souls committed to
us, especially those of the weaker sort, to whom we dare not propose an
Invitation to Popery, and much less any thing that may give countenance or
encouragement to Irreligion. It is said indeed, that we are not required to
approve but to read it: To this Sir, you have very well answered, that Reading
was Teaching it, or if it be not so absolutely in the nature of the thing; yet
in common Construction, I am afraid it would have been so understood. But we
do not stand in need of this Excuse, for if there be any passages in it, that
are plain temptations to Popery or Licentiousness; it cannot consist with our
duty either to God or the Church to read them before our People.

As for the Dispensing Power, and the Oaths and Tests required to qualify men
for Offices Military and Civil, I must leave them to the Consideration of those
who are nearer concerned, and therefore reasonably presumed to understand them
better. Nor do I envy his Majesty the use of his Popish Subjects, though I do
not know what service they may be capable of doing more than other men. This
Nation has for some time made hard shift to subsist without much of their Aid,
and against the wills of several of them: but now they are become the only
necessary men, and seem to want nothing but Number to fill all places Military
and Civil in the Kingdom; in the mean time the Odiousness of their Persons, and
the Insolence of their Behavior with their way of menacing strange things,
makes some abatement of the merit of their service.

Lastly, The respect which we have for His Majesty's Service, will not permit
us to Read the Appendix to the Declaration: Where the flower of the Nobility
and Gentry of this Kingdom are something hardly reflected on, as Persons that
will not contribute to the peace and honor of the Nation; Because they would
consent to the taking away the Laws against Papists, that they be put into a
Condition to give us Laws. The Persons here reflected on, We know to be the
chief for Ability and Interest, and Inclination to serve the King, and
therefore cannot do His Majesty that disservice as to be Publishers of their
disgrace, and make our selves the Instruments of alienating from his Majesty
the Affections of his best Subjects. Nay we find in our selves a strange
difficulty to believe that this could come from His Majesty, who has
experienced their faithfulness upon so many and pressing Occasions. This could
not well proceed from any but a Stranger to those Honorable Persons, and the
Nation, and a greater Stranger to shame and good manners; and what have we to
do to Publish the Venom and Virulency of a Jesuit.

A Letter to a Dissenter from his Friend at the HAGUE, concerning the Penal
Laws and the Test; showing that the Popular Plea for Liberty of Conscience is
not concerned in that Question.
SIR,
I Suppose you are very busy about the Choice of Parliament Men, and all hands
are at work to Elect such Members as may comply with the great Design to Repeal
the Penal Laws and the Test. The pretense I confess is very plausible; for all
men are fond of Liberty of Conscience, who dissent from the Established
Religion; but you and I have lived long enough in the world to observe that the
most pernicious Designs have been carried on under the most plausible
Pretenses; and that is Reason enough to enquire whether there be no danger of
it now. I shall not say one word against Liberty of Conscience, nor for Penal
Laws and Tests: Imagine the best things you possibly can of the one, and
declame as much as you please against the other. For I do not see that either
of them are concerned in the present Dispute; but only made use of to wheedle
unthinking people, and to catch them with a very inviting Bait: and therefore
before you engage too warmly in this Cause, I would offer some few things to
your calm and deliberate Thoughts.

The great Pretense is Liberty of Conscience; and if this were the true state
of the Case, the Dispute would be more doubtful and perplexed: for that is an
Argument a man may talk of without end, and it is not to be expected that men
who feel the want of Liberty, or taste the sweetness of it, should be persuaded
by any Arguments to forgo it when it may be had., But now, if Liberty of
Conscience may be had without the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws; if it be
apparent to men who will open their eyes, that the true spring of all this zeal
for Repealing the Test and Penal Laws is not Liberty of Conscience; if there be
great danger that by consenting to this Repeal, we shall forfeit both the
Liberty of our Consciences and our Civil Liberties into the Bargain; then I
presume you will readily grant that Liberty of Conscience, as good a thing as
it is, is no Reason for such a Repeal.

I. As for the first, it is a very plain case; For you enjoy Liberty of
Conscience now, and yet the Penal Laws and Test are not Repealed. What greater
Liberty do you desire than you now have? What can the Repeal of the Penal Laws
and Test do for you which the King's Declaration has not done? You have his
repeated Promises, his avowed Principle that Conscience is not to be forced;
and that no man ought to suffer merely for his Religion; though the Penal Laws
are not repealed, yet' they are suspended; they are not executed either against
Papists or Dissenters, and you have the security of the King's Declaration for
it.

If you say, that the King can quickly recall his Declaration, and reinforce
the Penal Laws if he find you obstinate against Repealing them; I Answer first,
It is very dishonorable to imagine such a thing of the King, after such a
Declaration as this, which he has repeated the second time with all possible
assurances of his Resolutions to stand to it: and that not as a mere Act of
grace and favor, but as his own avowed Principle, that Conscience ought not to
be forced. If you Reply that the King may very Honorably recall this Liberty
of Conscience, when you will not have it, but resolve to keep these persecuting
Laws; I answer, Not, if it be against the Principles of his own Conscience to
Persecute. Mere favors may be withdrawn when they are slighted; but no man
will violate his own Conscience, to be revenged of such ingratitude. And yet
this is not the case: You do not slight the grace and favor of his
Declaration, but gladly accept the Liberty he gives; and all the World sees
that You use it too: but instead of Repealing these Penal Laws, You choose to
rely upon his Royal Word and Dispensing Power; which argues so great a
Confidence in him, and attributes such Authority to him, that it cannot
possibly displease him. This is a plain sign, that you think your selves secure
in his Reign; and can you think the King will persecute you in his own Reign,
because you are contented to trust his Successors too? which would be a very
odd kind of passion for Liberty of Conscience.

To imagine the King should reinforce the Penal Laws upon your refusal to
Repeal them, is to suspect that this great Zeal is not for Liberty of
Conscience, but for the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test; that is, that
Liberty of Conscience is granted for the sake of Repealing the Penal Laws and
Tests, not the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests, desired for the sake of
Liberty of Conscience; and then who knows what will become of Liberty of
Conscience, when the Penal Laws and Test are Repealed? If you suspect any such
thing which never ought to be suspected of so just and indulgent a Prince, it
is better to make the Experiment before, than after such a Repeal.

Suppose the King should withdraw his Declaration upon your refusal to comply,
who would put the Laws in Execution against you? They must either be
Dissenters, or Papists, or the Church of England: I presume you do not fear
that you should execute the Laws against your selves; and as for Papists, it
were worth trying whether they who are so obnoxious to the Laws themselves,
would put them in Execution against Dissenters, especially after all their
Clamors against them: and as for the Church of England, when they have been so
reproached by Papists for Executing these Laws already, though more at the
instance of the Court than from their own inclination, they will no longer be
made the instruments of such Executions, only to serve the turn of them that
will reproach them: So that if the Declaration were recalled, you have a moral
certainty that the Penal Laws cannot be Executed in this Kings Reign, because
there is no body to execute them.

As for the Test, you cannot pretend that Liberty of Conscience is concerned in
the Repeal of that. You may go to Conventicles, and the Papists may go to Mass
without any disturbance, though the Test be never repealed: and therefore the
only design of repealing that must be to give a legal Qualification to Papists
to possess all places of Honor, Profit and Trust in the Nation; that is, to
put your Lives and Liberties into their hands; which I confess is a great
Complement to a Roman Catholic Prince; but a Complement may sometimes be
overstrained. And yet it is such a Complement as they need not. For we see they
are qualified by the Dispensing Power, without the Repeal of the Test; which
has made me often wonder why they are so zealous to have it repealed. Do they
still question the Kings Dispensing Power? And desire some better security? Let
them say so then, and give up that point, and then we'll talk with them about
repealing the Test: but there is no need of repealing this Law, since the King
it seems has power to dispense with it in his Reign and they are very sanguine
men, if they hope to have any occasion for it in another! And if after all
their boasts of a Dispensing Power, the Law still keeps them in awe, can it be
the interest of Protestants to take off these restraints? Are they not insolent
enough already, while these threatening Laws hang over their heads? Or do we
hope that their modesty and good Nature will increase with their Power? For my
part, I desire that all men whom I fear may lie under a legal incapacity: for
though their Force and Power may be the same, yet there is some difference, in
point of Authority and Self-defence.

II. There are many things which would make a wise man suspect that there is
some farther Design than Liberty of Conscience in all this zeal for repealing
the Penal Laws and Test. For it would be very surprising to find a Roman
Catholic Prince whose Conscience is directed by a Jesuit, to be really zealous
for Liberty of Conscience; to see so many Popish Pens employed in pleading for
Liberty of Conscience, and declaiming against Sanguinary Laws, when all the
World knows what Opinion the Church of Rome has about Liberty of Conscience,
what great friends the Jesuits are to it; how they abhor persecuting men for
their Religion: witness the mild and gentle usage of the French Protestants by
a King whose Conscience is directed by a tenderhearted Jesuit. And if a
Princes zeal for his Religion be much greater than for Liberty of Conscience;
it would make one suspect that his chief design is to serve his Religion by it;
and this is no new invention, but as old as the days of the Apostate Julian,
when the same method was taken to reinforce Paganism by Liberty of Conscience.
This was the last effort of dying Paganism; may it be so of Popery too.

We know there was no talk of Liberty of Conscience, till the Nobility and
Gentry of the Church of England refused to take off the Test: and then there
was no other way left, but to buy off the Penal Laws and Test with Liberty of
Conscience, which demonstrates that Liberty of Conscience is not the last End,
but only a Means in order to some further End; and the Means is seldom valued
when the End is obtained. Men who can offer so much violence to their own
Nature and the Principles of their Religion, as to grant Liberty of Conscience
which of all things they hate, to procure a Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws;
when that is done, can easily find some occasion to pretend a forfeiture of
this Liberty, and to salve their Conscience and Honor together. Penal Laws, to
keep men from damning themselves, will be thought more merciful than Liberty of
Conscience; and the softness and tenderness of Nature, must give place to a
Bigottry in Religion; and then we shall in vain wish for our old Penal Laws and
Test again, when we feel the more terrible smart of new ones.

Though it be told us, that it has always been his Majesty's Persuasion that
Conscience ought not to be forced, I think that is no security, because though
this has always been his Principle, yet it has not always operated. We know
whose hand was most concerned both in making and executing Penal Laws in the
last Reign; and if our Dissenters suffered so much then, as they now complain
of, they know what they may suffer again, notwithstanding these Principles for
Liberty of Conscience; for the same Principles obtained then, as do now. Upon
the last withdrawing into Scotland, notwithstanding those Principles the poor
Scotch felt the severity of those Penal Laws with a witness; and methinks it is
not safe trusiing to such Principles as so often act by way of Antiparistasis,
and produce Effects quite contrary to their own Natures: and however the Church
of Rome may indulge such Principles now they are convenient to serve a present
turn, if the Scene ever alter, this private Conscience will be thought as great
Heresy as a private Judgment, and whosoever now may own it must then be guided
by the public Conscience of the Church, as well as by their Faith.

There are so many surprising Circumstances in this whole matter, as cannot but
amaze a thinking Man: that so fierce a Zeal should be now kindled for a Liberty
of Conscience, that a Liberty of Judgment will not be allowed, but who ever
will not concur in this Opinion, must undergo the high displeasure; whereas
there can be no Liberty of Conscience without Liberty of Judgment: And to be
mortally angry with every man who is not of my Opinion, is no good Preface to
granting every Man a Liberty to think and act, as he pleases.

If a Potentate should be so Zealous for Liberty of Conscience, as to change
all his old Antipathies and Friendships, to receive his professed Enemies and
Rebels into his bosom, and cast off his tried and Experienced Friends; that he
should forget all injuries and all kindnesses together, this would be such an
effect of a great passion for Liberty of Conscience as was never known before:
and when Causes do not work naturally, we suspect some preternatural
ingredients mixed with them.

That a Zeal against the Test and Penal Laws, should be made a Test to the
whole Nation; and that not without severe Penalties too, viz. The forfeiture of
our Princes favor, of all Places of Trust and Honor, and incapacity to serve
in Parliaments if they can prevent it, or to be Members of any little
Corporation.

That for the sake of Liberty of Conscience, the whole Clergy must be forced to
publish the Declaration, though they declare it to be against their
Consciences: That the Archbishop and six of his Suffragans must be sent to the
Tower, for Petitioning for their own Liberty of Conscience; and whither they
must have gone next God knows, unless they had been rescued by an Honest Jury:
That all those who did not read the Declaration are still threatened with
Suspensions, and Deprivatious: Archdeacons and Chancellors commanded to turn
Informers, though almost all of them must inform against themselves for not
reading, or not sending the Declaration: and all this while the Laws are on
their side. It is like to be a very terrible Liberty of Conscience, when it is
grown up into the Maturity and strength of a Law, which like another Hercules
can strangle all Laws and Liberties in its Cradle. These things make me apt to
suspect that the best way to preserve Liberty of Conscience is to keep the Test
and Penal Laws.

III. For Thirdly. If there be any reasou to suspect any other design than
Liberty of Conscience, as suppose to promote Popery, and by degrees to make it
the Established Religion of the Nation, (which certainly is the Design, unless
you can imagine, that Priests and Jesuits, and one who has given up his
Understanding and Conscience to them, can ever be without this Design,) You
will easily be convinced that there is infinite hazard in repealing the Test
and the Penal Laws.

This sets Papists upon an equal level with Protestants, and then the Favor of
the Prince will set them above them: and when the whole power of the Nation,
and the whole administration of Justice is in Popish hands, there will need no
Penal Laws to persecute Protestants. If you say this is done in a great many
instances now before such a Repeal; I answer, then you may certainly guess what
will be done when those incapacitating Laws are repealed: And yet the
difference is very great; For while they are under such a legal Incapacity, the
distrust of their power will make them more modest, which is the only thing
that can plead excuse hereafter; but when they have legal authority, they will
show their Nature without restraint. Men who have any thing to lose will act
cautiously in prospect of an After-reckoning, or while these legal incapacities
continue will be afraid to act; but when the Legal Authority and Power is in
their hands, Protestant Subjects will quickly find what a Popish liberty of
Conscience means.

While these Laws continue, some professed Professed Protestants whose
Consciences are governed by their Interest are afraid to declare; and by these
means Popery wants hands and numbers to do its work: But when these Laws are
removed, hopes of preferment will prevail on some, and fear on others; and when
this frozen Adder begins to grow warm, and recover its blood and spirits, it
will find its sting too.

This would certainly overthrow the Constitution of the Church of England,
which is the most effectual way to let in Popery: For when all Incapacities are
removed, Papists are as well qualified for Church-Preferments as Protestants,
and it will be an easy matter to find pretenses, to remove the best Men to
make way for them.

We have four Catholic Bishops (as they vainly call themselves) already
prepared to fill vacant Sees; and if such Men have the impudence to publish
their Pastoral Letter, and make their public Visitations while all the Laws
against them are in force, judge what they will do when they are repealed. Thus
our Parishes may be filled with Roman Priests, and they indeed are the fittest
to serve under Roman Bishops. And if one College be already seized into Popish
hands, and the Protestant possessors turned out of their Freehold; when those
Laws are Repealed, we may quickly see more follow them; and judge whether this
be not a fair and easy step to Popery.

Nay, I have heard some good Lawyers say, that when the Penal Laws are
repealed, Popery is the Established Religion of the Nation: That when a
repealing Law is repealed, the repealed Law revives: I am not so good a Lawyer
as to judge of this, but I think it is worth your Considering.

But who knows, when all the Ecclesiastical Laws are Repealed, what the King's
Supremacy and his Ecclesiastical Commission may do? There have been great and
big words said of it of late; and I believe You had better keep your Penal
Laws, than fall under the lash of a Popish Supremacy.

I know there has been a great talk of an Equivalent, but I would gladly know
what that Equivalent should be. Shall it incapacitate all Papists for any
Office either in Church or State? That must not be, for fear of depriving the
King of the natural right he has to the service of his Subjects; and then I am
sure there can be no Equivalent for the repeal of the incapacitating Laws.

But you say there shall be a New Charter for the Church of England, the
Protestant Religion and Liberty of Conscience. Now shall this be with a Penalty
or without one? If with a penalty, then you do not repeal, but only exchange
your Penal Laws; and if Penal Laws are not such Unchristian things, but they
may be allowed, we cannot have better for the security of our Religion than we
have; and therefore we had best keep these. Is there any other fault in our
Penal Laws, (especially when they are not executed) but that they are too great
a security to the Church of England, and the Protestant Interest? And if this
be a reason for Protestants at this time to repeal them, I have done. But if
this new Establishment be without a penalty, what is it good for?

When these Penal Laws are removed, Papists are qualified to sit in both Houses
of Parliament: and who knows whether Closetting and Reforming of Corporations,
and such other Arts may not quickly make a Popish Parliament? And then Good
Night to your New Establishment and Liberty of Conscience.

These things I hope, Sir, You will consider in your Choice of Members for
Parliament; and not be cheated with the Popular cry of Liberty of Conscience,
into the vilest and most despicable Slavery both of Soul and Body.

I am SIR, Your very Cordial Friend, and faithful Monitor.

A Plain Account of the PERSECUTION laid to the Charge of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
THE desire of Liberty to serve God in that way and manner, which Men judge to
be most acceptable to him, is so Natural and Reasonable, that they cannot but
be extremely provoked against those who would force them to serve him in any
other. But the conceit withal, which most men have that their way of serving
God is the only acceptable way; naturally inclines them, when they have Power,
to use all means to constrain all others to serve him in that way only. So that
Liberty is not more desired by all, at one time, than it is denied by the very
same Persons at another. Put them into different Conditions, and they are not
of the same mind: but have different inclinations, in one state, from what they
have in another. As will be apparent by a short view of what has passed in
these Churches and Kingdoms, within our memory.

II. Before the late Civil Wars there were very grievous Complaints made of the
Bishops; that they pressed the Ceremonies so strictly, as to inflict heavy
Censures upon those called Puritans, who could not in Conscience conform to
them. Now no sooner had those very Persons who thus complained, got their
liberty to do as they pleased, but they took it quite away from the other: and
Sequestered all those who would not enter into their Holy League and Covenant;
for the Reforming all things, according to the Model which they propounded.
Nay, they were not willing to bear with Five Dissenting Brethren among
themselves; who could not conform to the Presbyterial Government. And when
these Dissenting Brethren, commonly known by the name of Independants, had got
a Party strong enough, which carried all before them; they would not allow the
use of the Common Prayer in any Parish; no not to the King himself in his own
Chapel: not grant to one of the old Clergy, so much liberty as to teach a
School, etc. Which things I do not mention (God knows) to reproach those who
were guilty of them; but only to put them in mind of their own Failings: that
they may be humbled for them, and not insult over the Church of England, nor
severely upbraid them with that, which when time was, they acted with a higher
hand themselves. If I should report all that the Presbyterians did here, and in
Scotland, and all that the Independants did here, and in New England; it would
not be thought that I exceed the Truth, when I say they have been more guilty
of this fault, than those whom they now charge with it. Which does not excuse
the Church of England, it must be confessed; but does in some measure mitigate
her fault. For the Conformable Clergy having met with such very hard usage in
that dismal time wherein many of them were oppressed above measure; no wonder
if the smart of it, then fresh in their minds, something imbittered their
Spirits; when God was pleased by a wonderful Revolution, to put them into Power
again.

III. Then a stricter Act of Uniformity was made, and several Laws pursuant to
it, for the enforcing that Uniformity, by severe Penalties. But let it be
remembered that none were by those Laws constrained to come to Church, but had
Liberty left them to serve God at home (and some Company with them) in their
own way. And let it be farther remembered, that the reason why they were denied
their liberty of meeting in greater Assemblies was, because such Assemblies
were represented as greatly endangering the public Pecce and Safety: as the
words are in the very first Act of this nature against Quakers, in the Year
1662. Let any one read the Oxford Act, (as it is commonly called) made in the
Year 1665. and that at Westminster in the Year 1670. and he will find them
intended against Seditious Conventicles; That is, they who made them were
persuaded by the Jesuit interest at first to look upon such Meetings as
Nurseries of Sedition, where bad Principles were infused into men's minds,
destructive to the Civil Government. If it had not been for this, it does not
appear that the Contrivers of these Laws were inclined to such Severities as
were thereby enacted; but the Nonconformists might have enjoyed a larger
liberty in Religion. It was not Religion alone which was considered, and
pretended, but the public peace and seulement, with respect to which they were
tied up so straightly in the exercise of their Religion. Which, to deal clearly,
I do not believe would have taught Rebellion: but this was constantly
insinuated by the Court Agents; and it is no wonder if the Parliament who
remembered how the Ministers of that Persuasion (though indeed from the then
appearance of Popery) had been the principal Incouragers of that Defensive War
against the King, were easily made to believe that they still retained the same
Principles, and would propagate them, if they were suffered among the People.
Certain it is also, that the Court made it their care to have those Acts
passed; though at the same time they hindered their execution: that they might
keep up both Parties in the height of their Animosities; and especially that
they might make the Church of England, be both, hated and despised by the
Dissenters.

IV. Thus things continued for some time, till wise men began to see into the
Secret; and think of a Reconciliation. But is was always, hindered by the Court,
who never thought of giving Liberty by a Law, but only by the Prerogative,
which could as easily take it away. There was a time, for instance, when a
Comprehension, etc. was projected by several Great Men both in Church and
State; for the taking as many as was possible into Union with us; and providing
Ease for the rest. Which so netled the late King, that meeting with the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, he said to him (as I perfectly remember) What, my
Lord, you are for a Comprehension? To which he making such a reply as
signified, he heard some were about it: No, said the King, I will keep the
Church of England pure and unmixed: that is, never suffer a Reconciliation with
the Dissenters. And when the Lords and Commons also had not many years ago
passed a Bill for the repealing of the most heavy of all the Penal Laws against
Dissenters, viz. the Statute of 35 Eliz. 1. (which, by the Parliament is made
against the Wicked and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, and ^
persons) his late Majesty so dealt with the Clerk of the Parliament, that it
was shuffled away and could not be sound; when it was to have been presented to
him, among other Bills for his Royal Consent unto it. A notable token of the
abhorrence the Court then had of all Penal Laws, and of their great kindness to
Dissenters.

V. Who may remember, if they please, that as once there was a time, when the
Court turned out, or chid, those Justices, who were forward in the Execution of
the Laws against Nonconformists; because they were then in so low a Condition,
that the Court was afraid the Church of England might indeed be established in
its Uniformity. So when the Nonconformists were by some liberty, grown
stronger, and set themselves against the Court interest, in the Election of
Sheriffs, and such like things; then all those Justices were turned out who
hung back, and would not execute the Laws against them; and Justices picked out
for the purpose, who would do it severely. Nay, the Clergy were called upon,
and had Orders sent them, to return the Names of all Nonconformists in their
several Parishes; that they might be proceeded against in the Courts
Ecclesiastical. And here I cannot forget the Order made by the Middlesex
Justices, at the Sessions at Hickses-Hall, Jan. 13. 1681. Where they urge the
Execution of the Act of 22 C. 2. against Conventicles, because in all
probability they will destroy both Church and State. This was the reason which
moved them to call upon Constables and all other Officers to do their duty in
this matter: Nay, to call upon the B. of London himself, that he would use his
utmost endeavors, within his Jurisdiction, that all such Persons may be
Excommunicate. This was a bold stroke, proceeding from an unusual degree of
Zeal; which plainly enough signifies that the Bishops were not so forward as
the Justices in the prosecuting of Dissenters. Who may do well to remember that
the House of Commons, a little before this, had been so kind to them, that
those Justices would not have dared to have been so severe as they were at
Hickses-Hall, if they had not been set on by directions from Whiteball. For in
their Order they press the Execution of the Statute 1 Eliz. and 3. Jac. 1. for
levying Tuelve pence a Sunday upon all those that do not come to Church:
Whereas the House of Commons, Nov. 6. 1680. had, Resolved, Nemine
contradicente, that it is the Opinion of this House, That the Acts of
Parliament made in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, against Popish
Recusants, ought not to be extended against Protestant Dissenters.

VI. Who should not forget how backward the Clergy of London especially, were
to comply with this design, of reviving the Execution of the Laws against them;
what courses they took to save them from this danger! and what hatred they
incurred for being so kind to them! Which in truth was kindness to themselves;
for now they saw plainly enough that Nothing was intended but the destruction
of us both by setting us in our turns, one against the other. Many indeed were
possessed with the old Opinion, that the Dissenters aimed at the overthrow of
the Government both in Church and State: which made them the more readily join
with those who were employed to suppress them. by turning the edge of the Laws
upon them. But both these were most industriously promoted by the Court: who
labored might and main to have this believed, that they who were called Whigs,
intended the ruin of the Church and of the Monarchy too: and therefore none
had the Court favor but they alone who were for the ruining of them: all
others were frowned upon, and branded with the name of Trimmers; who they
adventured at last, to say were worse than Whigs. Merely because they seeing
through the design, desired those ugly Names of Whig and Tory might be laid
aside; and persuaded all to Moderation, Law, Unity, and Peace. If any man had
these dangerous words in his mouth, he had a mark set upon him; and was looked
upon as an Enemy, as soon as he discovered any desires of Reconciliation. No
peace with Dissenters was then as much in some men's mouths, as no peace with
Rome had been in others. They were all voted to destruction; and it was an
unpardonable Crime so much as to mention an Accommodation.

Such things as these ought not to be forgotten.

VII. But if they lift not to call them to mind, (though they be of fresh memory)
yet let them at least consider what they have had at their Tongues end, ever
since they knew any thing: That the Church of Rome is a persecuting Church, and
the Mother of Persecution. Will they then be deluded by the present Sham of
Liberty of Conscience; which they of that Church pretend to give? It is not in
their power, no more than in their Spirit: They neither will nor can give
liberty of Conscience; but with a design to take all liberty from us. That
Church must be obeyed; and there is no middle choice among, them, between turn
or burn, conform or be undout. What Liberty do they give in any Country where
their power is established? What Liberty can they give who have determined that
Heretics ought to be rooted out? Look into France (with which we have had the
strictest Alliance and Friendship a long time) and behold, how at this moment
they compel those to go to Mass; who they know abher it as an abominable
Idolatry. Such a violent Spirit now acts them, that they stick not to profane
their own most holy Mysteries; that they may have the face of an Universal
Consofmity without the least Liberty. For the new Converts as they are called,
poor Wretches, are known to be mere outward Compliers in their Hearts
abominating that which they are forced eternaliy to worship. They declare as
much by escaping from this Tyranny over their Consciences, and bewa ling their
sinful Compliance; whenever they have an opportunity. And they that cannot
escape, frequently protest they have been constrained to adore that, which they
believe ought not to be adored. And when they come to dye, refuse to receive
the Romish Sacrament; and thereupon are dragged, when dead, along the Streets,
and thrown like dead Dogs upon the Dunghils. Unto what a height of rage are
the spirits of the Romish Clergy inflamed; that it perfectly blinds their eyes,
and will not let them see how they expose the most sacred thing in all their
Religion (the Holy Sacrament, which they believe to be Jesus Christ himself) to
be received by those who they know have no reverence at all for it, but utterly
abhor it? For they sorce them, by all manner of violence, to adore the Host
against their will, and then to eat what they have adored; though they have the
greatest reason to believe, that those poor Creatures do not adore it. That is,
the Church of Rome will have her Mysteries adored by all, though it be by
Hypecrites. None shall be excused, but whether they believe or not believe,
they shall be compelled to do as that Church does. Nothing shall hinder it; for
the hatred and fury wherewith they are now transported, is so exceeding great;
that it makes them (as I have said) offer violence even to their own Religion,
rather than suffer any body not to conform to it.

VIII. And assure your selves they are very desirous to extend this Violence
beyond the bounds of France. They would fain see England also, in the same
condition, the Bishop of Valence and Die, has told as much, in the Speech
which he made to the French King, in the Name of the Clergy of France, to
Congratulate his glorious Achievements, in rooting out the Heresy of Calvin.
In which he has a most memorable passage, for which we are beholden to him
because it informs us that they are not satisfied with what their King has
done there; but would have him think there is a further Glory reserved for him,
of lending his help to make us such good Catholics, as he has made in France.
This is the blessed Work they would be at: and if any among us be still so
blind as not to see it, we must look upon it as the just judgment of God upon
them for some other sins which they have committed. They are delivered up to a
reprobate mind, which cannot discern the most evident things. They declare to
all the World that they have been above fifty years crying out against they
know not what. For they know not what Popery is (of which they have seemed to
be horribly afraid) if they believe that they of that Religion either can or
will give any Liberty; when they have power to establish their Tyranny. It is
no better: St. John himself has described that Church under the name of
Babylon, that cruel City; and of a BEAST, which like a Bear, tramples all under
its feet; and of another Beast, which causes as many as will not worship the
Image of the Beast, to be killed; and that no man may buy or sell save such as
have had his mark; i. e. are of his Religion. Rev. 13. 1, 15, 16. This
Character they will make good to the very end of their Reign, as they have
fulfilled it from the beginning. They cannot alter their nature no more than
the Ethiopean change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. It ever was since the
rise of the Beast, and it ever will be till its fall, a bloody Church, which
can bear no contradiction to her Doctrine and Orders, but will endeavor to
root out all those that oppose her from the face of the Earth. Witness the
Barbarous Crusado's against the poor Albigenses in France: in one of which
alone Bellarmine himself says, and not without Triumph, there were killed no
less than an hundred thousand, Witness the horrible Butcheries committed in
France, in England, and in the Low Countries in the Age before us; and in
Poland, the Valleys of Piedmont, and in Ireland in this Age; upon those who had
no other fault but this, that they made the Holy Scriptures, and the Roman
Church, the Rule of their Faith.

IX. But it you be ignorant of what has been done, and is doing abroad, yet I
hope you observe what they do here at home. What do you think of the
Declaration which was very lately imposed to be read in all our Churches? Which
when several Bishops and their Clergy, most humbly represented, they could not
in Conscience publish to the People in time of Divine service; this would not
excuse them; their Petition was received with indignation, and looked upon as a
Libel; the Bishops were prosecuted for it, and Inquiry is now ordered to be
made after those who did not read it (as well as those that did) that they may
be punished by the High Commissioners Call you this Liberty of Conscience? Or
do you imagine you shall never have any thing imposed upon you, to be read in
your Congregations, which you cannot comply withal? Consider, I beseech you,
what will become of you when that time shall come? What Is the meaning of this,
that ever they are looked upon as Offenders, for following their Conscience,
whose Services have been acknowledged to be so great, that they should never be
forgotten? It ought to teach Dissenters what they are to expect hereafter, when
they have served them so far, (by taking off the Tests and the Penal Laws) as
to enable them with safety to remember all their former pretended
transgressions. Let them assure themselves the services of the Church of
England are not now more certainly forgotten than the Sins of Dissenters will
hereafter, when they have got power to punish them, be most certainly
remembered. Be not drawn in then by deceitful words to help forward your own
destruction. If you will not be assistant to it, they cannot do it alone: and
it will be very strange if you be persuaded to lend them your help, when the
deceit is so apparent, For what are all the present pleas for Liberty, but so
many infamous Libels upon the Roman Church, which denies all Men this Liberty?
While they declaim so loudly against Persecution, they most notoriously
reproach Popery, which subsists by nothing but deceit and cruelty. And who can
think that they would suffer their Church to be so exposed and reviled, as it
is by such discourses, but with a design to cheat heedless people into its
obedience? For this end they can hear it proved, nay, prove it themselves to be
an Antichristian Church, when they prove it is against Christianity, nay,
against the Law of Nature and Common Reason, to trouble any body for his
opinion in Religion.

X. Once more then I beseech you, be not deceived by good words, if you love
your Liberty and your Life. Call to mind how our poor Brethren in France were
lately deluded by the repeated Protestations which their King made, he would
observe the Edict of Nantes (which was the foundation of their Liberty) even
then, when he was about to overthrow it: and by many assurances which were
given them by those who came to torment them, that the King intended to reform
the Church of France, as soon as he had united his Subjects. What he had done
already against the Court of Rome, they told them was an instance of it; and
they should shortly see other matters. Such ensraring words they heard there
daily from the mouths of their armed Persecuters, who were ready to fall upon
them, or had begun to oppress them: And therefore they would be arrant fools
here, if they did not give good words when they have no power to hurt us. But
we shall be far greater fools if we believe they will keep their word when they
have got that power; the greatest of all fools if we give them that Power. They
have no other way but this, to wheedle us out of our Laws and Liberties. Do but
surrender the one, I mean our Laws, and they will soon take away the other, our
beloved Liberties. Be not tempted to make such a dangerous Experiment: but let
the Laws stand as they are because they are against them (as appears by their
earnest endeavors to repeal them) and be not used as tools to take them away,
because they have been grievous to you. They never can be so again. For can
they who now Court you have the face to turn them again upon you, after they
have made all this noise for Liberty? And the Church of England, you may be
assured, will not any more trouble you: but when a Protestant Prince shall
come, will join in the healing of all our breaches; by removing all things out
of the way, which have long hindered that blessed work. They cannot meet
together in a body to give you this assurance (how should they without the
King's authority so to do?) but every particular person that I have discoursed
withal, which are not a few (and you your selves would do well to ask them,
when you meet them) profess that they see an absolute necessity of making an
end of these Differences that have almost undone us: and will no longer oontend
to bring all men to one Uniformity; but promote an Uniform Liberty. Do not
imagine I intend to give mere words: I mean honestly; such a regular Liberty,
as will be the beauty and honor, not the blot and discredit of our Religion.
To such a temper the Archbishop of Canterbury, with several other Bishops of
his Province, and their Clergy, have openly declared they are willing to come.
And the Bishops and Clergy of the Church of England have never been known to
act deceitfully. Our Religion will not at any time allow them to equivocate;
nor to give good words without a meaning, much less at such a time as this,
when our Religion is in great danger; and we have nothing to trust unto, but
Gods protection of sincere Persons. Let Integrity and Uprightness preserve us,
is their constant Prayer. They can hope for no help from Heaven, if they should
prevaricate with men. God they know would desert them, if they should go about
to delude their Brethren. And they are not so void of common sense, as to
adventure to incur his most high displeasure, when they have nothing to rely
upon but his favor.

In short, Trust to those who own you for their Brethren, as you do them; for
though they have been angry Brethren, yet there is hope of Reconciliation between
such near Relations. But put no Confidence in those who not only utterly disown
any such Relation to you, but have ever treated you with an implacable hatred,
as their most mortal Enemies; unto whom it is impossible they should be
reconciled.

Prove. 12. 19, 20. The lips of Truth shall be established for ever: but a lying
Tongue is but for a moment.

Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly are his
delight.

Abbey and other Church Lands, not yet assured to such Possessors as are Roman
Catholics; Dedicated to the Nobility and Gentry of that Religion.
SInce it is universally agreed on, that so great a matter as the total
alienation of all the Abby-Lands, etc. in England, can never be made legal and
valid; and such as will satisfy the reasonable doubts and scruples of a
religious and conscienciousPerson, except it be confirmed by the supreme
Authority in this Church; its evident that the Protestants, who assert the
Church of England to be autokephalor, and such as allows of no Foreign
Jurisdiction or Appeals, having had these Lands confirmed to them by the King
as Head of the Church, the Convocation as the Church representative and by the
King and Parliament as the supreme Legislative Power in this Realm, have these
Alienations made as valid to them as any Power on Earth can make them; but the
Members of the Church of Rome, who maintain a Foreign and Superior
Jurisdiction, either in a general Council, or in the Bishop of Rome, or both
together, cannot have these Alienations confirmed to them, without the consent
of one or both of these Superior Jurisdictions. If therefore I shall make it
appear, that these Alienations in England were never confirmed by either, I do
not see how any Roman Catholic in England can, without Sacrilege, retain
them and his Religion together.

As to the first of these, since there has been no Council from the first
Alienation of Abby-Lands in England to this day, that pretends to be general,
but that of Trent; we neeed only look into that for the satisfaction of such
Roman Catholics as esteem a general Council above the Bishop of Rome: And I am
sure that that Council is so far from confirming these Abby-Lands to the
present Possessors, that it expressly denounces them accursed that detain them.
Sess. 22. Decret. de Ref. Cap. 11. Si quem. etc. If Covetousness, the root of
all evil, shall so far possess any Person whatsoever, whether of the Clergy or
Laity, though he be an Emperor or a King, as that by force, fear, or frand, or
any art or color whatsoever, he presume to convert to his own use and usurp
the Jurisdiction, Goods, Estates, Fruits, Profits or Emoluments whatsoever, of
any Church or any Benefice, Secular or Regular, Hospital or Religious House; or
shall hinder that the profits of the said Houses be not received by those to
whom they do of right belong, let him lie underan Anathema till the said
Jurisdiction, Goods, Estates, Rents, and Profits, which he has possessed and
invaded, or which have come to him any manner of way, be restored to the
Church; and after that have Absolution from the Bishop of Rome. So great a
Terror did this strike into the English Papists that were possessors of
Church Lands, against whom this Anathema seems particularly directed, that many
of the zealous papists began to think of Restitution, and Sir William Peter's,
notwithstanding his private Bull of Absolution from Pope Julius the Fourth, was
so much startled at it, as that the very next year he endowed eight new
Fellowships in Exeter College in Oxford. Again, the same Council, Sess. 25.
Decret. de Ref. c. 20. Cupiens Sancta Synodus, etc. Decrees and commands,
that all the Holy Canons, and general Councils, and Apostolic Sanctions in
savor of Ecclesiastical Persons, and the Liberties of the Church, and against
those that violate them be exactly observed by every one; and does farther
admonish the Emperor, Kings, Princes, and all Persons of what estate soever,
that they would observe the Rights of the Church as the commands of God, and
desend them by their particular Patronage, nor suffer them to be invaded by any
Lords or Gentlemen whatsoever; but severely punish all those who hinder the
Liberties, Immunities and Jurisdictions of the Church; and that they would
imitate those excellent Princes, who by their Authority and Bounty increased
the Revenues of the Church; so far were they from suffering them to be invaded,
and in this let every one sedulously perform his part, etc. And now after so
full and express Declaration of the Council of Trent, I do not see how any of
those Roman Catholics, who esteem a general Council to be the supreme
Authority in the Church, and receive the Trent Council as such, can any way
excuse themselves in point of Conscience from those heavy Curses that are there
denounced against all those that detain Church Lands, especially since the
Papists themselves vehemently accuse King, Henry the Eighth for sacrilegiously
robbing of religious Houses, and seizing of their Lands; a great part of which
Lands are to this very day possessed by Papists. Now though there may be some
Plea for the Popes Authority, in the interim of a general Council, and in such
things wherein they have made no determination; yet in this matter there is no
color for any such pretenses, since the Council of Trent was actually
assembled within few years after these Alienations, and expressly condemned the
possessors of Abby-Lands, and after all this was all confirmed and ratified by
the Pope himself in his Bulla Super conf. genesis Council. Trid. A. D. 1564. And
though we have here the Judgment of the infallible See, as to this matter in the
Confirmation of the Trent Council, yet because there be some that magnify the
Popes extravagant and unlimited power over the Church, and pretend that he
confirmed the Abby-Lands in England to the Lay-possessors of them, I shall
show. Secondly, That the Pope neither has nor pretends to any such Power, nor
did ever make use of it in this matter under debate; only I shall premise, that
whereas some part of the Canon Law seem to allow of such particular alienations
as are made by the Clerks and members of the Church, with the consent of the
Bishop, yet such free consent was never obtained in England, and as to what was
done by force, fraud, and violence, is of so little moment as to giving a legal
Title, that even the alienations that were made by Charles Martell, who is
among the Papists themselves as infamous for Sacrilege as King Henry the
Eighth, yet even his Acts are said to be done by a Council of Bishops as is
acknowledged by Dr. Johnston in his assurance of Abby-Lands, p. 27. I shall
proceed to show, First, That the Pope has no such power as to confirm these
Alienations, and this is expressly determined by the insallible Pope Damasus in
the Canon Law. Cause. 12. 9. 2. c. 20. The Pope cannot alienate Lands belonging
to the Church in any manner, or for any necessity whatsoever, both the buyer
and the seller lie under an Anathema till they be restored, so that any
Churchman may oppose any such Alienations, and again require the Lands and
Profits so alienated. So that here we have a full and express Determination of
the infallible See. And though in answer to this it is urged by Dr. Johnston,
that this Canon is with small difference published by Binius in the Councils,
and so as to confine it to the suburbicacy Diocese of Rome; yet that this
Answer is wholly trivial, will appear.

First, Because if the Bishop of Rome has no Authority to confirm such
alienations in his own peculiar Diocese where he has most power, much less can
he do it in the Provinces where his power is less.

Secondly, That in all Ecclesiastical Courts of the Church of Rome, it is not
Binius's Edition of the Councils, but Gratian's Collection of Canons, that is
of Authority, in which Book these words are as here quoted.

Thirdly, Since this Book of the Popes Decree has been frequently reprinted by
the Authority and Command of several Popes, and constantly used in their
courts; this is not to be looked upon as a Decree of Pope Damasus only, but of
all the succeeding Popes, and in the opinion of F. Ellis, (Sermon before the
King, December. 5. 1686. p. 21.) what is inserted in the Canon Law is become the
Judgment of the whole-Church.

Fourthly, It Is absolutely forbid by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth. in his Bull
ptefixed before the Canon Law ( A. D. 1580) for any one to add, or invert any
thing in that Book.

So that according to this express Determination in the Popes own Law the
Bishops of Rome have no power to confirm any such Alienations as have been made
in England, and agreeable to all this Pope Julius the Fourth, (the very Person
that is pretended to have confirmed these Alienations) declared to our English
Ambassadors, that were sent upon that Errand; That if he had power to grant it,
he would do it most readily, but his Authority was not so large. F. Paul's H.
of Council of Trent, Land. A. D. 1629. p. 392. And therefore all Confirmations
from the Bishop of Rome, are already prejudged to be invallid, and of no force
at all.

Secondly, No Bishop of Rome did ever confirm them. The Breve of Pope Julius
the Third, which gave Cardinal Pool the largest powers toward effecting this,
had this express limitation, Salvo tamen in his, quibus propter renem
magnitudinem and gravitatem haec Sancta seeds merito tibi videritur consulenda,
nostro and prefatae sedis beneplacito and conformatione, i. e. Saving to us in
these matters (in which by reason of their weight and greatness this holy See
may justly seem to you, that of right it ought to be consulted) the good
pleasure and confirmation of us and of the holy See, which is the true English
to that Latin, and that this whole Kingdom did then so understand these words,
is evident from the three Ambassadors that were sent to Rome the next Spring,
viz. Viscount Montecute, Bishop of Ely, and Sir Edward Carn. these being one to
represent every state of the Kingdom,) to obtain of him a Confirmation of all
those Graces which Cardinal Pool had granted. Burnet's H. Ref. p. 2. f. 300. So
that in the esteem of the whole Nation, what the Cardinal had done was not
vallid without the Confirmation of the Pope himself. Now this Pope Julius, and
the next Marcellus both dyed before there is any pretense of any Confirmation
from Rome; but this was at length done by Pope Paul the Fourth, is pretended,
and for proof of it three things are alleged, First, The Journals of the House
of Commons where are these words, After which was read a Bill from the Popes
Holiness, confirming the doing of my Lord Cardinal, touching the assurance of
Abby-Lands, etc. Secondly, a Bull of the same Pope to Sir Will. Peter's.
Thirdly, The Decrees of Cardinal Pool, and his Life by Dudithius: To all which
I answer.

First, That its confessed on all hands, that there is no such Bull or
Confirmation by Pope Paul the Fourth, to be any where found in the whole World,
not any Copy or Transcript of it, not in all the Bullaria, nor our own Rolls
and Records, though it be a matter of so great moment to the Roman Catholics of
England, and what cannot be produced may casily be denied. Nor can it be
imagined that a Journal of Laypersons that were parties concerned, or a private
Bull to Sir Will. Peter's, or some hints in the Decrees and Life of the Cardinal
will be of any moment in a Court at Rome, whenever a matter of that vast
consequence, as all the Abby-Land's in England shall come to be disputed,
especially if it be observed, that this very Journal of the house of Commons is
no public Record, but has past through private hands. has been corrupted and
defaced, and that in Passages of the greatest moment, as are the words of of W.
Hakewell Esquire in his Observation upon them 70 Years since, printed A. D. 1641.
And whereas the Journal's of the House of Lords are true Records, and kept by
their proper Officer; there is not one word to be sound of any such
confirmation.

Secondly, If there ever was any such Bull it had this limitation in it, that
the Possessors of such Lands should bestow them all on Colleges, Hospitals,
parochial Ministers, or other such like spiritual Uses; and this I prove.

First, Because the famous Instances that are usually given of the Popes
Alienations of Church Lands, were only a changing them from one religious Use
to another. Thus when Pope Clement the Fifth, A. D. 1307, suppressed the
Knights-Templars in this Nation, and seized all their Lands and Goods, he gave
them all to the Hospitallers of St John of Jerusalem, and that was ratified in
Parliament, 17. Fdw. Second; which Act sets forth, That tho those Lands were
escheated to the Lords of the Fee by the said Dissolution, yet it was not
lawful to detain them. When Pope Clement the Seventh, A. D. 1528, gave Cardinal
Woolsey a Power to surpress several Monasteries; he was to transferr all their
Goods and Possessions to his Collegiate Church at Windsor, and to Kings College
in Cambridge; and when the same Pope gave the same Cardinal many other
Religious Houses, it was for the endowing Christ-Church in Oxford, and his
College in Ipswich: And to name no more, when Pope Alexander the seventh, A. D.
1655. suppressed the Order of the Fratres Cruciferi, he disposed of all their
Houses, Farms and Rights to such uses and pious works as he thought fit. Vide
Bullar. Ludg. Vol. Ult. Fol. 220.

Secondly, When this very Pope was attended with the English Ambassadors that
came to his Confirmation, the Pope found fault with them, That the Churchyards
were not restored, saying that it was by no means to be tolerated, and that it
was necessary to render all even to a Farthing, because the things that belong
to God, can never be applied to humane uses, and he that withholdeth the least
part of them, is in a continual state of Damnation; that if he had power to
grant them he would do it most readily, -- but his authority was not so large
as that he might profane the things that are dedicated to God; andlet England
be assured that this would be an Anathema, etc. F. Paul's H. of the Council of
Trent; p. 392. SleidaniCom. P. 779. And all this was said by the Pope within
four Months of the pretended Confirmation.

Thirdly, The private Bull to Sir W. Peter's bears date within two. Months after
the pretended Confirmation, vide. Sir W. Dugdales Eccl. Col. Fol. 207. the
Title of which Bull is this, The Bull of Paul the Fourth Bishop of Rome, in
which he confirms to Sir W. Peter's all and singular the Sales of several
Manors, etc. sometimes belonging to Monasteries, which the said Sir W. Peter's
is ready to assign and demise to spiritual uses. Then follows the Bull it self,
which says, That this Confirmation was humbly desired from us, and that there
were reasonable Causes to persuade it, viz. a Petition exhibited by the said
Sir W. Peter's, that the Manors, etc. belonging to certain Monasteries, and
sold to him by King Henry the Eighth, which he is ready to assign and demise to
spiritual uses, may be approved and confirmed to him; wherefore the said Pope
does acquit and absolve him, being inclined by the said supplications, etc. By
which Bull Sir W. Peter's had no power given him to keep those Lands or dispose
of them to his Heirs, but only to distribute them to such religious uses as he
thought best. Now it is a most implorable thing, that Sir W. Peter's should
petition the Pope for a limited Dispensation, if the whole Nation, as is
pretended, had been absolutely dispensed with but two Months before, without
any limitation at all: So that either there was no such General Confirmation,
or else it was limited, with the same restrictions as that to Sir W. Peter's,
viz. to bestow them upon spiritual Uses. And this is the only probable Reason
why in England this Bull is wholly suppressed and lost. In confirmation of
this, it may be observed, that Cardinal Pool, notwithstanding his Dispensation,
earnestly exhorted all Persons by the Bowels of Christ Jesus, that not being
unmindful of their Salvation, they would at least out of their Ecclesiastical
Goods take care to increase the Endowments of Parsonages and Vicarages, that
the Incumbents may be commodiously and honestly maintained according to their
Quality and Estate, whereby they may laudibly exercise the cure of Souls, and
support the incumbent Burdens, and farther urged the Judgments that fell upon
Balthazar, for converting the holy Vessels to profane uses.

Fourthly, Queen Mary, who best understood what had been done, after the time
of this pretended Confirmation from the Pope, restored all the Church Lands
that were then in the Crown, saying, That they were taken away contrary to the
Law of God and of the Church, and therefore her Conscience did not suffer her
to detain them, etc. When she gave them to the Pope and his Legate to dispose
of to the Honor of God, etc. she said, She did it because she set more by the.
Salvation of her Soul than ten such Kingdoms. Heylins H. Ref. p. 235. And to
this Act of Restitution, she was vehemently pressed by the Pope and his Legate.
F. Paul's H. of the C. of Trent, p. 393. Dudithius in vita poli. p. 32. And
these things thus restored by the Queen, were disposed of by the Legate to
several Churches, Dudithius, ib. From all which it is evident, that neither the
Pope, nor his Legate, nor Queen Mary knew of any such Confirmations of these
Alienations as would quiet the Conscience without restoring them to spiritual
uses.

Fifthly, Queen Mary, not only did so her self, but pressed it vehemently upon
her Nobles and Parliament, that they would make full Restitution, Heylin p.
237. Sleidan. p. 791. and several of them, as Sir Thomas Pope, Sir William
Peter's, etc. who had swallowed the largest morsels of those Lands, did make
some sort of Restitution, though not to the Abbeys themselves, yet to Colleges
and Religious Uses.

Sixthly, This very Pope Paul the Fourth, published a Bull, in which he
threatened Excommunication to all manner of Persons as kept any Church Lands to
themselves, and to all Princes, Noblemen, and Magistrates, that did not
forthwith put the same in Execution. Heylin's Hist. Ref. p. 238. So that by a
new Decree he retrieved all those Goods and Ecclesiastical Revenues which had
been alienated from the Church, since the time of Julius the Second. Rycaut's
Contin. p. 112. So improbable a story is it, that this Pope confirmed these
Alienations in England. And whereas Dr. Johnston, p. 173. has these words, Mr.
Fox says, the Pope published a Bull in print against the restoring of
Abby-Lands, which Dr. Burnet affirms also, Ap. Fol. 403. It is notoriously
false, they both asserting the contrary; Dr. Burnet's Words in that very place
are these: The Pope in plain terms refused to ratify what the Cardinal had
done, and soon after set out a severe Bull, cursing and condemning all that
held any Church Lands.

Seventhly and lastly, The succeeding Popes have been clearly of this opinion.
Pope Pius the Fourch, who immediately succeeded this Paul, confirmed the
Council of Trent, and therein damned all the detainers of Church Lands; and
though he was much importuned to confirm some Alienations made by the King of
France to pay the debts of the Crown, yet he absolutely refused ^, F. Paul's H.
C. Trent. p. 713. Pope Innocent the Tenth, first protested against the
Alienations of Church Lands in Germany, that were made at the great Treaty of
Munster and Osnaburg. A. D. 1648. and when that would not do, by his Bull, Nov.
26. in the very same Year, damns all those that should dare to retain the
Church Lands, and declares the Treaty void. Instrumentum pacis, etc. and
Innocentii 10 me declaratio nullitatis. Artic. etc. and all their late Popes in
the Bulla caenae do very solemnly Damn and Excommunicate all those who usurp
any Jurisdiction, Fruits, Revenues, and Emoluments belonging to any
Ecclesiastical Person upon account of any Churches, Monasteries, or other
Ecclesiastical Benefices, or who, upon any occasion or cause, Sequester the
said Revenues without the express leave of the Bishop of Rome, or others,
having lawful power to do it, etc. And though upon Good Friday there, is
published a general Absolution, yet out of that are expressly excluded all those
who possess any Church Lands or Goods, who are still left under the sentence of
Excommunication. Toleti Instr. Sacord. and his Explicatio casuum in Bulla canae
Dni reserva.

From which considerations it is evident, that it never was the design of the
Pope to confirm the English Church Lands to the Lay-possessors, but that he
always urged the necessity of restoring of them to religious uses, in order to
which, the Papists prevailed to have the statute of Mertmaln repealed for 20
Years. In Queen Elizabeth's Reign the factious Party that was managed wholly by
Romish Amiffaries, demanded to have Abbeys and such religious Houses restored
for their Use, and A. D. 1585, in their Petition to the Parliament, they set it
down as a resolute Doctrine, that things once dedicated to Sacred Uses ought so
to remain by the Word of God for ever, and ought not to be converted to any
private use, Bishop Bancrofts Sermon at p. c. A. D. 1588. p. 25. And that the
Church of Rome is still gaping after these Lands, is evident from many of their
late Books, as the Religion of M. Luther, lately printed at Oxford, p. 15. The
Monks wrote Anathema upon the Registers and Donaticns belonging to Monasteries,
the weight and effect of which Curses are both felt and dreaded to this day. To
this end, the Monasticon Anglicanum is so diligently preserved in the Vatican,
and other Libraries in Popish Countries, and especially this appears from the
obstlnate refusal of this present Pope to confirm these Alienations, tho it be
a matter so much controverted, and which would be of that vast Use toward
promoting their Religion in this Kingdom.

If therefore the Bishops of Rome did never confirm these Alienations of Church
Lands, but earnestly and strictly required their Restitution; if they have
declared in their Authentic Canons, that they have no power to do it, and both
they and the last general Council pronounce an heavy Curse and Anathema against
all such as detain them: Then let every one that possesses these Lands, and
yet owns either of these foreign Jurisdictions, consider, that here is nothing
left to excuse him from Sacrilege, and therefore with his Estate he must
derive a curse to his Posterity. There is scarcely any Papist but that is
forward to accuse King Henry the 8th. of Sacrilege, and yet never reflects
upon himself who quietly possesses the Fruits of it, without Restitution,
either set them not accuse him, or else restore themselves. Now whatever
opinions the Papists may have of these things in the time of health, yet I must
desire to remember what the Jesuits proposed to Cardinal Pool in Doctor Pary's
Days, viz. That if he would encourage them in England, they did not doubt but
that by dealing with the Consciences of those who were dying, they should soon
recover the greatest part of the Goods of the Church. Dr. Burnet's Hist. Vol.
2. p. 328. Not to mention that whenever the Regulars shall grow numerous in
England, and by consequence butthensome to the few Nobility and Gentry of that
Persuasion, they will find it necessary for them to consent to a Restitution of
their Lands, that they may share the burden among others. For so vast are the
Burdens and Payments that that Religion brings with it, that it will be found
at length an advantageous Bargain to part with all the Church Lands to
indemnifie the rest. And I am confident that the Gentry of England that are
Papists, have found greater Burdens and Payments since their Religion has
been allowed, than ever they did for the many years it was forbid; and this
charge must daily increase so long as their Clergy daily grows more numerous,
and their few Converts are most of them of the meanest Rank, and such as want
to be provided for: And that is no easy matter to force Converts, may appear
from that excellent Observation of the great Emperor Charles the Fifth, who
told Queen Mary, That by endeavoring to compel others to his own Religion, i.
e had tired and spent himself in vain, and purchased nothing by it, but his own
dishonor. Card. Pool in Heylins Hist. Ref. p. 217. And to conclude this
Discourse, had the Act of Pope Julius the Third by his Legate Cardinal Pool, in
confirming of the Alienation of Church Lands in England, been as vallid as is
by some pretended? yet what shall secure us from an Act of Resumption? That
very Pope after that pretended Grant to Cardinal Pool, published a Bull, in
which he excommunicated all that kept Abbey Lands or Church Lands, Burnets Hist.
Vol. 2. p. 309. by which all, former Grants, had there been any, were
cancelled. His Successor, Pope Paul the Fourth, retrieved all the Goods and
Ecclesiastical Revenues that had been alienated from the Church, since the time
of Julius the Second; and the chief Reasons that are given why the Popes may
not still proceed to an Act of Resumption of these Lands in England, amount
only to this, That they may stay for a fair opportunity, when it may be done
without disturbing the Peace of the Kingdom. From all which it is evident, that
the detaining of Abbey Lands, and other Church Lands, from the Monks and Friars,
is altogether inconsistent with the Doctrine and Principles of the Romish
Religion.

The King's Power in Ecclesiastical Matters truly stated.
HIS present Majesty having erected an High Commission Court to enquire of, and
make redress in Ecclesiastical Matters, etc.

Q. Whether such a Commission, as the Law now stands, be good or not?

And I hold that the Commission is not good. And to maintain my Opinion herein,
I shall, in the first place, briefly consider, what Power the Crown of England
had in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Matters (for I take them to be synonymous
Terms) before 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. And 2ly. I shall particularly consider that
Act of 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. And, 3ly. I shall consider 13 Car. 2. ca. 12. And by
that time I have fully considered these three Acts of Parliament, it will
plainly appear, That the Crown of England has now no Power to erect such a
Court.

I must confess, and do agree, That by the common Law all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was lodged in the Crown; and the Bishops, and all Spiritual
Persons derived their Jurisdiction from thence: And I cannot find, that there
were any attempts by the Clergy to divest the Crown of it, till William the
First's time, in whose time, and his Successors down to King John, the Pope
obtained four Points of Jurisdiction; 1st. Sending of Legates into England.
2ly. Drawing of Appeals to the Court of Rome. 3ly. Donation of Bishoprics and
other Ecclesiastical Benefices. And, 4ly. Exemption of Clerks from the secular
Power. Which four Points were gained within the space of an hundred and odd
years; but with all the opposition imaginable of the Kings and their People;
and the Kingdom never came to be absolutely inslaved to the Church of Rome till
King John's time, and then both King and People were, and so continued to be in
a great measure in Henry III's time; and so would in all likelihood have
continued, had not the wise Edward I. opposed the Pope's Usurpation, and made ^
Statute of Mortmain: But that which chiefly ^ the Neck of this, was, That after
the Pope and Clergy had endeavored in Ed. II's time, and the beginning of Ed.
III. to usurp again; Ed. 3. ^ resist the Usurpation, and made the Statutes of
Provisors, 25 Ed. 3. and 27 Ed. 3. And Richard II. ^ those Acts with 16 Rich.
2. ca. 5. and kept ^ Power in the Crown by them. Laws, which being interrupted
by Queen Mary, (a bloody Bigot the Church of Rome) during her Reign, there was
an Act made in 1 Eliz. ca. 1. which is entitled An Act to restore to the Crown
^ ^.
the ancient Jurisdiction over the Estate, Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and
abolishing foreign Powers repugnant to the same. From which Title I collect
three things; 1st. That the ^ had anciently a Jurisdiction over the Estate
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual. 2ly. That that Jurisdiction had for some time
been at least suspended, and the Crown had not exercised it. 3ly. That ^ Law
did not introduce a new Jurisdiction, but restored the Old; but with restoring
the old Jurisdiction to the Crown, gave a Power of Delegating the Exercise of
it. And as a Consequence from the whole, that all Jurisdiction that is lodged
the Crown, is subject nevertheless to the Legislative Power in the Kingdom.

I shall now consider what Power this Act of 1 ^. 1. declares to have been
anciently in the ^, and that appears from Sect. 16, 17, 18. of the same Act.

Section 16. Abolisheth all Foreign Authority in ^ Spiritual and Temporal, in
these words; And the intent that all the Usurped and Foreign Power and
Authority, Spiritual and Temporal, may for ever clearly extinguished, and never
to be used or obeyed within this Realm, or any other Your Majesty's Dominions
or Countries: (2.) May it please Your Highness, that it may be further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, ^ or
Potentate Spiritual or Temporal, shall at any ^ after the last day of this
Session of Parliament, ^, enjoy, or exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction,
Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence or Privilege Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
within this Realm, or within any other Your Majesty's Dominions or Countries
that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from ^ the same shall be clearly
Abolished out of this ^, and all other Your Highness's Dominions for ^; any
Statute, Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions, ^ any other matter or cause
whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And after the said Act
has abolished all Foreign Authority, in the very next Section, Sect 17. It
annexeth all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown in these words; And that
also it may likewise please Your Highness, That it may be Established and
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities, and Preheminences, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been, or may
lawfully be exercised, or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State
and Persons, and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and of all
manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities
shall for ever, by Authority of this present Parliament, be United and Annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. From these words, That such Jurisdiction,
etc. as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had then-to-fore
been exercised or used, were annexed to the Crown; I observe, That the Four
things aforesaid, wherein the Pope had incroached, were all restored to the
Crown; and likewise all other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that had been
exercised or used in this Kingdom, and did thereby become absolutely vested in
the Crown.

Then Section 18. gives a Power to the Crown to assign Commissioners to
exercise this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in these words; And that Your
Highness, Your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have
full Power and Authority, by Virtue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, to Assign, Name and Authorize when and as often as Your
Highness, Your Heirs or Successors shall think meet and convenient, and for
such and so long time as shall please Your Highness, Your Heirs or Successors,
such Person or Persons, being natural horn Subjects to Your Highness, Your
Heirs or Successors, as Your Majesty, Your Heirs or Successors shall think meet
to exercise, use, occupy and execute under Your Highness, Your Heirs and
Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges and Preheminences in any
wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within
these Your Realms of England and Ireland, or any other Your Highness's
Dominions and Countries; (2.) and to Visit, Reform, Redress, Order, Correct and
Amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Power, Authority or Jurisdiction can or may lawfully be Reformed, Ordered,
Redressed, Corrected, Restrained or Amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God,
the increase of Virtue, and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this
Realm; (3) And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned, authorized
and appointed by your Highness, your Heirs or Successors after the said Letters
Patents to him or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall have full
Power and Authority by virtue of this Act and of the said Letters Patents under
your Highness, your Heirs and Successors to exercise, use and execute all the
premises according to the tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents, any
matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

So that, I take it, that all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was in the
Crown by the Common Law of England, and declared to be so by the said Act of 1
Eliz. 1. and by that Act a power given to the Crown to assign Commissioners to
Exercise this Jurisdiction; which was accordingly done by Queen Eliz. and a
High Commission Court was by her Erected; which late and held Plea of all
Causes, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical during the Reign of Queen Eliz. King James
the first, and King Charles the first, till the 17 year of his Reign.

Which leads me to consider the Statute of 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. which Act recites
the Title of 1 Eliz. ca. 1. and Sect. 18. of the same Act, and recites further,
Section 2. That whereas by color of some words in the aforesaid branch of the
said Act, whereby Commissioners are Authorized to execute their Commission
acording to the tenor and effect of the Kings Letters Patents, and by Letters
Patents grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners have to the great and
insufferable Wrong and Oppression of the Kings Subjects used to Fine and
Imprison them, and to exercise other Authority, not belonging to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction restored by that Art, and diverse other great Mischiefs and
Inconveniences have also ensuid to the Kings Subjects by occasion of the said
Branch, and Commissions issued thereupon, and the executions thereof: Therefore
for thr repressirg and preventing of the aforesaid abuses, Mischiefs and
Inconveniences in time to come, (by Sect. 3. the said Clause in the said Act 1
E. 1. is Repealed with a Non obstante to the said Act in these words) Be it
Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this
present Paliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
aforesaid Branch, Clause, Article or Sentence contained in the said Act, and
every word, matter and thing contained in that Branch, Clause, Article or
Sentence shall from benceforth be Repealed, Annulled, Revoked, Annihilated and
utterly made Void for ever; any thing in the said All to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And in Sect 5. of the same Act it is Enacted, That from and after the First of
August, (in the said ^ mentioned) all such Commissions shall be void, in these
words, And be it further Enacted, Toat ^ and after the said First day of August
no new Court should be erected, ordained or appointed within this Realm of
England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall or ^ have the like Power,
Jurisdiction or Authority as to said High Commission Court now bath or
pretends ^ have; but that all and every such Letters Patents Commissions and
Grants, made or to be made by ^ Majesty, his Heirs or Successors; and all
Powers and Authorities, Granted or pretended, or mentioned ^ be granted
thereby; And all Acts Sentences and Decrees to be made, by virtue or color
thereof, shall ^ utterly void and of none effect.

By which Act then, the power of Exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
Commissioners, under the Broad-Seal, is so taken away, that it provided no such
power shall ever for the future be Delagated by the Crown, to any Person or
Person whatsoever.

Let us then in the last place consider, Whether the Act of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12.
has Restored this Power or not?

And for this, I take it, that it is not restored ^ the said Act, or any Clause
in it; and to make that evident, I shall first set down the whole Act ^ then
consider it in the several Branches of it, that relate to this matter: The Act
is Entitled,

An Act for Explanation of a Clause contained in an Act of Parliament made in
the 17th Year of the ^ King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a Branch
of Statute in primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical.

The Act it self runs thus, Whereas in an Act of Parliament made in the
Seventeenth Year of the ^ King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Branch of a Statute primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical, it is (amongst other things.) Enacted, That no Archbishop,
bishop nor Vicar General, nor any Chancellor, nor ^ of any Archbishop, Bishop
or Vicar General, ^ any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual
Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister of Justice nor any other person or
persons whatsoever, ^ Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or
Jurisdiction, by any Grant Lisence, or Commission of the King Majesty. His
Heirs or Successors, or by any Power ^ Authority derived from the King, his
Heirs or Successors or otherwise, shall (from and after the First Day of August
which then should be in the Year of our Lord ^ One thousand six hundred forty
one) Award, Impose or Inflict any Pain, Penalty, Fine, Amercement,
Imprisonment, or other Corporal Punishment upon any of the Kings Subjects, for
any Contempt, Misdemeanor, Crime, Offense, Matter or Thing whatsoever,
belonging ^ Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance or Jurisdiction; (2)
Whereupon some doubt has been made that all ordinary power of Coertion and
proceeding in Causes acclesiastical were taken away, whereby the ordinary cause
of Justice in Causes Ecclesiastical has been obstructed. (3.) Be it therefore
Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That neither the said Act nor any
thing therein contained, does or shall take away any ordinary Power or
Authority from any of the said Archbishops, Bishops, or any other person or
persons, named as aforesaid, but that they and every of them, Exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may Proceed, Determine, Sentence, Execute and
Exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all Cenfures and
Coertions appertaining and belonging to the same, before any making of the act
before recited, in all Causes and Matters belonging ^ Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws used and
practiced in this ^, in as ample Manner and Form as they did and might lawfully
have done before making of the said Act.

Sect. 2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the before
recited Act of Decimo ^ Car. and all the Matters and Clauses therein contained
(excepting what concerns the High Commission Court, or the new Erection of some
such like court by Commission) shall be and is thereby Repealed to all intents
and purposes whatsoever, any thing, cause or sentence in the said Act contained
to the contrary not withstanding.

Sect. 3. Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, that neither this Act nor
any thing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to revive, or give
Force to the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said First Year of the
Reign of the said Late Queen Elizabeth mentioned in the said Act of Parliament
made on the said Seventeenth Year of the Reign of the said King Charles; but
that the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said First Year of the
Reign of the said Late Queen Elizabeth shall stand and be Repealed ^ such sort
as if this Act had never been made.

Sect. 4. Provided also, and it is hereby further Enacted, That it shall not be
lawful for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or
any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister, or any other
person having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to Tender
or Administer unto any person whatsoever, the Oath usually called the Oath Ex
Officio, or any other Oath whereby such person to whom the same is tendered or
Administered, may be charged or compelled to Confess or Accuse, or to purge him
or her self of any Criminal matter or thing whereby he or she may be liable to
Censure or Punishment; any thing in this Statute, or any other Law, Custom or
Usage hertofore to the contrary hereof in any wife notwithstanding.

Sect. 5. Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained shall
not extend, or be construed to extend, to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop, or
any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or other person or persons
aforesaid, any Power or Authority to Exercise, Execute, Inflict or determine
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure, or Coertion, which they might not by
Law have done before the Year of our Lord 1639. (2) Nor to Abridge or Diminish
the Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, nor to
confirm the Canons made in the Year 1640. nor any of them, nor any other
Ecclesiastical Laws or Canons not formerly Confirmed, Allowed or Enacted by
Parliament, or by the Established Laws of the Land, as they stood in the Year
of our Lord 1639.

From the Title of the Act, and the Act it self considered, I gather,

First, That it is an Explanatory Act of the 17. of Car. 1. as to one
particular Branch of it, and not introductive of any new Law.

Secondly, That the occasion of making it was not from any doubt that did
arise, Whether the High Commission Court were taken away? or Whether the Crown
had power to Erect any suchlike Court for the future, but from a doubt that was
made that all ordinary Power of Coertion, and proceedings in Causes
Ecclesiastical was taken away, whereby Justice in Ecclesiastical Matters was
obstructed; and this doubt did arise from a Clause in 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. Sect.
4. herein mentioned to be recited in the said Act of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12.

Thirdly, That this Statute of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12. as appears upon the face of
it, was made to the intent the ordinary Jurisdiction which the Bishops and
other Ecclesiastical persons had always exercised under the Crown, might not be
infringed; but not to restore to the Crown the power of Delagating the Exercise
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Letters Patents to Lay persons or any others,
and as to this nothing can be plainer than the words of the Act it self, Sect.
2.

Whereby 17 Car. 1. is repealed, but takes particular care to except what
concerned the High Commission Court or the new erection of some such Court by
Commission.

Neither did the Lawmakers think this Exception in that Statute of 13 Car. 2.
ca. 12. Sect. 2. to be sufficient, but to put the matter out of all doubt, in
the Third Section of the same Statute, It is provided and Enacted, That neither
that Act nor any thing therein contained, should extend or be construed to
revive, or give force to the Branch of 1 Eliz. 1. Sect. 18. but that the same
Branch should stand absolutely Repealed. And if so, then the power of the Crown
to delegate the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is wholly taken away;
for it was vested in the Crown by 1 Eliz. 1. and taken away by 17 Car. 1. ca.
11. and is in no manner restored by 13 Car. 2. 12. or any other.

But there may arise an Objection from the words in the Statute of 13 Car. 2.
ca. 12. that says, That that Act shall not extend to abridge or diminish the
Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs. Whence some
Men would gather, That the same Power still remains in the Crown that was in it
before 17 Car. 1. ca. 11.

To which Objection I give this Answer, That every Law is to be so constructed,
that it may not be Felo de se, and that, for the honor of the Legislators,
King, Lords, and Commons. Now I would appeal to the Gentlemen themselves that
assert this Doctrine, Whether they can so construct the Act of 13 Car. 2. ca.
12. as they pretend to do, without offering violence to their own Reason, For
when the 1 Car. 1. ca. 11. had absolutely Repealed the Branch of 1. Eliz. 1.
that vested the power in the Crown of Delegating the Exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and Enacts, That no such Commission shall be for the future; and
the Act of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12. Repeals the 17 Car. ^ ca. 12. except what relates
to that particular Branch, there can no more of the King's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, be saved by the saving in the 13 Car. 2.
ca. ^ but what was left in the Crown by 17 Car. ^ ca. 11.

And now I hope I have sufficiently evinced That all the Proceedings before the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners are CORAM NON ^ and therefore have sufficient
Reason to ^ That the same would never have been set on ^ by his present Majesty
(who had always the Character of JAMES the Just, and has ^ upon his Royal
Word, That he will invade ^ Man's Property) had he not been Advised there unto
by them who are better versed in the Canon of the Church of ROME, than in the
Laws that relate to the CROWN and CHURCH of ENGLAND.

A LETTER of several French Ministers Fled into Germany upon the account of the
PERSECUTION in France, to such of their Brethren in England as approved the
Kings Declaration touching Liberty of Conscience. Translated from the Original
in French.
Although in our present Dispersion, most dear and honored Brethren, it has
pleased the Providence of God to conduct us into places very distant from one
another: Yet that Union which ought always to continue betwixt us, obliges us
to declare our sense to one another with a Christian and Brotherly Freedom upon
all occasions, that may present themselves to us so to ^ It Is this makes us
hope that you will not take ^ amiss of us, if at this time we deliver our
Opinion to you touching the Affairs of England in matter of Religion, and with
reference to that Conduct which you have observed therein.

We ought not to conceal it from you, ^ greatest part of the Protestants of
Europe have been extremely scandalized to understand, that certain among you,
after the example of many of the Dissenters, have Addressed to the King of
England, upon the account of his Declaration, by which he ^ granted Liberty of
Conscience to the No-nconformists: And that some others who had already ranked
themselves under the Episcopal Communion, nevertheless published the said
Declaration in their Churches; and this at a time when almost all the Bishops
themselves with so much Firmness ^ Courage refused to do it.

If we may be permitted to tell you freely what ^ Opinion is concerning the
conduct of the Bishops and of the Dissenters in this conjuncture, we shall make
no difficulty to pronounce in favor of the former. We look upon it that they
have exceedingly well answered the Duty of their Charge, whilst despising their
own private Interest, they have so worthily supported that of the Protestant
Religion: Whereas the others, for want of considering these things as they
ought to have done, have given up the interest of their Religion to their own
particular advantages.

It is not out of any complement to the Bishops, which less out of any enmity
to the Dissenters, that we make such different judgments concerning them. We
know well enough how to commend ^ blame, what seems to us to deserve our
Praise, ^ our Censure both in the one and in the other. We do not at all
approve the conduct of the Bishops toward the Dissenters under the last Reign.
And although we do not any more approve that of the Dissenters in separating from
their Communion, ^ we do confess they had some reason in the bottom for it; and
that the Ceremonies which they have refused to submit to, are the Remains of
Popery, which we could rather wish might have been entirely abolished. In this
unhappy Schism which has so long time rent the Church of England, we look upon
it, that both Parties have been equally defective in their Charity. On the one
side, the Dissenters ought by no means to have separated themselves for the
Form of Ecclesiastical Government, nor for Ceremonies which do not at all
concern the Fundamentals of Religion. On the other side, The Bishops should
have had a greater Condescension to the Weakness of their Brethren: And without
doubt they would have ^ in a manner more agreeable to the Spirit of the Gospel,
if instead of treating them with so much rigor as they did, they had left them
the Liberty of serving God according to their Conscience, till it should have
pleased him to reunite All under the same Discipline. However the Conformity
of Opinion between the Dissenters and Us, ought to have prejudiced Us in their
favor, had we been capable of Partiality on this occasion. There is also
another thing which might have disposed us to judge less favorably of the
Bishops than of them, and that is the Yoke which they have imposed upon the
French Ministers by obliging them to receive a second Ordination before they
could be permitted to Exercise their Ministry in the Church of England, as if
the Ordination they had received in France had not been sufficient. But we must
do Justice to all the World, and bear Witness to the Truth. We have already
said, and we must again repeat it: It seems to us that on this last Occasion
the Bishops have discharged their Duty, and are most worthy of Praise, whereas
the Dissenters on the contrary are extremely to be blamed. And we will
presently offer our Reasons wherefore we judge so of the one, and of the other.

In the mean time, most dear Brethren, give us leave freely to tell you, That
if our Brethren the Dissenters of England, who have Addressed to the King, are
to be blamed (as we verily believe they are) you certainly are much more to be
condemned. The Hardships under which they had lived for many years without
Churches, without Pastors, without Assemblies, made them think the Liberty of
Conscience which was offered to them, a great Ease. Their Spirits, soured and
prejudiced by the ill Treatments they had received from the Church of England,
had not freedom enough to let them see that the Present which was made them was
Empoison'd. And therefore upon the sudden they received it with joy, and
thought themselves obliged to testify their Acknowledgment of it. But for you
who never had any part in the Divisions of the Church of England, and who by
consequence were in a state to judge more soundly of things, How is it that you
should not have perceived the Poison that was hid under the Liberty of
Conscience offered to them? Or if you did not perceive it of your selves, how
is it that the Generous Refusal of the Bishops, though at the peril of their
Liberty and Estates, to publish the Declaration in their Diocesses, should not
at least have opened your eyes?

How have those Venerable Prelates now highly justified themselves from the
Reproach that was laid upon them of being Popishly affected, and of persecuting
the Dissenters only, but of a secret Hatred to the Reformation? How well have
they made it appear that these were only Calumnies invented by their Enemies to
render them odious to the Protestants, and that their hearts were truly fixed
to the Reformed Religion, and animated with a Zeal worthy Primitive Bishops?
Could you see those faithful Servants of God disobey the Order of their
Sovereign, expose themselves thereby to his Disgrace, suffer Imprisonment, and
prepare themselves to suffer any thing, rather than betray their Consciences
and their Religion, without admiring their Constancy, and being touched with
their Examples? But above all, could you resolve by your Conduct to condemn
that of those generous Confessors? Is this the Acknowledgment which you ought
to have made to them for that Charity, with which they had received and
comforted you in your Exile? Is this to Answer the Glorious Quality of
Confessors, of which you so much vaunt your selves? Is this the Act of Faithful
Ministers of Christ? Give us leave to tell you, most dear Brethren, your
Proceedings in this Affair appear so very strange to us, that we cannot imagine
how you were capable of so doing. It seems to us to have even effaced all the
Glory you had attained by your Sufferings, to Reproach your Ministry, and to be
unworthy of True and Reformed Christians.

This is no rash judgment which we pass; and to convince you that it is not, we
beseech you only to examine these things with us without Prejudice and Interest.

The Declaration of which we speak is designed for two purposes: The one, the
re-establishment of Popery. The other, the extinction of the Reformed Religion
in England. The former of these designs appears openly in it. The second is
more concealed; it is a Mystery of Iniquity, covered over with a specious
appearance; and of which the trace must be concealed till the time of
manifestation comes. We will say nothing of a third Design, which is, Of the
Oppression of the Liberties of England for the Establishment of an absolute
Authority, but shall leave it to the Politicians to make their Reflections upon
it. As for us, if we sometimes touch upon it, it shall be only with reference
to Religion: We will apply our selves chiefly to the two other Designs which
they proposed to themselves who made that Declaration.

It cannot be denied but that by this Declaration, there is a Liberty of
Conscience granted differently to the Papists and to the Dissenters. ^
comprehends both the one and the other under the Name of Nonconformists. And we
may with confidence affirm, That they were the Papists especially whom the King
had in his eye when he gave this Declaration. And howsoever he may pretend to
have been touched with the Oppressions which the Dissenters had suffered; yet
that his principal design was to re-establish Popery.

Behold here already a very great evil, and such as all true Protestants are
obliged with their ^ most power to oppose. What, shall we see Popery, that
abominable Religion, that prodigio^^ heap of Filthiness and Impurity,
re-establish itself, with all it honors, in Kingdoms from which the
Reformation had happily banished it? And shall there be found in those Kingdoms
Protestant who not only stand still without making any opposition to it, but
even favor its re-establishment and openly give it their Approbation? Who
could have thought that the Dissenters of England, ^ who have always testified
so great an aversion to the Roman Religion; and who have no other pretense to
separate from the Bishops, than that they have in part retained in their
Government and Ceremonies the Exteriors of that Religion, should now themselves
join to bring it entirely in? But above all, Who could have believed that the
French Ministers, who after having experimented all the Fury of Popery in
France, were at last banished, rather than that they would subscribe to its
Errors and Abuses: And for this very cause fled into England, that they might
there more freely profess the Protestant Religion, should now contribute to
re-establish Popery in their new Country where they had been received by their
Brethren with so singular a Charity? Would you indeed Gentlemen, see England
once more submitted to the Tyranny of the Pope, whose Yoke it so happily threw
off in the last Age? Would you there see all those monstrous Doctrines, all
those Superstitions, and that horrible Idolatry which reigned there before the
Reformation, domineer once more in it? Would you that the People should again
hear the Pulpits and the Churches sounding out the Doctrins of Purgatory, of
Indulgences, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. and see the Image and Relics
of the Saints carried solemnly in Procession, with a God formed by the hand of
Man. And that in sine, they should again publicly adore those vain Idols? We
are confident there is not ^ good Protestant in the World that would not
startle ^ at the thought of it.

But this is not yet all. The Declaration of which we speak does not only
re-establish Popery with all its abominations, but does moreover tend to the
Ruin of the Reformation in England. A Man need not to have any great Sagacity
to be convinced of this. And that as much as it seems to establish for ever the
Protestant Religion in that Kingdom, it does on the contrary destroy the very
Foundations of it.

The ground upon which the Reformation is founded in England, are the Laws
which have been made at several times for the settlement of it, and to abolish
either the Tyranny of the Pope, or the Popish Religion altogether. And as these
Laws have been made by the King and Parliament together, so that the King has
not the power to Repeal them without a Parliament, they secure the Protestant
Religion against the Enterprises of such Kings as should ever think to Destroy
it.

But now if this Declaration be executed, we are no more to make any account of
those Solemn Laws which have been passed in favor of the Reformation; they
become of no value, and the Protestant Religion is entirely lest to the King's
Pleasure. This is what will clearly appear from what we are about to say.

The King not having been able to obtain of the last Parliament to consent to a
Repeal of the Laws which had been made against the Nonconformists, dissolved
the Parliament it self. Not long after, without attending a new one, he did
that alone by his Declaration which the Parliament would not do conjunctly with
him. He granted a all Liberty of Conscience to the Nonconformists, he freed
them from the Penalties which had been appointed against them, and dispensed
with the Oaths to which the Laws obliged all those who were admitted to any
Charges, whether in the soldiery, or in administration of Justice, or of the
Government. In pursuance of these Declarations, he threw the Protestants out of
all Places of any great Importance, to clap in Papists in their room, and goes
on without ceasing to the entire establishment of Popery. Who does not see,
that if the Protestants approve these Declarations, and themselves authorize
such Enterprises, the King will not stop here, but that this will be only one
step to carry him much further? What can be did when he shall do the same thing
with reference to those Laws which exclude the Papists out of the Parliament,
that he has done to those which shut them out of all Charges and Imploys, and
forbad them the Exercise of their Religion? Does not the approbation of such
Declarations, as it overthrows these last, carry with it beforehand the
approbation of those which shall one day overthrow the former? And if the King
shall once give himself the Authority to bring Papists into the Parliament, who
shall hinder him from using Solicitations, Promises, Threatenings, and a
thousand other the like means to make up a Popish Parliament? And who shall
hinder him with the concurrence of that Parliament to repeal all the ancient
Laws that had been passed against Popery, and make new ones against the
Protestants? These are without doubt the natural Consequences of what the King
at this time aims at. These are the fruits which one ought to expect from it,
if instead of approving, as some have done, his Enterprises against the Laws,
they do not on the contrary with all imaginable Vigor oppose them.

Reflect a little on what we have here said, and you will confess that we have
reason to commend the Conduct of the Bishops who refused to publish the
Declaration, and to condemn those Dissenters who have made their Addresses of
Thanks for it.

It is true, that the Dissenters are to be pitied, and that they have been
treated hardly enough; and we do not think it at all strange, that they so
earnestly sigh after Liberty of Conscience. It is natural for Men under
Oppression to seek for Relief; and Liberty of Conscience considered only in it
self, is, it may be, the Thing of all the World the most precious and most
desirable. Would to God we were able to procure it for them by any lawful
means, and without such ill Consequences, though it were at the peril of our
Lives! But we conjure them to consider how pernicious that Liberty of
Conscience is which is offered to them, as we have just now shown. On the one
side, it is inseparably linked with the Establishment of Popery; and on the
other, it cannot be accepted without approving a terrible Breach, which his
Majesty thereby makes upon the Laws, and which would be the ruin of the
Reformation in his Kingdoms, were not some Remedy brought to it. And where is
the Protestant who would buy Liberty of Conscience at so dear a rate, and not
rather choose to continue deprived of it all his Life?

Should the private Interest of our Brechren the Dissenters blind them in such
a manner, that they have no regard to the general Interest of the Church?
Should they for enjoying a Liberty of Conscience so ill assured, shut their
Eyes to all other Considerations? How much better would it be for them to
reunite themselves to the Bishops, with whom they differ only in some Points
of Discipline; but especially at this time, when their Conduct ought to have
entirely defaced those unjust Suspicions which they had conceived against them?
But if they could not so readily dispose themselves to such a Reunion, would
it not be better for them to resolve still to continue without Liberty of
Conscience, and expect some more favorable time when they may by lawful means
attain it, than to open themselves a Gite to Popery, and to concur with it to
the Ruin of the Protestant Religion?

You will, it may be, tell us, that it looks ill in us, who so much complain,
That we have been deprived of Liberty of Concience in France, to sind fault
with the King of England for granting it to his Subjects: And that it is the
least that can be allowed to a Sovereign, to allow him the Right to permit the
exercise of his own Religion in his own Kingdoms, and to make use of the
Service of such of his Subjects as himself shall think sit, by putting them
into Charges and Employs. You will add, That his Majesty does not go about
neither to abrogate the ancient Laws, nor to make new ones. All he does being
only to dispense with the Observation of certain Laws in such of his Subjects
as he thinks fit, and for as long time as he pleases; and that the right of
dispensing with, and suspending of Laws, is a Right insepably tied to his
Person: That for the rest, the Protestant Religion does not run the least
Risque. There are Laws to shut the Papists out of Parliament, and these Laws
can neither be dispensed with, nor suspended: So that the Parliament partaking
with the King in the Legislative Power, and continuing still Protestant, there
is no cause to fear, that any thing should be done contrary to the Protestant
Religion. Besides, What probability is there, that a King who appears so great
an Enemy to Oppression in matters of Conscience and Religion, should ever have
a thought, though he had the Power himself, to oppress in this very matter the
greatest part of his Subjects, and take from them that Liberty of Conscience
which he now grants to them, and which he promises so ^ to observe for the time
to come?

These are all the Objections that can with ^ appearance of Reason be made
against what we have before said. They may all be reduced ^ five, which we
shall examine in their order. And we doubt not but we shall easily make it
appear that they are all but mere Illusions.

1. We do justly complain, That they had taken from us our Liberty of
Conscience in France because it was done contrary to the Laws. And one may as
justly complain that the K. of England does labor to re-estalish Popery in his
Country, because he cannot do it but contrary to the Laws. Our Liberties in
France were founded us on solemn Laws, upon perpetual, irrevocable and sacred
Edicts, and which could not be ^, without violating at once the Public Faith
the Royal Word, and the Sacredness of an Oath And Popery has been banished out
of England by Laws made by King and Parliament, and which cannot be repealed
but by the author of King and Parliament together; so that the therefore there
is just cause to complain, that the King should go about to overthrow them
himself alone by his Declaration.

2. It is not true that a Sovereign has always the right to permit the Exercise
of his own Religion in his Dominions, and to make use of the ^ of such of his
Subjects as he himself shall that fit, that is to say, by putting of them into
^ and Employs: And in particular, he has this right, when the Laws of his
Country contrary thereunto, as they are in the ^ before us. Every King is
obliged to observe the fundamental Laws of his Kingdom. And the King of
England, as well as his Subjects ought to observe the Laws which have been
established by King and Parliament together.

3. For the third, the distinction between abrogation of a Law, and the
dispensing ^ and suspending of it, cannot here be of use; whether the King
abrogates the Laws which have been made against Popery, or whether without
saying expressly that he does abrogate them, he overthrows them by his
Declarations, under pretense of dispensing with suspending of them; it is still
in effect same thing. And to what purpose is it the Laws are not abrogated, if
in the ^ time all sorts of Charges are given to Papists and Popery it self be
re-established contrary to the tenor of the Laws? The truth is, if the King,
has such a power as this, if this be ^ Right necessarily tied to his Person,
it is in vain ^ the Parliament does partake with him in the Legislature. This
Authority of the Parliament is but a mere Name, a Shadow, a Phan ^, a Chimera,
and no more.. The King is still the absolute Master, because he can alone, and
without his Parliament, render useless by his Declarations, the Laws which the
Parliament shall have the most solemnly established together with him. We
confess the King has right of dispensing in certain Cases, as, if the concern
be what belongs to his private Interest, he may without doubt whenever he
pleases, depart from his own Rights; it is a Liberty which no body will pretend
to contest with him. But he has not the power to dispense to the Prejudice of
the Rights of the people, ^ by consequence put the Property, the Liberty, and
the Lives of his Protestant Subjects into the hands of Papists.

4. What we have now said in Answer to the third Objection, will be more clear
from the Answer we are to give to the fourth. They should persuade the
Protestants that their Religion is in safety, because on the one side the King
cannot make Laws without the Parliament; and that on the other, there being
Laws which exclude Papists out of the two Houses, it must necessarily follow,
That the Parliament shall continue to be Protestant. But if the King has the
power to break through the Laws, under the pretense of dispensing with, and
suspending of them, what Security shall the Protestants have that he will not
dispense with the Papists, the Observation of those Laws which do exclude them
out of the Parliament, as well as ^ has dispensed with those that should have
kept them out of Charges and Employments? ^ Security shall they have, that he
will ^ at any time hereafter suspend the Execution of the former, as he has
already suspended the Execution of the latter? Which being ^ what should hinder
us from seeing in a little ^ a Popish Parliament, who, together with the King,
shall pass Laws contrary to the Protestant Religion? What difference can be
shown between the one and the other of these Laws, ^ the one should be liable
to be dispensed with and suspended, and the other not? Were they not both
established by the King and Parliament? Were not both the one and the other
made for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and of those who profess it?
Are not the Rights of the people concerned in the one as well as in the other?
And whosoever suffers and approves the King in the violation of these Rights in
some things, does he not thereby authorize him to violate them in all? If the
King has power to put the Liberty and property, and Lives of his Protestant
Subjects at the mercy of the Papists, by placing them in Charges contrary to
the Law, why should he not have the power to raise the same Papists to the
Authority of Legislators, by declaring them capable of sitting in Parliament,
seeing that is but contrary to Law? Do not deceive your selves, the Laws are
the Barrier which bound the Authority of the King, and if this Barrier be once
broken, he will extend his Authority as far as he pleases. And it will be
impossible for you after that to set any bounds to it.

5. In fine, he must be very little acquainted with the Spirit of Popery, who
imagins that it will be content to re-establish it self in England, without
aiming to destroy the Protestant Religion. Give it but Time and Opportunity to
fortify it self, and you may then expect to see what it is. In all places
where it has got the power in its hands, it will not only rule, but rule alone,
and not suffer any other Religion besides it self; and imploys the Sword and
Fire to extirpate that which it calls Heresy. Were not this a Truth confirmed
by infinite Examples both ancient and modern, which every one knows who has
read any thing of History, it would be too much evidenced by the Cruelties
which it has so lately exercised against the Churches of Hungary, of France,
and of the Valleys of Piemont. And men ought not to be lulled asleep by the
pretense of an Inclination which the King of England would be thought to have
for Liberty of Conscience, nor by the Promises which he makes to perserve it to
all his Subjects without distinction. Every one knows that persidiousness and
breach of Faith, are Characters of Popery no less essential to it than Cruelty.
Can you doubt of this, Gentlemen? you who so lately came from making a sad
Experiment of it? How often did our King promise us to preserve us in our
Privileges? How many Declarations? How many Edicts did he set out to that
purpose? How many Oaths were taken to confirm those Edicts? Did not this very
King Lewis XIV. himself solemnly promise by several Edicts and Declarations to
maintain us in all the Liberties which were granted to us by the Edict of
Nantes? And yet after all, what scruple was there made to violate so many Laws,
so many Promises, and so many Oaths? The Protestants of England have themselves
also sometimes likewise experimented the same Infidelity: And not to allege
here any other Example, let us desire them to remember only the Reign of Queen
Mary, what promises she made at her coming to the Crown, not to make any change
of Religion; and yet what bloody Laws she afterward passed to extinguish the
Reformation as soon as she saw her self fast in the Throne? And with that
inhumanity she spilt the Blood of her most faithful Subjects to accomplish that
design. After such an instance as this, a man must be very credulous indeed,
and willing to deceive himself, that will put too much confidence in the
promises of the King that now reigns. Do we not know, that there are neither
Promises nor Oaths which the Pope does not pretend to have power to dispense
with in those whom he employs for the Extirpation of Heresy? And do we not
also know, that it is one of the great Maxims of Popery, a Maxim authorized
both by the Doctrine and Practice of the Council of Constance, That they are
not obliged to keep any Faith with Heretics. We ought not to believe that King
James II. a Prince who has so much Zeal for Popery, should be governed by any
other Maxims than those of his Religion. And whosoever will take the pains to
examine his Conduct, both before and since his coming to the Crown, will find
that he has more than once put 'em in practice:

And this, Gentlemen, we suppose may be sufficient to convince all reasonable
persons, that there is nothing more pernicious than that Declaration which you
have approved; whether by publishing it, as some of you have done, or by
addressing to the King to thank him for it. When you shall have reflected upon
these things you will without doubt your selves confess, that you have suffered
your selves to be amused with some imaginary advantages which you hope to make
by this Declaration. In the mean time most dear Brethren, you will pardon us,
if we have chanced to have let any thing slip that is not agreeable to you. We
had no Design to give the least Offense either to you, or to our Brethren the
Dissenters of England. If we have spoken our Thoughts freely of your Conduct,
and ^ theirs, we have at least spoken with no less liberty of that of the
Bishops. And God is our Witness, that we have said nothing of the one or the
other, but in the sincerity of our Heart and out of a desire to contribute
somewhat to his Glory, and the good of his Church. We are,

Most honored Brethren, Your most Humble, most Obedient and most affectionate
Brethren in Jesus Christ. N. ^

Popish Treaties not to be relied on: In a Letter from a Genleman at York, to
his Friend in the Prince of ORANGEs Camp. Addressed to all Members of the next
Parliament.
THE credulity and Superstition of Mankind has given great Opportunities and
Advantages to cunning Knaves to spread their Nets, and lay ^ Traps in order to
catch easy and unwary creatures; these being led on by Ignorance, or ^, they
by Pride or Ambition, or else a Vile and ^ Principle; Therefore seeing we are
in this state of Corruption, bred up to believe Contradictions and
Impossibilities, led by the Nose with ^ State Monntebank, and Mankish Jugler, ^
like Puppets by Strings and Wires; it seems ^ time to vindicate Humane Nature,
and to free ^ from these Shackles, laid upon her in the very ^: for Man (who
ought to be a Free and ^ Animal) in his present state is only an ^ and Machine,
contrived for the Vanity and ^ of Priests and Tyrants, who claim to themselves,
^ seem to Monopolize the Divine Stamp, though we ^ all made of the same.
Materials, by the same ^, and in the same Mould, equal by Nature, ^ together
and linked in Societies by mutual contracts, placed by turns one above another,
and entrusted for some time with the Power of executing our own Laws, and all
by general consent for the Public Good of the whole Community; this is ^
genuine Shape and Figure of Primitive and ^ Government, not distempered and
fatally ^ with the monstrous Excrescencies of Arbitrary Power in one single
Member above all the Laws of the whole; Infallibility, Divine Right, etc. ^ by
Knaves and Sycophants, bellev'd by Fools, ^ scarce ever heard of the Greek and
Roman Histories, and never read their own. I shall therefore give some Examples
(out of an infinite number) of People ruined and utterly destroyed by their ^
Credulity, and good Nature, matter of Fact ^ a stronger Proof, and better Rule
to steer mankind, than the empty Motions of the Schools, ^ only to perplex and
confound our ^, lest it should discover the naked Truth of things. The present
Letter will confine it self only to Public Promises, Oaths, and Solemn
Contracts, scandalonsly violated by the Roman Catholics, nor with Heathens and
Heretics only, but amongst themselves: We will begin with the more remote
Countries.

The Spaniards and Portugueses have acted so treacherously with the Africans,
and the Natives of both Indies, that the Cruelty of the History would be
incredible, if it was not related by their own Historians; their Leagues and
Treaties (the most sacred Bonds under Heaven) were soon neglected, and the
Spirit of their Religion broke all before it; how many Millions of those
innocent Creatures were murdered in cold Blood, and for Pastime sake, with all
the variety of Torments that the Devil could inspite into them? how soon were
the vast Regions of Mexico, New Spain, Peru, Hispaniola, Brasel, etc.
depopulated, above twenty Millions of the poor harmless Inhabitants being put
to death in full Peace, and they the best natured People in the World, and very
Ingenious; though they may seem Savages to a sort of Men, who think all
Barbarians that differ from them in Habits, Manners, Customs, Diet, Religion,
Language, etc. not considering that all-wise Nature has contrived a different
Scene of things for various Climates? Nay, such is the Inhumanity of these
Catholic Nations here at home, that they will frequently bring Strangers
(settled amongst them by the Laws of Commerce) and their own fellow Subjects
into the Inquisition, especially if they are Rich, upon a pretense of some
Heretical opinion, though they themselves at first protect and license the
Opinion; is in the case of Molino, whose Book had received an Imprimatur from
most of the Inquisitors of Spain and Italy, and even from the Infallible Head
of the Church, yet afterward it was burnt, and he himself together with many
of his Followers miserably tortured; the Pope scarce escaping the Punishment.
The Generous Marshal Schombergh (driven out of France for his great Services)
who had won many Battles for the Portugueses, and saved their Country, could
not be suffered to end his Old Age amongst them, but was forced in the midst of
Winter to commit himself to the Sea, and fly to an Inhospitable Shore.

The present French King renounced all his Pretenses on Flanders, concluded the
Pyrenean Treaty, and swore at the Altar, not to meddle with that Country; but
how well he observed that Sacred Covenant, Baron D'Isola will best inform you
in his ^ ^, for which he was thought to be poisoned; neither has the French
Monarch been contented to break all Faith and Measures with the Spaniard, but
he has gone about to deceive and ruin the Pope, Emperor, all the Princes and
Electours of the Empire, the Prince of Orange, Duke of Lorrain, the Swizzes,
the Dutch, and the English, and not only these his Neighbors and Allies, but
his own Protestant Subjects, who had all the Security that Solemn Edicts,
Oaths, and Promises could afford then, besides many other obligations upon the
Crown for bringing the King to the Throne; yet all of a sudden they found
themselves oppressed and destroyed by his Apostolical Dragoons, their Temples
razed, their Wives and Children taken away, their Goods and Estates
confiscated, themselves cast into Prisons, sent to the Galleys, and often shot
at like Birds: His seizing of Lorrain, Franch Compte, Alsact, Strasburgh,
Luxembergh, the Principality of Orange, the County of Avignon, Philipsburg, the
whole Palatinate, the Electorates of Mentz, Trevis, and Cologn, his building of
Citadels in the Empire and in Italy, etc. are so contradictory to National
Agreements, and Public Treatles, that scarce a Jesuit or a Frenchman can have
Impudence enough to defend them; a Banditto, a Pyrate, or a Pick-pocket would
be ashamed of such Actions; and an ordinary Man would be hanged for a Crime a
Million times less. His seizing upon Hudson's Bay, and leading the English into
Slavery; the French Treachery in the Engagement at Sea between us and the
Dutch, their frequent seizing of our Ships, are light things, not worthy our
Resentment, being under the Conduct of a Monsicur whom the World so justly
vilifies and despises.

The Emperor can have no good Pretense to condemn the King of France, or any
other Catohlick Prince for breach of Common Faith and Honesty, since he himself
has plald the same Game with his Protestant Subjects, inviting some of the ^
of the Hungarian Nobility to Vienna, under the color of Treaty and Friendship,
and then cutting of their Heads, seizing their Estates and Properties
destroying their Pastors and Churches, and extirpating the whole Reformed
Religion, after he had promised and stipulated to protect and give them the
liberty of their Consciences. The Parisian Massacres were carried on and
executed under a Mass of Friendship, all the Principal Protestants of France
being invited to the healing Marriage, to Revel and Caress, were Barbarously
Butchered at the Toll of a Bell in their Beds, when they dreamed they ^
securely. The Irish Massacre of above 200000 Protestants was no less
Treacherous, it was a Copy of the Spanish Cruelty in the West Indies, to whom
the Irish are compared by Historians for their Idleness and Inhumanity, tho'not
for their Wit.

The Persecutions of the Protestants in the Valley of Piedmont, are another
instance of Popish Immunity and baseness; they were under the common shelter of
public Pactions and Treatles, and ^ been solemnly owned by the Dukes of Savoy,
to ^ the most Loyal and the most Courageous of the Subjects. The present Duke,
who undertook the last Persecution, was not content to destroy the with his own
Troops, but called in the French assist at the Comedy, to shoot them off the
Rock to hunt them over the Alps, and to sell the stronger of them to the
Galleys, that the very Turkish Slave themselves might deride and insult over ^
Catholics, who have not Power or Opportunity execute the same things, seem to
condemn the Conduct in Public, but sing Te Deum in Private, and soon as ever
they have got a sufficient Force, commit the like Barbarities, so essential to
their Religion, that all the instinct of Nature cannot separate them. The Holy
Father at Rome (though he sets for a moderate and merciful Pontificate) ordered
Deum to be Sung up and down, for the extirpation of Heresy out of France and
Pidemont; and ^ English Catholics have given us (as their Army ^ Interest
increased) several proofs, how well ^ can juggle and disguise themselves;
setting up ^ of Inquisition, turning Protestants out of all ^ and even out of
their Freeholds, dispensing ^ Laws, Ravishing Charters, packing Corporations, ^
and all under a notion of Liberty or a Divine ^ they with their Accomplices
defended illegal Declarations, and set up an Authority above all our ^ under
the Cloak of a sham Liberty of Conscience, racking at the very same time the
Consciences of the Church of England Men, and ^ the Foundation of our State: If
Mr. Pen ^ his Disciples, had condemned the unlawfulness the Declarations and
the Dispensing Power, ^ they wrote so fast for Liberty of Conscience, they had
then showed a generous zeal for a just freedom in Matters of Religion, and at
the same ^ a due veneration to the Legislative Power, Kings, Lords, and
Commons) but the secret of the ^ was to maintain and Erect a Prerogative ^ all
Acts of Parliament, and consequently to produce upon that bottom Tyranny and
Popery; yet ^ all this uncontrollable Power and ^ of Grandeur, an Easterly
Wind, and a Fleet Fly-Boats, would cancel and undo all again. Our ^ Historians
relate of King John, that being some distress, he sent Sir Tho. Hardington, and
^ Sir Ralph Fitz-Nichols, Ambassadors to ^ the great Emperor of Morocco, with
^ of his Kingdom to him, upon Condition he should come and aid him, and that if
he prevailed ^ would himself turn Mohammedan and renounce ^.

I will not insist upon the violations of Laws and Treaties in the Low
Countries, or the Spanish ^ over them, because the Spaniards have got so much
by that Persecution and Cruelty, that they might be tempted to practice the
like again; for forcing the Netherlanders to take up Arms for their defense,
and by necessitating Queen Elizabeth ^ and preserve them, they have set up a ^
and Glorious State (as they themselves have called them in some Treaties) that
has preserved ^ languishing Monarchy of Spain, and the Liberty of Christendim.

The base and cowardly Massacre of that great ^ William Prince of Orange, of
the Renowned ^ Coligny, and the Prince of Conde; the many bloody Conspiracies
for the Extirpation of the whole Race of the House of Orange; The Murders ^
Henry the 2d, and Henry the 4th, are all Rewards and everlasting Monuments of
Popish Barbarity. What incredible Effusion of Blood has been occasioned by the
frequent revolts of the Popes against the Emperors, by he Image Worship, and
the Holy Wars? What Treachery in the Bohemian Transactions and Treaties? What
Inhumanity burning Jerome of Prague, and John Hus, when they had the Emperors
Pass, and all other ^ securities from the Council it self, that put to ^ those
two Good Men.

The Reign of Queen Mary, is another Scene of the Infidelity and Treachery of
the Church of Rome; what Oaths did she take? what Promises and Protestations
did she make to the Suffolk Men who had set the Crown upon her head? and yet
they were the first that felt the strokes of a Persecution from Her. Read her
History in Fox's Martyrs, and Doctor Burnet's History of the Reformation.

The many Conspiracies to destroy Queen Elizabeth and King James, the Gunpowder
Plot, the Counsels carried on in Popish Countries to take off King Charles the
First, and the many late Popish Plots, are a continued Series and Thread,
carried on by the Church of Rome, to break through all Laws both of God and Man,
to erect an Universal Monarchy of Priest-Crast, and to bring the whole World
under their Yoke. The Sweeds have taken an effectual and commendable way to
keep Popish Priests and Jesuits (those ^ and disturbers of Societies, the
declared Enemies to the Welfare of Mankind) out of their ^, by Gelding them,
and consequently rendering them incapable of Sacerdotal Functions, though the
Priests have found out a Salvo, and will say Mass and Consess, if they can
procure their Testicles again, and carry them in their Pockets either preserved
or in Powder. In aethiopia, China, and Japan, the Roman Priests have been so
intolerably turbulent, and such extravagant Incendiaries, that they have been
often Banished and put to Death; so that now they disguise themselves all over
the Eastern Nations, under the Names and Characters of Mathematicians,
Mechanics, Physicians, etc. and dare not own their Mission to propagate a
Faith which is grown ridiculous all over Asia.

The long and dreadful Civil Wars of France, the many Massacres and
Persecutions, and lastly, the Siege of Rochel, are living Instances how far we
may rely upon Engagements and Laws, both as to the taking of that Bulwark, and
the promised relief from hence. The Protestant Defenders of it, refusing to
rely any longer upon Paper Edicts, and the Word of a Most Christian King, had
this City granted them as a Cautionary Town for their Security, for before they
had always been deluded out of their Advantages by fair promises, insignificant
Treaties, and the word of a King; yet Lewis the 13. following the vicious
Examples of Treacherous Princes, fell upon this Glorious City, which upon the
account of their Laws and Privileges, made a resistance and brave defense,
(having never heard of Passive Obedience amongst their Pastors) thinking it
more lawful to defend their Rights, than it was for Lewis to invade them.

As for the late and present Reign here in England, they are too nice and
tender things for me to touch; whether the Transactions of them are consistent
with the Coronation-Oaths, the many Declarations, Protestations, public and
solemn Promises, I am no fit Judge; they are more proper for the Gravity of an
Historian, or the Authority of a Parliament to handle, than for a private
Gentleman in a Letter to his Friend: The Bishops Papers, and the P. of Orange's
Declarations are the best Memoirs of them, but they only begin, where the two
parts of the History of the growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government left off,
and how far we may trust to Catholic Stipulations, Oaths, and Treaties, the
facts of past and the present Age are the best Criterions and Rules to guide
and determine us; for what happens every day, will in all probability happen to
morrow, the same Causes always produce the same Effects; and the Church of Rome
is still the same Church it was a hundred years ago, that is, a Mass of
Treachery, Barbarity, Perjury, and the highest Superstition; a Machine without
any principle or settled Law of Motion, not to be moved or stopped with the
weights of any private or public Obligations; a Monster that destroys all that
is sacred both in Heaven and Earth, so Ravenous that it is never content,
unless it gets the whole World into its Claws, and tears all to pieces in order
to Salvation; a Preteus that turns it self into all shapes, a Chamelion that
puts on all Colors according to its present circumstances; this day an Angel
of Light, to morrow a Beelzehub. Amongst all the Courts of Christendom where I
have conversed, that of Holland is the freest from Tricks and Falsehood; and
though I am naturally jealous and suspicious of the Conduct of Princes, yet I
could never discover the least Knavery within those Walls, it appeared to me
another Athens of Philosophers, and the only Seat of Justice and Virtue now
left in the World; as for the Character of the Prince of Orange, it is so
faithfully drawn by Sir Will. Temple, Doctor Burnet, and in a half sheet lately
printed, that I, who am so averse from Flattery, that I can scarce speak a good
word of any Body, or think one good thought of my self, will not write any
further Panegyric upon his Highness, only that he is a very Honest Man, a
great Soldier, and a Wise Prince, upon whose Word the World may safely rely. A
late Pamphleteer reviles the Prince with breaking his Oath when he took the
Statholder's Office upon him, not considering that the Oath was imposed upon
his Highness in his Minority by a French Faction then jealous of the aspiring
and true Grandeur ^ his Young Soul; that the States themselves (^ whom the
Obligation was made) freed his Highness from the Bond; and that the necessity
of Affairs, and the Importunities of the People forced that Dignity upon him,
which his Ancestors had enjoyed, and he so well deserved, that he saved the
sinking Commonwealth (their Provinces being almost all surpised and enslaved
by the French compared to the gasping State of Rome after the loss of Can:
His Highness was no more pust up with this Success, than he had been daunted
with Hardships and Misfortunes; always the same ^ Just, Serene, and Unchanged
under all Events, and Argument of the vastness of his Mind; whereas on the
contrary, Mutability, (sometimes Tyrant sometimes Father of a Country,
sometimes ^, other times Sneaking) is oftentime a ^ of a Mean and Cowardly
Soul, vile and ^, born for Rapine and Destruction.

As for the Princess, she may without any flattery be styled the Honor and
Glory of her Sex; the most Knowing, the most Virtuous, the Fairest, and yet the
best Natured Princess in the World; ^ and Admired by her Enemies, never seen in
any Passion, always under a peculiar Sweetness of Temper, extremely moderate in
her Pleasures, taking delight in Working and in Study, Humble and Affable in
her Conversation, very percinent in ^ Questions, Charitable to all Protestants,
and frequenting their Churches: The Prince is often see with her at the Prayers
of the Church of England and she with the Prince, at the Devotion of ^ Church;
she dispenses with the use of the Surplice Bowing to the Altar, and the Name of
Jesus, out ^ Compliance to a Country that adores her; being more intent upon
the Intrinsic and Substantial Parts of Religion, Prayer and Good Works: ^
speaks several Languages even to Perfection, is entirely Obedient to the
Prince, and he extremely ^ to her; in a word, She is a Princess of many
extraordinary Virtues and Excellencies, without any appearance of vanity, or
the least mixture of ^ and upon whose promise the World may safely depend. As
for the many Plots and Conspiracies against this Royal Couple, a short time may
bring the all to light, and faithful Historians publish them in the World,

Lastly, We may observe, that whereas it has been the Maxim of several Kings
both at home and abroad of late years, to contend and outvie each other in
preying upon and destroying not only their Neighbors, but their own Protestant
Subjects, ^ all methods of Persidiousness and Cruelty; the only way to
establish Tyranny, and to enslave the natural Freedom of Mankind, being to
introduce a general Ignorance, Superstition, and Idolatry; For if once people
can be persuaded that Statues and Idols are Divinities and adorable, and that a
Wafer is the infinite God, after two or three ridiculous Words uttered by a
vile Impostor and Impudent Cheat, then they may easily be brought to submit
their necks to all the Yokes that a Tyrant and a Priest can invent and put upon
them; for if once they part with their Reason, their Liberty will soon follow;
as we behold every day in the miserable enslaved Countries where Popery
domineers. On the contrary, it has always been the steady and immutable
principle of the House of Orange to rescue Europe from its Oppressors, and to
resettle Governments upon the primitive and immortal Foundation of Liberty and
Property; a glorious Maxim taken from the old Roman Commonwealth, that fought
and conquered so many Nations only to set them free, to restore them wholesome
Laws, their natural and civil Liberties; a Design so generous, and every way
great, that the East groaning under the Fetters and Oppressions of their
Tyrants, flew in to the Roman Eagles for Shelter and protection, under whose
Wings the several Nations lived free, safe, and happy, till Traitors and
Usurpers began to break in upon the Sacred Laws of that virtuous Constitution,
and to keep up Armies to defend that by Blood and Rapine, which Justice would
have thrown in their Face, and punished them as they deserved; the preservation
and welfare of the People being in all Ages called the Supreme Law, to which
all the rest ought to tend.

From the foregoing Relation of matter of Fact, it appears most plain, that the
Roman Catholics are not to be tied by Laws, Treaties, Promises, Oaths, or any
other bonds of Humane Society; the sad experience of this and other Kingdoms,
declares to all Mankind the invalidity and insignificancy of all Contracts and
Agreements with the Papists, who notwithstanding all their Solemn Covenants
with Heretics, do watch for all Advantages and Opportunities to destroy them,
being commanded thereunto by their Councils and the Principles of their Church,
and instigated by their Priests.

The History of the several Wars of the Barons of England, in the Reigns of
King John, Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, in
Defense of their Liberties, and for redressing the many Grievances (under which
the Kingdom groaned) is a full representation of the Infidelity and Treachery
of those Kings, and of the Invalidity of Treaties with them; how many Grants,
Amendments, and fair Promises had they from those Princes? and yet afterward
how many Ambuscades and Snares were laid to destroy those glorious Patricts of
Liberty? what Violations of Compacts and Agreements, and what havoc was made
upon all Advantages and Opportunities, that those false Kings could take? Read
their Histories in our several Chronicles.

FINIS.

