THE Wisdom of Believing: IN TWO SERMONS Preached at COURT, April 7, and 14.
1700.

BY E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester-College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

Published by His MAJESTY's Command.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

SERMON I.
ROMANS i. 22. Professing themselves to be wise, they became Fools.
WHatever Value we set upon being Wise, or whatever Affectation we have of
being so accounted; yet there is no greater Argument of Human Weakness than
This, That we rarely know what we mean by Wisdom; nor are our Notions any where
more confused than upon this Question, What it is to be Wise?

To extricate our Thoughts in some measure out of this Confusion, we may
distinguish Wisdom into Three Kinds, viz.

The Wisdom of Grace, The Wisdom of Nature, and The Wisdom of Imagination.
I. The Wisdom of Grace is called in Scripture; the Wisdom from above; because
thence it comes, and we cannot attain it without the Influence of God. Now the
Power and Use of this Wisdom is to secure our Eternal Interest, by the Means of
Holy Living and Conformity to the Divine Will: And because this is our main
Concern, and all the rest is but Loss and Shame and Misery without it, the
Style of the Holy Spirit allows nothing to be Wisdom but purely This, The Fear
of God, that is Wisdom; And our Apostle, who had large Talents of other
Knowledge, which he might have boasted of, if they could justify the boasting;
styles all Foolishness, none worth the owning, but to know Christ Jesus, and
the power of his Resurrection. He that has this Wisdom has sufficient; and
without it, the greater our pretenses are to Wisdom, the more conspicuous is
our Folly.

II. The second Kind of Wisdom is that of Nature, i. e. such as Men may have of
themselves, through the Power of their native Faculties, and the Improvements of
Industry and Observation. And from this Fountain has flowed many commendable
Fruits in all Ages; All Rules and Arts for the Conduct, Employment, and
Accommodation of Life. But forasmuch as this Wisdom is often separate from that
of Grace, so it as often turns to Subtilty and Artifice, to Doubling and
Insincerity, to Deceiving and being deceived. This is that Wisdom whereby our
Savior says, The Children of the World are wiser in their Generation than the
Children of Light: Wiser in their Generation, i. e. Wiser to serve themselves
in reference to present Advantages. Not that Worldly Men are therefore
esteemable to have the better Understandings: It were in a manner Blasphemous
to think, That Godliness did ever occasion Stupidity; or that it ever was
occasioned by it. The Good Man knows as many Methods of Management; but the
Worldly Man is bolder to make use of all he knows: The Good Man walks on simply
in the Road of Providence, believing God's Blessing to be his best Portion; But
the Worldly Man turns into every crooked Way; as if it were to make himself
amends for the want of that Providence and Blessing he has no mind to trust
upon: The Good Man looks upon the World as his Inn; and therefore is not so
sollicitous for his Accommodations here, as he is for his Arrival at his
Journey's End: But the Worldly Man looks upon it as his Home; and therefore
imploys all his Care and Intention to make it as easy and entertaining to him
as he can. For Example;

In the first Age of the World, Cain is said to have gone forth from the
presence of God, i. e. To have cast off all Care of Religion; And this Personal
Inclination of His formed all his Posterity to be Profane: On the other side,
Seth walked with God, and instituted his Posterity to the same pious Care of
being Religious. In the mean time we may observe, That the Chief Inventions,
which serve both to the Use and Divertisement of the present Life, as the
Forming of Societies, Building of Cities, and finding out curious Arts and
Manufactures are all attributed to the Profane Line: But it would be very Rash
for all this to conclude, That these were the Men of better Parts and
Capacities than the other. The Children of Seth accounted it sufficient for
their Happiness to be contented with what was needful, and to pursue the favor
of God as the Consummation of their Enjoyments which is undoubtedly the Supreme
Wis'dom. Whereas the other being destitute of hopes from God, made it all their
study to procure such Enjoyments to themselves as might be had without Him. But
let us observe a little further, and see what the World it self was the better
for all these issues of it is Wisdom: In the power of it Men brought in many
agreeable Advantages; but through the Corruption of it they likewise brought in
the Flood; wherein all were destroyed but those few that had escaped the common
Depravation. And what then is the Wisdom of the World but, (as our Apostle
calls it) Foolishness with God?

III. The Third kind is what I call the Wisdom of Imagination, that is, a
Wisdom that has it is Being in Opinion and Conceit; and by which Men come to
think well of themselves. Now this kind of Wisdom is a mere Shadow; for even
they that are Fools pretend to it, as well as they that are of greater Talents;
but neither are at all the wiser in truth, for this Opinion of their being so:
And as it is in it self a Shadow; so it chiefly aims and catches at a Shadow,
that is, at Vainglory and the Admiration of others. Now we may observe of this
kind of Wisdom, That it is always attended with one mischievous Companion, and
that is the Affectation of Singularity: They that are Wise in their own
Conceit, always found their Conceit upon the Knowledge of somewhat that is Odd
and out of the Way: They hate to think in the common Level; They value not
themselves for knowing what is vulgarly known; but esteem it their Excellency
to start Novelties, and to be the Originals of their own Opinions. From which
it follows that this kind of Wisdom is always a direct Adversary to Faith:
Because Faith is a simple Thing, and delivered purely with the Design that all
should receive it Uniformly; In which case the Man that affects Singularity is
never pleased till he can form some New Conception of the matter Revealed,
whereby he may import that the Reach of his Understanding is above the common
Measure. So that the main Characteristick of this Wisdom is to be ever
Opposing, or Scrupling, or Refining upon Faith, and pretending to lead that
revealed Light, which we all ought to follow with a ready and cheerful
Submission. From this busy Itch of pretended wise Men, to unsettle Religion,
and mis-interpret the Messages of God, and to vend their own Imaginations in
place of Divine Oracles, it was that the Prophet Is. 5. 21. Denounces Woe
against them that are Wise in their own Eyes, and Prudent in their own Sight.
And my Text is no less a warning against this kind of Wisdom from the exemplary
Mischiefs that it has formerly brought upon others, who professing themselves
to be Wise became Fools; The Truth that is pointed at in these Words and from
this Example, I shall farther evince, and apply in these two Propositions.

(1.) That Human Wisdom is a dangerous Guide in Matters of Religion. And,

(2.) That God has vouchsafed Faith as a necessary Expedient in order both to
make and to keep Men Wise.

The first Proposition, ( viz.) That Human Wisdom is a dangerous Guide in
Matters of Religion; I shall evidence by showing, that the greatest Mischiefs
relating to Religion, that ever yet happened to Mankind, have owed their
Original to this pretended Wisdom. And I need no more to prove this than the
following Instances, viz.

(1.) That Wisdom first extinguished the common Worship of God and brought
Idolatry into the World.

(2.) That Wisdom first wasted Man's Conscience, and brought Sin into the World.

(3.) That this Wisdom first corrupted Faith and brought all Heresies into the
Church.

As to the first Instance ( viz.) That Wisdom first extinguished the common
worship of God and brought Idolatry into the World.

It is the express Intimation of the Text. For the Apostle is here treating
concerning the Idolatry of the Gentiles; to what extravagance it proceeded and
from what Cause it sprung; a Subject which cannot be duly considered without
matter of Wonder. Noah the Preacher of Righteousness who had warned the old
World and called them to Repentance in vain, had at least this Advantage by it,
that he came with greater awe to Teach and Instruct the New: And he taught them
in such a manner, both what they ought to Believe and to Do; that the Apostle
says of them, v. 21. They all knew both God and his Worship; though it was a
Knowledge they liked not to retain; but instead of that as v. 23. They changed
the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into the Image of corruptible Man, and to
Birds, and fourfooted Beasts, and creeping Things. And this Corruption of Faith
and Worship together came on so fast, that the same Noah who had seen the
Funerals of the old World, for their No Religion; saw likewise in his own days
the new World overspread with a False Religion, more Absurd and Irrational than
None. Now the Text tells us expressly that this State of things as strange and
gross as it was, was introduced under the pretenses of Wisdom, Professing to be
Wise they became Fools; And then as an Instance of this it is added, They
changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into the Image of Corruptible Man,
and to Birds, and fourfooted Beasts, and creeping Things: From which it appears
that their bringing in of Idolatry, although it was the Proof of their Folly, yet
it was the Project of their Wisdom.

It was the Wise amongst them that formed the Design, and addressed to the
Multitude with a grave appearance, and prevailed (as we may conceive) by some
such Form of Arguing as this. We are all aware, ye Sons of Noah, that Religion
is our Chief Concern, and therefore it well becomes us to improve and advance
That as much as possible: And altho'd we have received Appointments from God
for the Worship that he requires, yet if these appointments may be altered for
his greater Glory, who doubts but it will be a commendable Piety so to alter
them? Now our Father Noah has instituted us in a Religion, which in truth is
too Simple, and too Unaffecting; It directs us to worship God abstractedly from
all Sense, and under a confused Notion; under the formality of Attributes, as
Power, Goodness, Justice, Wisdom, Eternity, and the like; an Idea which we
neither sufficiently reach, nor does that sufficiently reach our Affections:
whereas in all Reason we ought to worship God more pompously, and more
extensively too, than in his own Essence. We ought not only to adore his
Personal Attributes, but likewise all the Emanations of them, and all those
Creatures by whom they are eminently represented; this will stir up and quicken
and direct our Devotion. Nor let any say that this Method will derogate from
the Honor of the Creator; certainly it is most expressive of his Honor, when
we acknowledge, that not only Himself but even his Creatures are Adorable. We
ought therefore (if we will be Wise) to worship the Host of Heaven; or rather
to worship God through them, because they are eminent Representations of his
Glory and Eternity: We ought to worship the Elements because they represent his
Benign, and Sustaining and ubiquitary Presence: We ought to worship the Ox and
the Sheep, and whatever Creatures are most beneficial, because they are the
Symbols of his Love and Goodness: And with no less Reason, the Serpent, the
Crocodile and other noxious Animals, because they are the Symbols of his awful
Anger. Thus it is that we shall worship him more intensly, and feel and be
affected with our Worship.

Now to Men disposed with a Desire to be wise in Religion above what was
prescribed, there is no doubt but such Arguments as these would soon seem wise
and weighty enough, to enforce their Design. But there was another part of
Idolatry which obtained first, and spread farthest, that Wisdom had yet more
moving Pretenses to establish it upon. The first Fruits of Idolatry was offered
up to Men; as we learn in this Chap. from the Verse following, and more at
large from Wisd. 14. where we are told that Princes were worshipped; whether
Present, in their Persons; or Distant, by their Statues and Pictures; And then
that Men Inferior to Princes, but emenient in their Generation for any
beneficent or obliging Qualities, were worshipped after their Death. As for the
worship of Princes we have no reason to doubt but it was as high and as early
as Nimrod himself: Belus and Jupiter, Names by which he was known in other
Regions, import no less than his Deification: So that though he failed in
building his Tower to Heaven; which was a haughty attempt, that God thought fit
to check and repress; yet he failed not to build up himself to to Heaven in the
Estimation of his Admirers; which was a Judgment that God thought fit to permit
upon those that so boldly sought it.

As for the Deifying of Princes, Wisdom suggested that They were the
Representatives of God's Power upon Earth; to which Character worship was
reasonably due: And not only so, but because such an Adoration would best
conduce to the good Government of the World, forasmuch as it added a new
Obligation to Peace and Submission; and made it of Religious, as well as Civil
Importance.

As for the Worshipping of those among the Dead, who had been famous in their
Generation (such as former Ages vulgarly styled Heroes, and Modern the
Beatify'd, or the Saints) Wisdom had abundance to allege for this
establishment. As

(1.) That such an Honor bestowed upon the Virtuous was but a proper
Incitement to others to imitate the same Virtue.

(2.) That to Honor those that were eminent in such a manner, was chiefly to
honor God, whose distinguishing Communications made them so.

(3.) That to Address and Supplicate to such as Mediators, was a more Modest
and Reverential Address to God, than if we applied immediately to himself.

(4.) That by applying to those who had been so nearly touched with our
Infirmities, and our Sins themselves not excepted, we were sure to find the
more Compassionate and tender Advocates. I doubt not but Men in that Age were
qualified to argue for their Humors as well as they can now; and we know that
Wisdom has carried this point in the Church of Rome, even at this day, this day
of Meridian, that is of Gospel Light.

Thus Wisdom brought Idolatry into the World.

The second Instance I proposed to evince it a dangerous Guide in Matters of
Religion, was this: That Wisdom (or let me indifferently call it Reason, a Name
more in vogue and more used in reference to the present Subject, but it means
purely the same thing; I say) It was Wisdom or Reason that first wasted Man's
Conscience, and brought Sin into the World.

There has been a time when Human Wisdom or Reason had a fairer pretense to
Conduct than ever it will have again. In Paradise where it was without the
Opposition of Appetite, without the Bias of Prejudice, without the Cloud of
Perturbations, who can think but that it had then more Power and Freedom to
conduct wisely, than ever it could pretend to since? But therefore if it failed
then in point of Conduct; this must needs pass for an Argument to abate some of
that Veneration, which the Opinionative are willing should be ascribed to it,
under this State of so unhappy a Change; Let us then consider the Scene of
things as it lay at that time.

God then charged our first Parents not to eat of the Tree in the midst of the
Garden; binding his Charge with this Sanction, That they should dye when they
did it: Now at that time there was not any (...), No Law of the Members warring
against the Law of the Mind; no Rebellion of Appetite against the Dictates of
Understanding: To suppose there was, would be to suppose our first Parents fallen
even before the Fall, and to have been made under the same Disorder, that their
Posterity now complains of. And accordingly we find in holy Scripture that the
Sin of our first Parents in that case is distinguished from those of all their
Offspring: For whereas other Men's Sins are generally called (...) Lusts; we
may observe that their Sin is always called (...), Deception: The Apostle calls
it so no less than thrice (...), that is, a Deception or Imposture that they
sufferd to pass upon their Understanding: Whereof we may take an Illustration
from a Scriptural Passage, 1 Kings 13. where we find a young Prophet of Judah
sent to denounce God's Judgments against Jeroboam in Bethel; who withal
received a Command that he should neither Eat nor Drink in that Place. Now it
no way appears that the violence of this young Prophet's Appetite did raise in
him any desire to disobey this Command; on the contrary, he was upon his return
resolvedly and contentedly, without either Eating or Drinking; so that it is
plain his Appetite did not constrain him to transgress: But an old Prophet of
the Place (moved probably with Envy that the Honor of this Message had been
conferred on a Prophet of Judah, and not on himself) addresses to him with an
Imposture; telling him that God did reverse his former Order, and did now give
him Liberty to Eat and Drink in Bethel: As consequently he did, and thereupon
received the Reward that is due to him who disobeys a certain Command, for the
sake of an uncertain Suggestion. With the like Imposture and Fiction it was
that the old Serpent addressed himself to our first Parents; implying by the
Tendency of all his Discourse that God had either dissembled his real Will in
his former Order, or at least that he had now Reversed it; So that now they
should not Dye, but on the contrary receive great advantage from the Eating of
the Fruit: And hereupon they proceeded to Eat it, being drawn aside to do so,
not from the violence of Appetite, but from the temerity of Reason; which
suffered them to believe an uncertain Suggestion, in opposition to a certain
Command. From which I observe that it was Reason not Appetite, that made the
first false Step in Nature, and withal opened an inlet to the succeeding
violence of the Passions. And how little cause have we then to lay such a
stress upon that Faculty; or to be so fond of its Guidance? For if Reason
betrayed in the most perfect State, how much more easily will it do so Now; if
ever it be permitted to argue against the obvious Sense of what has been
Revealed?

And if Wisdom were thus Originally the Parent of Sin; we may less wonder that
in after Ages it has become so indulgent a Nurse to it; as we may prove it to
have been by one Instance I shall offer; from which it will appear that this
pretension to Wisdom or Reason has given a greater blow to Virtue, and settled
and Empire of Sin upon a firmer Establishment in the Christian World, than
either Ignorance or natural Pravity was ever able to do in the Heathen. For
Example;

When the State of a general Idolatry (but now mentioned) had brought Men to
desert God, and God in Justice to desert them to the mischief of their Option;
when in consequence to this affected Blindness, Men in most cases came to be at
a doubt what it was to do well; and more uncertain of what advantage it would
be to do so: One would have thought that Sin Then, if ever, was like to get the
Field; and that the Kingdom of Satan had been settled without Reluctance: And
yet it was not so: The Heathens still found an Invincible Check from the
Bodings of their Conscience, and the Apprehensions thereupon that there was to
be a future Reckoning: And by this very Bridle many amongst them lived under
great Restraint, and were Men of Virtue; and they that were otherwise could not
escape Remorse and Affrightment for their Guilt.

The Wisdom of the World to arm it self against these Fears, did, (1.) (from
Countenance of the palpable Mistake concerning the Gods then in Worship) start
the Opinion, That there was no God at all.

But the Notion of Atheism did seem so Monstrous and Irrational, that few would
receive it; and They who professed it were looked upon as not believing
themselves; but as speaking rather what they wished, than what they thought.
And of this the Psalmist gives us Notice, Psalm. 14. 1.

Others (proposing to offer less Violence to the common Conceptions of Mankind)
taught That indeed there were Gods; but that they were Regardless of Human
Affairs; and that such a State of Incuriousness in them was necessary to their
own Happiness and Quiet: But neither could this Notion work far; because it
seemed to the Generality, as absurd and more affronting to the Divine Nature,
to believe that God was Indifferent and Regardless, than to believe there was
no God at all. And of this Doctrine the Psalmist gives us Intimation, Psalm. 94.
7.

A Third, and that the strongest Barrier against such ill Bodings, was drawn
from the Philosophy of our Constitution, whereby the Soul was represented as
necessarily Mortal as the Body, and thereupon secure against all future
Accounts. Of which Doctrine Solomon gives us a large Notice, Wisdom, chap. 2.

Perhaps I had been more in the Mode, had I mentioned Greece for the School of
these Doctrines, and Diagoras, Protagoras, and Epicurus for the Doctors: But I
am sensible what great Disrespect has been shown to the Holy Scriptures, by
this Affectation. In which Scriptures (during the Period they pretend to, which
is much above half of that Time the World has hitherto lasted) we meet with the
best Account of all things even Civil as well as Sacred. And how absurd would
it be for me, in this particular Matter, to ascribe the Fortuitous Being, and
the Perishable State of the Soul, and the Regardlesness of the Deity, to
Epicurus; when we find these Notions recorded in Holy Writ, as espoused long
before Greece had ever opened a School to any of this vain Philosophy?

But, these Circumstantials set aside, my main Point was to show, That these
several Arguments had not power to shelter the Heathen World from frightful
apprehensions concerning the future ill consequences of Sin: They still doubted
that forasmuch as their Souls had a Notion of Eternity, they had likewise an
Essential Relation to Eternity; And therefore they thought that their own
inward Hopes and Fears spoke better Sense about the issues of such a Duration,
than they could meet with from the Reasonings of those that pretended to be
wiser. And here the Heathens were forced to stop; and though their Wit and Will
were heartily joined to serve the cause of Vice as far as they could, yet they
could never remove this awful Barrier. Whereas, in a more Illuminated time, (as
we must allow that of the Gospel to be;) The most Illuminated of that time (as
they would have us allow the Socinians to be) have with great Ostentation, and
as great Applause of their Wisdom, done the cause of Vice more effectual
Service, than ever could be done it before.

Abating the Outrage they have done the Scripture, (about which they are not
very Sollicitous) they have made their Hypothesis Plausible as well as
Grateful: They speak respectfully of God; and not disrespectfully of the Soul;
They determine not How, or of What it is made; but they determine that, as it
is a Creature of Gods, so it is either Mortal or Immortal at his discretion:
And thereupon to reward the Pious with Eternal Happiness, is what well suits
with Gods Goodness and Benignity: But it would not do so, to punish the Sinful
with Eternal Torments: That could neither suit with Goodness nor Justice it
self: Because that between Temporal Guilt and Eternal Punishment, there is no
Proportion: And therefore all that the sinful Soul may fear from God, is a
Declaration of its Incapacity for Heaven, and a Sentence for its extinction and
loss of Being.

Never such an Amulet as this was offered to quiet all the bodings of
Conscience; Never did Sin sleep upon so soft a Pillow as is made up of this
Hypothesis; which carries careless Souls, beyond all former Hope, even into the
Lap of their own Wish; which is, Never to be acquainted with Eternity, so they
may undisturbedly enjoy their present Inclinations.

Juvenal the Poet speaking of that Notion that the Heathens had formed of a
future State, That there was a Boat, and a Ferryman, and a black Lake, and
frightful Frogs in it, which careless Souls were to pass over to a miserable
Abode; Cries out -- Quis puer hoc credat? i. e. (In Hypothesi) in it is
circumstantial Dress, It were Childish to believe this -- But adds (in Thesi)
At tu vera puta --: Do thou who ever thou art, believe This, at least something
like this, to be true.

And who can say but Juvenal was a wise Man in this Reflection? But then is it
not surprizingly strange that a more elevated Wisdom should set it self to
prove, That nothing like This ought to be believed? And that all fears of
Futurity are Groundless, except that of being made Insensible? It was Wisdom to
believe Hell Torments in those that neither knew God nor his Revelation; And
can it be Wisdom too, for any not to believe Hell Torments, who are sure that
God has revealed them? And is it not farther surprizingly strange, that those
Men who pretend their Zeal for Morality is above that of all others, should
open such a Sluice to the Flood of Immorality? Alas! what a Contradictory thing
is professed Wisdom, when once it affects to lead in Matters of Faith? It is
much more both absurd and mischievous than confessed Folly.

Thus much for the second Charge of Wisdom, ( viz.) That it brought Sin into
the World.

The last I proposed to warn us against fondness for its Guidance is This, (
viz.) That it first corrupted Faith, and brought all Heresies into the Church.

Suitably to this -- It is commonly observed of that sect of Men, who in the
earliest days of Christianity invented so many various Corruptions of Faith,
that they hardly left room for the Invention of subsequent Ages to find out any
New; That they affected for a distinguishing Name to be called Gnostici, i. e.
the Knowers, or such as understood more than their Neighbors. And we cannot
doubt but that our Apostle had an Eye to some of these, and their wild
Opinions, as well as the Principle that occasioned them, 1 Timothy 6. 20. where
charging Timothy to stand firm in the Faith, and to keep that Depositum, i. e.
that Scheme of Christian Doctrine which had been delivered, prescribes to him
this Means as necessary to his purpose (viz.) That he should avoid the
opposition (...) of Science (or Wisdom) falsely so called; which some professing
have erred concerning the Faith: We know the Scripture meddles not with the
Impeachment of any Science, or with calling it false, but barely as it
intrenches upon Faith, and opposes that which it ought to follow: And therefore
this Science is here specified by it is Opposition, i. e. it is Inclination to
oppose the Faith commonly received; accounting it a restraint (as I have
intimated already) to think or believe with the Vulgar.

And to evidence that this Kind of Science did make Men err concerning the
Faith, as the Text alleges; Let us but consider those Heresies that are
mentioned in Scripture as first obtaining in the Church, and we shall soon see
how they took their Rise, at least all their Pretense from this very Principle.

Some there were (we know) who erred concerning the Resurrection, saying it was
already past; and no doubt but it was a start of Wisdom and Affectation of
extraordinary Reach that first formed this into a Heresy. For Example;

Some of the Heathen Philosophers who were grown to dress up their Doctrines
for Ostentation, and not so much to instruct, as to surprise and make
themselves admired; Had pronounced of Virtue, That it was a sufficient Reward
to it self; and that a good Man was Happy enough in being Good, and leading a
Life according to Reason, although there were no Expectations of a future
Recompense. Whereupon some Christian Proselytes pleasing themselves with the
vain Glory of this Notion, adopted it into Christianity, and held that it was a
Poor and Mercenary thing to practice Godliness for the Expectation of another
World; And that therefore although God had in the Gospel declared a Resurrection,
yet this Resurrection was to be understood in a Figurative and Moral Sense, i.
e. to import no more than a rising from the State of Sin to the State of
Righteousness: And that the Christian Virtue would then be more glorious, and
more worthy of God, when it shall appear that he obeys for God's sake, rather
than for his own? Thus those of the Anti-Anastasie were pleased by dint of
Wisdom to void the Promises of Heaven; which wild Conclusion we may wonder at
the less, since the wise Socinians have at this day with no less contradiction
to Scripture been pleased to void the Threatenings of Hell.

We are told of another Sect in that Age, who erred concerning the Condition of
the Gospel Covenant; Resting upon a naked Faith as the entire Qualification;
and thereby voiding the Law, vilifying Obedience, and turning the Grace of God
into Wantonness. One would not think indeed that Wisdom could have much of
pretense toward this Project, and yet it had: The Antinomians alleged, That
whereas it was the peculiarGlory of God to be infinitely Merciful; and the
Glory of Christ's Satisfaction to be infinitely Valuable; The more Guilt Men
had, the more abundant opportunity they gave to God to discover the Riches of
his Pardon; and the more Men were in Debt, the greater appeared to be both the
Value of their Ransom, and the Credit of their Redeemer.

No doubt but this Arguing seemed Wise to them that used it; And at least we
have this to allege for the support of its pretense, That the Antinomians were
not more extravagant in asserting that Christ's Satisfaction was sufficient to
save without the care of Good Living, than the Socinians are in asserting that
the Care of Good Living is sufficient to save without the Satisfaction of
Christ: For so their Scheme runs;

That Christ neither made nor intended any Satisfaction at all; and yet every
Impartial Man may convince himself, That it is not more evident in Scripture,
That God requires us to be Holy, than that Christ shed his Blood for our
Redemption; Redemption I say, not in the Exemplary, but in the Expiatory Sense.

We have another Mass of Heretical Corruption spoken of by our Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. not indeed as then reigning, but rather foretold as that it should
reign, through occasion of a Certain Man of Sin sitting as God in the Temple of
God: Even The Papists allowing that the Scene of this grand Corruption of Faith
is Rome; and we may without prejudice affirm it to be Popery it self. Now to
see how Wisdom has contributed to bring this Mass of abuses into that Church,
Let us but consider this single One; which we may look upon as the most
Charactistical ( viz.) The setting up of a Human Infallible Guide: Whereby
every Bishop of that See, seems to effect the pretense of Montanus, and would
be held for a Holy Ghost Incarnate; And what can come nearer to one sitting as
God in the Temple of God?

What hand Wisdom had in hatching this Conceit we may learn from the wisest of
that Communion, when they allege that the Belief of This is the sure and only
Method to end all Controversies, and establish that Peace and Union which all
good Christians desire. And as for the Means made use of to bring this Conceit
into Credit, they have carried in them the most pompous Semblance of Wisdom
Imaginable: While its particular Champions, the Jesuits, (the Artificial
Petavius and others) have contrived with elaborate Pains and Study, to weaken
the Authority of the Scriptures, as being of Uncertain Interpretation, and of
Uncertain Reception; and to puzzle the Sense of all the distinguishing Articles
of Christianity; by alleging the Opposition of Heretics, and the difference
of Conciliary Decrees; and by raking up all the Dissonancies of Expressions
that are to be met with in the Writings of the Ancients.

As indeed how can the same Truth be delivered without Dissonancies of
Expression, supposing it to be delivered upon different Occasions, and for
different Respects? Let the Expressions of St. Paul and St. James upon the
Article of Justification pass for an Instance of Appeal.

In the mean time the Wisdom of the Church of Rome thought fit to do all this
Insidiously, and with purpose to Deceive, so they might serve this Important
End, ( viz.) To make Christians believe that they must needs be bewildred while
they were under such an unstable Conduct as that of the Scriptures, Councils
and Fathers; and therefore to conclude themselves obliged to repair to the
standing Infallible Guide.

Ask the Socinians themselves Whether there were not admirable Wisdom in this
Contrivance: For even they themselves make use of the same Means, and borrow
their boasted Arms of Learning from the Jesuit's Shop; not indeed to the same
End, in Form; but to the same, in Mischief; Not to establish the Pope for an
Infallible Guide; but to establish Reason for an Infallible Guide; which in
effect is to set up as many Popes in the World, as there are Men of an assuming
Imagination.

What I have said hitherto has been in order to evince the Truth of my first
Proposition, (viz.) That Wisdom is a dangerous Guide in Matters of Religion.

I offered a Second, (viz.) That God has vouchsafed Faith as a necessary
Expedient both to make and to keep Men Wise: Which I reserve for the Subject of
another Discourse.

SERMON II.
ROMANS i. 22. Professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools.
FRom these Words considered, together with their Occasion, I have before
inferred these Two Heads of Discourse:

I. That Human Wisdom (or Reason) is a dangerous Guide in Matters of Religion.
And this I have proved already, by showing, How strangely Wisdom has failed in
all her Conduct about such Matters. The Second is,

II. That God has ordained Faith as a Necessary Expedient, both to Make and to
Keep Men Wise. The Proof whereof I am now to pursue.

I suppose there is no Man in the World of what Persuasion soever, but will be
ready to grant, That what God vouchsafes to reveal, must be abler to make us
Wise, than what we can conceive of our selves: Nor (in consequence) will any
deny, That Faith to what is Revealed is a Due which we owe not only to God for
the Honor of his Truth; but likewise to our selves, for the sake of our safe
Conduct: And therefore there is like to be no Dispute whether Faith (in
general) can make Men Wise; The Dispute is only upon this Point, What kind of
Faith (in particular) it must be that makes Men Wise: And we shall find that
the Judgment of Mankind lies under a common Prejudice against what is true in
reference to this Point. For we may observe it to obtain in the World, That the
Faith adapted to make a Wise Man, must be a Cautious and Reserved Faith,
because all Forwardness in Believing exposes Men to be deceived: And yet in
Holy Scripture we are taught clean contrary, That God is only pleased with an
Humble and Ready Faith, and every Abatement of Forwardness is a Diminution of
its Value. Our Savior in his Walk to Emmaus calls his Disciples Fools, because
they were slow of Heart to Believe. And soon after he tells Thomas, That the
Tardiness of his Faith had robbed it of its Blessing, For Blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed.

And because I am falln upon the mention of this Apostle, I will choose to
insist a little upon his Character; which may serve both for an Example and an
Illustration of the matter I am upon.

Thomas (as far as we may learn by all the mentions made of him in Holy Writ)
was a Man Bold in Reasoning, and extremely Nice in Believing: Which is a
Character that by the standard of the present Age has License to pass for an
Indication of Wisdom.

Joh. 14. 2, 3, 4. We have a Passage of Discourse wherein this Apostle was
wholly concerned: There our Savior says very obligingly to those about him: In
my Father's House are many Mansions -- I go to prepare a place for you -- And
whither I go you know, and the way you know: To this obliging Declaration
Thomas answers very peremptorily, Lord, we know not whither thou go, and how
should we know the Way? We see the Answer is directly contradicting to that
which our Savior alleged; and yet no doubt but the Apostle thought himself to
have Reason on his side for making such an Answer. Let us imagine what that
Reason might be: It Is possible he might form his arguing on this manner.

Lord, Thou say, Thou art going to thy Father's House to provide Mansions
for us: Now we know thy Father's House, according to natural Generation, is
that of Joseph and Mary; in which many Mansions are not to be had: But if thou
meanest a Father by any other kind of Generation; or any other Inheritance
which thou have a Title to recommend us to: This is what we do not understand;
and what we do not understand, it is impossible for us to Believe: And
therefore say to us something that we may believe; or in the mean time permit
us to be Incredulous, and to say, We know not whither thou go.

If I have in this Form, Argued any thing contrary to the Sentiments of the
Apostle; I have whereof to Retract in reverence to his subsequent better
Understanding: But I fear I have said nothing that the present Age will require
me to Apologize for; Because they who set up for a leading Genius, please
themselves to argue in the very same Method to justify a like Incredulity.
Thus runs the common Argument, We cannot believe what we please; we must
comprehend both the Matter and its Credibility, or else it were Rash and
Foolish to believe it.

Joh. 11. We have another Passage wherein Thomas was wholly concerned, There (
verse 14.) our Savior says to his Disciples Our Friend Lazarus is Dead, and I
am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent you may believe:
This we see our Savior urged expressly for an Encouragment of their Faith; and
yet Thomas his Reasoning turned it immediately into an Argument of Distrust: As
is apparent from what he said to his Fellow Disciples upon this Occasion,
(verse 16.) Let us also go, That we may Dye with him: The Key of his meaning in
this Sentence we may take from the Narration in the beginning of the Chapter:
Where it is sai'd That our Savior being then in Galilee, upon the News of
Lazarus his Sickness, proposed to go into Judea to visit him: Whereupon the
Disciples answered, ( V. 8.) Master, the Jews of late sought to Stone thee, and
go thou thither again? Now this Thought made a deep Impression upon the wary
Imagination of Thomas; and therefore when he saw his Master resolved to go; he
wound up all into this sort of Reasoning Despair. Lazarus is Dead, and all his
Pains and Fears are over; and better it were for us, if ours were so too: The
Jews Malice is bent upon the Destruction of us all; and if our Master could not
save his principal Friend from Death; what hopes is there of his saving us? Let
us go then and meet our Doom as patiently as we can. This is the natural
Paraphrase of what Thomas meant by that Sentence, Let us also go that we may
Die with him: And although nothing could be more contrary to the Faith he owed
his Master, or more affronting to the importance of what he had then said; yet
still he looked upon this as sound Reasoning: And indeed it was as sound as any
other Man's is; and brought forth as good Fruits as any other Man's does, when
it once takes License to Scruple, what it ought to believe.

The last mention of this Apostle is in the Instance of the Resurrection. He
had been told that our Savior was Risen from the Dead; and the truth of it had
been attested to him by Evidences beyond Exception: Several Companies who had
seen him, and converst with him several times; to whom he had exposed the sight
and feeling of his Wounds; to whom he had Expounded the Scriptures concerning
himself; with whom he had broken the Sacramental Bread; and conferred on them
the operative Benediction of, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: All these, with all
these convincing Tokens, had told Thomas that Christ was Risen: But yet Thomas
(in pure Wisdom) would not believe. He was also called Didymus, says the Text:
And I think that Allegation how casual soever it may seem, is Argumentative to
my purpose: ( viz.) Thomas had a Greek Name, as well as a Hebrew one; which is
a probable Argument that he had had a Conversation with the Greeks; and perhaps
had learnt from them That (...) Have a care of being Credulous, was the grand
Advice of one of their Sages; and thereupon he resolved not to believe without
farther Conviction than all this. And no doubt but he conceived Reason to be on
his side for all this Behavior: Reason suggested that a wise Man ought to be
cautious to the utmost, least he be imposed upon: Reason suggested that when he
had his Choice of several Matters to believe, he ought to choose that for the
Matter of his belief which was in it self most Credible: Now it was more
Credible that such a number of Witnesses might be Deceived; or (as Honest as
they once were) might be drawn into Confederacy to Deceive; Then that One
should rise from the Dead: Because This was naturally Impossible; It could not
be done without a Miracle; and wise Men will never have recourse to Miracles,
so long as nature may solve the Appearance.

Now suppose that Thomas proceeded Th us far with Reason on his side; and acted
like a Wise that is to say, a Cautious Man (as for ought I see, the standard of
many Men's Judgments at this day will allow him to have acted:) Yet let me
observe one thing more from his Example, and that is This ( viz.) That Human
Reason is very subject to be partially Blind: For while it is Hunting after
those Arguments that make for its present Purpose, it never takes notice of
those that make more strongly against it.

As for Instance: When Thomas refused to admit Conviction from the Sense and
Attestation of so many credible Witnesses; Yet at the same time he declared it
fit to be determined by the Verdict of his Own Sense: Where he never considered
what a haughty Piece of Injustice it was to imply that his own single Sense was
less Fallible, then the joint Experience of such a Number. Again, while he
imagined it possible that so many good Men should conspire to deceive him; he
never considered how many Arguments there were to prove that this Censure of
his was Absurd, as well as Uncharitable: For had he not Converst now three
Years under the Conviction of all sorts of Miracles, and could he not extend
his Faith to believe that One more might be done? After he had seen his Lord
raise more than One from the Dead; could he not think it possible that he
himself might be raised by the same Power? Nay (what was yet more culpable than
all the rest) after he had heard his Lord publicly averring before hand, that
Thus it must be, and that he should Rise again the Third Day; He never
considered that to distrust the Event after such a prediction of such a Person,
as had sufficiently proved himself able to do, whatever he thought fit to be
done, was a distrust absolutely Irreligious and Profane. And yet thns it was
-- Thus the wise Pretenses of Incredulity could betray Thomas to be Irreverent,
Uncharitable, Absurd and Irreligious, and all under the color of being
Reasonable. These extravagant Effects Niceness in believing could produce in
him; And who can Question but that they are likely to produce the same in any
one else?

This single Example serves to inform us, into what a Labyrinth Reason will
lead Men, when once it declines the Conduct of an humble and ready Faith; and
upon This my Assertion is founded that such a Faith is our only Guide unto
Wisdom.

But I shall proceed to evidence the same by a black Cloud of Instances.

I doubt not but they who scruple or oppose or depart from the Common Faith at
this day, will readily allow, That in whatever they except against the Received
Form, they do it from this same principle of Wisdom and Caution, ( viz.) Lest
they should be imposed upon by the Mistakes of others; and therefore they
resolve to adhere to some Sense of their own, which they look upon as more
Rational and less obnoxious to Absurdity or Deceiving. And there are Two
Parties of Men who have made themselves very notorious for this Pretense.

(1.) The First is of Those who will not allow any Revelation, i. e. Not any
Scripture dictated from God.

(2.) And the Second is of those who will not admit the received Interpretation
of that Scripture, which they allow to have been Revealed.

Now it may be made appear from the Instances of these very Parties; That no
Man ever departed from the Common Faith upon pretense of avoiding any
Absurdities therein supposed; but that he ran himself upon the necessity of
believing greater Absurdities, than any he pretended to avoid.

I. The first Party consists of Those who deny all Revelation; who profess a
Religion of Nature's Teaching, but none that God has taught: Who distinguish
themselves by the name of Deists, because they own a God, but barely a God; and
not those dispensations which are most suitable to the Goodness of the God they
own: Of which Revelation is the Chief.

Now however the Wisdom of such Men may please it self with this cautious
Inffidelity, which they pretend to take up as a Guard against Imposture; Yet
would it not be wiser for every Man to suspect his particular Reason when he
does, or may, observe it to clash with the common Reason of Mankind? And
certainly to deny Revelation is a Conceit that clashes with the Universal
Reason and Persuasion of Mankind in all Ages of the World. For there is nothing
wherein Men have consented more freely (next to the Being of a God) than in
this Belief That it is suitable to the Goodness of God to hold a Correspondence
and Commerce with Men, and to exert himself in a Providence that extends as
well to the Conduct of Actions, as to the disposal of Events; that is, a
Providence for Man's better Part, as well as for his Worse.

So long as Men continued in the Worship of the true God, They had this Notion
riveted upon their Minds by the vouchsafement of frequent Messages, and of such
Oracular Directions, as demonstrated themselves to come from God: And when Men
departed from the true Worship, yet they could not depart from this rooted
Expectation: Insomuch that the Devil could not maintain the Reputation of his
Worship among them without a pretense to the same Commerce. And this was the
Original of all the Heathen Oracles: Which although they were Delusory, yet they
afford an Evidence that there were others True and Divine, and that Mankind
always hoped for such from the God they Worshipped.

The Deist will submit his Faith to a Heathen Evidence, though he will not to a
Christian; And therefore he will not deny these Oracles to have been, and to
have been frequent among the Gentiles: He readily grants that Socrates (which
he is willing to prefer above Christ and his Apostles) got his Reputation of
being counted the wisest Man of his Country, from the Response of an Oracle:
(In which Response, by the way, we must presume either that God overruled the
Voice of the evil Spirit (as he did in Balaam's Case) and so forced him to
speak on Virtue's side; Or else that the Devil found himself necessitated
sometimes to do so, in Reverence to Men's Consciences; over whom he was not
always able to maintain his awe without some semblance of approving Virtue.)
Now if such Oracles were; Let any one likewise tell us how they came to cease
all together, as it is owned they did, at the Time of the Revelation by our Lord
Jesus: How came they thus to cease on a sudden, if it were not from the design
of Providence to make that event give Testimony both to Jesus and his
Revelation: To Jesus, that he was one who had Power over the Devil; and to his
Revelation, That it was Plenary and Consummate, so that for the future Men
needed not seek any farther to learn what is the full and acceptable and
perfect Will of God.

When the Deist confirms his prejudice against the Christian Revelation from
this Argument, That all Religions do equally pretend to the fame Original, that
is, to come from God: I allow that Reason has Here a proper Province; Let it
therefore be called in: Let Reason enquire, and then Judge, and say whether
there is any other Religion so worthy of God as the Christian is? Whether there
is any whose Doctrines are so convincing: And whose Miracles are so
Demonstrative: Nay, whether ever there was any thing of Human Faith, that came
so attested as our Religion does, and failed of Belief in the World: And what
singular Perverseness is it then that this should not be believed? Let any one
say especially, How the Gospel Truth, that asserted it self so effectually in
its beginning, at that time when any possibility of fraud could best have been
discovered, after it had asserted it self against all the Malice of Satan, and
the Opposition of all Worldly Powers; can after 1600 Years be given up as a
Fiction, or be affected with any such discredit, from the perfidiousness of a
company of bold and loose and weak Deserters? Let any one reflect upon
theseConsiderations, and he shall find that the Deists Opinion runs them upon a
multitude of Absurdities; besides all the fatal mischief of it is unconsidered
Consequences.

The several Religions received among the Gentiles, were so full of gross
Superstitions, and palpable Errors, that many particular Men among those
Gentiles, of sounder Judgments and better Spirits than the common, were
scandalized at their Religions and had them in Contempt: So that, although for
Decency's sake and Submission to the Laws, they gave occasional countenance to
the vulgar Rites of Worship, Yet their private Religion consisted in forming to
themselves a more rational Notion of God, abstracted from all the received
Idols; And the Worship they deemed most suitable to such a God, was placed in
following Reason, and reverencing their Consciences, and cultivating their
Minds in the study of Knowledge and Practice of Virtue: And these were such as
among the Greeks they first called Philosophers. They whom we modernly call
Deists, are the Apes of those Philosophers; and that they may be thought like
them, set up to treat Christian Religion with the same Contempt as those did
the Vulgar Heathen. But as it is observed of the Ape, that although of all
Creatures it most resembles Man, yet it is the ugliest of all Creatures,
because the Honor of that resemblance is abated by many ridiculous
Deficiencies; So we may say of the Deists, that they are the most absurd and
foolish of Men; because they Ape the wise under such great difference of
Circumstances, and such great deficiencies of Purpose.

For the Philosophers were such as in the Night of Gentile Darkness, set up
their Candle (so Solomon calls the Spirit of Man, The Candle of the Lord); they
strictly attended the improvement of their Minds, and so set up their Candle,
and walked commendably by the Light of it: Now these Men were truly Wise, none
under their Circumstances could possibly be Wiser. But on the contrary the
Deists are such, as at Noonday shut up their Windows, and keep out the Sun;
and then set up their Candle, and say that That is the most agreeable Light,
and the best Guide to their household Business. Now what can be alleged for the
Wisdom of These? There have been some carried away with this fantastical and
mistaken Admiration of the Philosophers Religion in former times of
Christianity; but they were rare as Monsters, and so accounted of: But they
never grew Numerous and in heart till of late, since they took their Growth and
Apology from the Conduct of the Socinians; The second Party I proposed to
instance in.

II. The Conduct of the Socinians was this; They owned the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, but would not abide by the received Interpretation of that Word;
nor admit that Explication of the principal Doctrines therein contained, which
had been delivered down by the Universal Church; but instead of this, usurped a
Liberty of Interpreting all anew at their own discretion, and to make them
speak their own prejudicated Sense. In conformity to this Design, Socinus,
after he had formed his new Scheme of Divinity, to make it pass upon the World
with all the Advantage he could, Introduces his Exposition upon St. John, with
this Sentence, Multa sunt profecto in quibus Christianus orbis adhuc caecutit,
and fortasse plura quam quis vel credere, vel etiam cogitare possit, i. e.
There are undoubtedly many Truths, and perhaps more than any one can either
believe or imagine, in respect of which the whole Christian World has been
hitherto quite Blind and Ignorant: Which Sentence (and several such like
accompanying it) makes it appear, That never any Man more filled up each Member
of that Character which our Savior gives of the Pharisee, ( viz.) Of thinking
well of himself and despising others, than Socinus did. For it implies that
although the Scriptures were the Oracles of God, yet they resembled those of the
Gentiles in this; That they were Dark and of a doubtful Sense, and of no
authoritative Interpretation, and that hitherto they had been quite mistaken,
till such time as this new Illumination had been vouchsafed to himself. Now
since this Imagination past upon Socinus from his Caution of being imposed upon
by the former Interpreters of Scripture: Let us consider how palpably he must
have imposed upon himself, before this Imagination could take place.

If he believed it himself, can any one else in Reason believe, That the whole
Christian World had been Blind down to his days, and Ignorant in the most
important Truths, which it was reserved for his honor to Reveal; So that the
Light of the Word had not yet enlightened Mankind, till his Comments had
dispelled the Cloud that lay upon it? Can any one believe with Reason, that all
the Assertors of our Religion in the Primitive Ages, Men Holy, Studious,
Learned, Signalized and Distinguished with all the Gifts of God, both Gracious
and Miraculous; had yet none of that Knowledge of the Mind of God, as might now
be learnt at the feet of Socinus? Can it appear agreeable to the Providence of
God, and his good Will for Human Salvation, after he had required Faith to
please him as well as Obedience; and that, Faith in Doctrines as well as in
Promises; yet to let 15 Centuries pass without making it commonly known what it
was he required Men to believe? Can it appear consistent with God's Promise to
his Church, That his Spirit should lead them into all Truth, and yet for such a
Tract of time the whole multitude of Christians should account it impious to
believe That, which now the Polish Catechism says, It is damnable not to
believe, when it is proposed: So that if Christians were saved before that time
in the Common Faith, it was from the Apology of their Ignorance; as their
Ignorance was, because they had not a Socinus to instruct them.

Say rather why the Deists may not as colourably Reject the Scriptures, as the
Socinians Own them, with so many contradictions to God's Truth and Goodness. In
due Reverence to both these Attributes of God we are obliged to affirm that the
Sense as well as the Letter of the Scripture, in all Matters necessary either
to be done or believed, has been the Depositum of the Church, and Faithfully
Preserved under it is Keeping: That the whole Faith, which (as the Apostle says)
was (...), at once delivered unto the Saints, had at the same time its Meaning
delivered; which from them has been derived by indubitable Testimony, as the
Matter of our uniform Belief: That the different Opinions, Sects and Factions
in the World, are no Argument against This; Because as St. Peter has warned us,
They who diversifie the Common Faith, do not Interpret but Wrest the
Scriptures; and (as St. Paul has observed) Divisions and Heresies spring not
from Ignorance, but from Carnality; not from want of Light, but want of Love:
Pride and Envy and Contention and Vanity, and such contrarious Passions, have
in all Ages, not been at a Loss for Truth, but have been contriving and setting
up somewhat they liked better. And let us see, in the next place, what it was
that the particular Affections of Socinus liked better than the received
Interpretations.

He and his Party are pleased to take offense that there are any Mysteries in
Religion; They will have nothing for the Object of our Faith but what is plain
to our Understanding, and easy to our apprehension; and although they will not
affirm that Reason has the Measure of what is or what may be; yet they resolve
Reason to have the Measure of what ought to be believed: Which I think is
Absurdity sufficient.

They conclude thereupon that the Doctrine of the Incarnation, that is, of God
Taking our Flesh, and dwelling among us, must not be believed, because it is
Irrational: And as for the Doctrine of the Trinity it would be offensive to
pious Ears to repeat those expressions of Reproach, with which they load it.
They say that these Doctrines do justly scandalize Jews and Turks, and hinder
them from coming in to our Religion. But as it is no Office of Civility to
complement away our Faith; so neither is it any Office of Charity in the
Socinians to go off from the Foundation to meet Jews and Turks; and to turn
Half-Infidels, that They may turn Half-Christians. But after all, when by the
grossest wresting of Words, and abuse of plain Sense, they have showed
themselves as much Friends to Fancy, as they are Enemies to Faith; after that
they have interpreted all Mysteries out of Religion, and so made their new
Hypothesis familiar and inoffensive, and therefore Credible, as they would have
us imagine; We must pronounce upon it, what Minucius sometimes did in the like
Case, In Incredibili Verum, in Credibili Mendacium; Truth still lies on the
Incredible, and Falsehood on the Credible side.

And to justify this Censure, let us confider, That the Mystery of any thing,
or (what is all one) The Abstruse or Incomprehensible Nature of any thing, is
no Argument against our believing it.

This is a Rule, I am sure, that holds true in Nature, and then with what Face
can we deny it to hold true in Religion? We surrender our Faith to the state of
all Visible things, without comprehending them; and what Obstinacy is it then
to refuse our Faith to the Things of God under the same Condition? It would be
an affront and calumny to Nature, to affirm that Those things which are before
us, those Works of God which lie every Moment under our Senses, are simply
Credible; that is, such as our Reason would Persuade us could be, if we had not
seen them to be: How short is our Plummet from Fathoming, the Essence, Mode,
Powers, Operations, Productions of the most common Beings? Undoubtedly had we
the Knowledge of this World we live in, as we have that of its Maker only from
a Book, I say, had we the Knowledge of this World we live in only from a Book,
we should be Tempted to treat that Book with as little Reverence, as the
Socinians or Deists have done the Holy Scriptures: And conclude that most of
the things that are in it were as Incomprehensible, Impossible and therefore
Incredible, as they fancy any thing to be that God has revealed concerning
himself.

Let me produce an Instance or two, and those out of the Holy Scriptures, to
inculcate by the way, That the Philosophical Truths we meet with there, are
Venerable as well as the Divine.

In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, says the Sacred
History: Where the Word Created is interpreted by all to mean, That God made
the World without any Pre-existent Matter to make it of; Now this Production of
the World we believe from the Authority of the Report; and likewise because of
the Absurdities that necessarily follow from the Supposal of the contrary: And
yet Human Reason could never form any Idea whereby to conceive the Possibility
of such a Production: And let any one say whether it be harder to believe, That
the Divine Essence did from everlasting emanate or flow into Three Social and
Coeternal Subsistences, than to believe, That in the Beginning of Time All
things were made out of Nothing: Or whether-Reason has more Arguments to plead
for the One, than for the Other.

Holy Job to exemplify the Power of God, pitches upon this Instance, chapter 26.
7. He hangs the Earth upon Nothing; or (as his Expression points elsewhere)
He makes it stand firm without a Foundation: Now when we find it impossible
for the utmost Art of Man to make a small Clod of Earth hang in the Air, It is
naturally Impossible for Man to conceive, how the whole Mass should hang in the
Air: It Is true when we see how things are, we Pride our selves in assigning of
Reasons why they must be so, but all fall short of solving the Difficulty:
Center or Magnetism or whatever Notions have been espoused, will not Solve it
in the present Instance: No Cause could make the Earth hang upon Nothing, but
the Omnipotence of that Will that ordered it to be so. Nor could we ever
believe it, but from a Submission of our Faith to that Omnipotence; Or from a
Submission to our Senses, even while they control and muzzle the Reluctance of
our Reason.

For another Instance of the Incomprehensible Works of God, The Sea is alleged
in the same Book ( cap. 38.) Of which it is said, That God has established its
place by his Decree, and set Bars and Doors before it, and said to it,
Hitherto shall thy proud Waves come, and no farther. Which Observation is
founded upon the convexity or roundness of the Surface of those Waters; in
respect of which (as the Psalmist naturally expresses it) They stand upon a
heap: A heap as miraculous, were it not more common, as That the Israelites
past through in the Red Sea: For in this heap the Waters are bound up, that (as
the Psalmist expresses it) They turn not again to cover the Earth; which by the
common Laws of Motion, they otherwise must necessarily do, and pour in upon
every Shore a Deluge instead of a Tide. Reason uninform'd by Experience of this
state of things could not possibly believe it, and yet how wild would the Man
be thought that should not believe it?

Once more -- The Psalmist for an Instance of the same kind, takes it from the
frame of our own Being, I am fearfully and wonderfully made: To consider the
Curiousness of our Frame is amazing and to reflect upon the Power that orders
it to be so, is no less than Tremendous. Let me instance but in one Particular,
whereof I will borrow the Hint from Solomon in his description of old Age,
Eccl. 12. 6. Or ever the Wheel be broken at the Cistern: Which Expression
cannot be interpreted so Genuinly of any thing, as of that Spring and Pulse in
the Heart, which begins the Circular Motion of our Blood; Let us consider, in
this Instance, How our Blood a ponderous Body, (contrary to the Laws of common
Nature) ascends without reluctance, and descends without Precipitation; is of
so many different Colors, under so many Forms of digestion, moves so many
Years without any influence of our Thought or Reflection, and when it ceases
takes Life away with it self. Let any weigh these Circumstances, and he may
well cry out with the same Holy Writer, Such Knowledge is too Great and
Excellent for me, I cannot attain unto it. And yet none of this Mystery is an
Argument against believing it.

I need Instance no farther: Nature is full of Mysteries and Incomprehensible
Things, and may we think then that the Nature or Subsistence of God can be
Revealed to us, and not admit a Mystery? We account those Israelites were very
gross Logicians, who thus argued Psalm. 78. He smote the stony Rock indeed, that
the Waters gushed forth; But can he give Bread also, and provide Flesh for his
People? That is, although we acknowledge that God has done this Miracle, we
will not believe he can do another: But it is yet more gross arguing for any
one to say, I believe the Works of God, although they are Incomprehensible; But I
will not believe any thing of God himself, unless I comprehend it.

It Is true, we believe these Incredible things in Nature, because we see them:
But then, may not our Ears bring in as good Evidence as our Eyes? Certainly we
are less obnoxious to Deception in hearing what God speaks, than we are in
seeing what Nature exhibits.

But this still is the Question which the Socinians will not suffer to be
begged: They affirm that God has not spoken any Mysteries concerning either
himself, or his Methods of our Redemption; They say our Interpreters have
coined these Mysteries: Whereas Their Interpretation has voided them, and made
them all plain.

And here (I confess again) Reason has a proper Province to act in; For although
Reason is not to prescribe the Matter of our Belief; Revelation is to do That;
yet Reason is a proper Judge whether such or such a Matter is Revealed or no:
For this consists only in apprehending the Sense of plain Words; which every
Man's understanding has an equal Right to pretend to.

Whereas therefore Socinus says he had a favorable regard to Jews and Turks in
his Interpretation of the Scripture; let them fairly be called in, and suffered
to Interpret for themselves. They are Scandalized at the Belief of a Trinity;
Be it so: But when they see in the Scriptures, That there are Three to whom we
are devoted in our Baptismal Covenant; Three in whom we must believe; To whom
we must pray; By whom we must bless, to whom we must give Worship and Glory:
Undoubtedly they will believe a Trinity, as soon as they will believe that the
Scriptures do not Teach One.

They are averse from believing that Jesus was God; Be it so: But when they see
it express in Scripture, That he, who in time was Jesus, was God from
everlasting; that when he took our Flesh upon him, He thought it no Robbery to
be equal with the Father; That He it is, who in the beginning laid the
Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of his hands:
Undoubtedly they will as soon believe that Jesus is Truly God, as they will
believe that the Scriptures do not say he is.

Let them see How when our Blessed Lord was charged with Blasphemy for making
himself Equal with God; he denied not the matter, but only absolved it from the
Crime: How at his most Solemn Devotion, when about to leave the World, he
prayed on this manner: And now (O Father) Glorify me with the Glory which I
had with thee before the World was: Undoubtedly they will conclude, That if
what the Socinians say be True, ( viz.) That he was not God, Neither was he a
Good Man: For all this deportment can imply no less than, that he affected to
be accounted God, and so he was ambitious (even sacrilegiously ambitious) of
that Honor to which he had no Title; and this no Good man could be.

In fine. Let Jews and Turks be admitted of the Jury, and they will undoubtedly
give Verdict; That if we are deceived in our Common Faith, that Spirit that
dictated the Scriptures could design no less than that we should be deceived.
Let those who have given occasion to such Reflections as these, find out a
Reply whereby to stave off their Reproach.

In the mean time I may observe that the Socinians have been Unlucky in the
execution of their main design: For they have not purged Mystery out of the
Scripture They have only changed its Place: They have taken Mystery out of the
Doctrine of the Scripture, Where it was Venerable, and Worthy the Majesty of
God; and they have placed it in the phrase of the Scripture where it is
opprobrious and repugnant to God's Sincerity. For Example, Expounding Joh. 1.
1. They say, That, In the beginning was the Word, signifies no more than that
Christ was, when he was born: That, The Word was with God, signifies nothing
else, but That Christ was taken up into Heaven to receive Instructions for his
subsequent Errand; That, The Word was God, signifies no more than, That he was
God's Messenger; That, All things were made by him, and without him nothing was
made, that was made; signifies only, That he was to preach the Gospel, by
Virtue whereof Men were to be made New Creatures. What Mystery and Riddle do
they make of these Expressions; and how remote is that Meaning from the Reach
of a Rational Conjecture?

Amidst this Romantic Pains of Interpreting, They met with a Text in the
General Epistle of St. John, (viz.) There are Three that bear witness in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One;
which so bafled their Invention, that they despaired of ever accomodating it to
their Scheme. Whereupon the Brethren of Transylvania thought it their wisest
way to Vote this Epistle out of the Canon; But being instructed that there were
some Copies of the Bible wherein this Text was not found, they concluded it for
their Advantage to let the Epistle pass for Canonical, but the Text for
Spurious and Forged: And hereupon there grew a great Triumph over the
Trinitarian Cause; but a Triumph without any possible Victory; For the Cause
does not want even the Text, much less a Forgery of it to support it self
withal.

It Is alleged that this Text was not read in those Copies that were in vulgar
Use at the time of the Council of Nice; because otherwise it would certainly
have been cited against the Arians: However this be, it is as certain that this
Text was read in those Copies that were in use before the Council of Nice; For
St. Cyprian asserting the Unity of the Church, notwithstanding it consisted of
several Congregations, Argues it from the Unity of the Godhead although
consisting of several Persons, And cites This Text for his Proof.

And Tertullian asserting This to be the Christian Doctrine, That the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, were each of them God, and yet the Godhead not Divided,
proves it from This Text, Hi tres Unum sunt. And then he remarks from the
Gender that they were not Unus but Unum, i. e. not One in Person, but One in
Essence.

Thus it was before the Council of Nice, and within half an Age after that
Council Damasus Bishop of Rome (perceiving from common Complaints, that many
Differences were crept into the several Copies of the Scripture) employed St.
Jerome, the most expert Man in Biblick Learning that was in the World, to
bestow his Pains in rectifying those Errors. And he having Copies sent to him
from all Parts of the World (as himself expresses it) and conferring them
together, among many other Emendations from the Authority of those Copies that
were most Ancient and Authentic, he restored this Text, with a Brand of
Unfaithfulness upon those who first omitted it: So that all the Fault
concerning this Text can lie only on those who first left it out; And what side
of the Controversy that Fault can affect, let any one Judge.

I mention this by the By, and only to give some Caution against the Artifice
of the present Socinian Factors; who insinuate with Hands lifted up that the
Trinitarian Cause must needs be desperate, when it could be reduced to such
mean shifts as the forging of a Text for its support: Which as it is a Calumny
that may indeed shock the Surpised; so all that are at leisure to open their
Eyes, may see it has no Foundation.

Upon the whole, we find that the Trinitarian Cause asserted it self
sufficiently against Arius, although his Opposition was more formidable than any
others can be: Because his Hypothesis came by little and little to be so finely
spun, that many Good Men professed they could hardly see that the Difference of
the Controversy lay more than in Words; and that Erat quando erat, which they
only insisted upon (being applied to the Term of a Rational duration not a
Temporary one) was not competent to justify such Uncharitable Divisions.

But as for the Socinians, their Hypothesis is Grosser and Looser, more Absurd
and more Precarious, and therefore neither their Arts nor Arguments can ever be
so formidable. God averting the Judgment of removing the Candlestick from an
unworthy Age: For under that Determination the Weakest Means will be sufficient
to undo us.

I insisted upon Thomas (at the beginning of this Discourse) as a Pattern of
the Socinians Incredulity: But Thomas being vouchsafed an irresistible
Conviction, made what amends he was able, by Crying out My Lord, and my God!
Which the Christian World has hitherto looked upon as the Orthodox Confession of
our Faith in Christ. But the Socinians, to avoid this part of his Example, are
pleased to expound his Confession in this Mysterious manner, They say, that the
First Compellation My Lord, was directed to Christ; implying that Thomas
acknowledged him to be his very Lord and Master; But the second Compellation My
God, was only an effect of Admiration, and was directed by an Apostrophe to God
in Heaven, and meant no more than Men ordinarily do, when admiring they Cry, O
God! what a wonderful thing is this?

Alas! That these Men would let Reason and Modesty work on them so far as to
restore Mystery to its proper Place in the Book of God! To let it be in Things,
where it is Adorable, and to remove it from Words, where it is Ridiculous! That
they would allow Thomas to have spoken Truth, and plain Sense in the Form of
his Confession! And That he is through all Ages more wisely Imitable in his
Retractation, than in his Unbelief! That they would not give Covert to their
Obstinacy under this deluding Axiom, We cannot believe what we Will, We must
have Reason for what we believe! Since it is the highest Act of Reason to
submit our Assent to that Testimony that cannot deceive us: And since it is the
next Act of Reason to receive that Testimony in the most natural Sense of the
Words wherein it is delivered: And since it is equally an Act of Reason to
believe, that whatsoever is Revealed relating to God, The more Incredible it
seems, the more Credible it is: Because if what is Revealed concerning God were
always adapted to our Comprehension, how could it reach, or with any fitness
represent that Nature, which we allow to be Incomprehensible?

But farther to evince the Deceit of that Axiom, We cannot believe what we
Will, we must have Reason on our side: Experience will make it appear that Will
has frequently more influence upon our Belief than Reason has. It Is an old Rule
built upon just Observation; That What we would willingly have, we easily
Believe. And let any one assign a Cause why most Men should think so
Particularly concerning themselves, concerning their own Talents, Properties
and Opinions, so that no in different By-stander is able to think the same, If
it be not This, That Fondness can carry it above Reason; and where Affection
takes Place, their Judgment becomes partial and blind and pronely Seducible.
And as Will has such an Influence upon our Belief, so be sure it has the same
upon our not Believing: There is no cause assignable for our not believing many
Things so eminent as this that we are not Willing to believe them: We refuse
our Assent as often for want of Inclination as we do for want of Argument: And
looking into the bottom of Motives and Pretenses, we shall find a Truth well
worth our Observing, ( viz.) That what Men at first call Reason, and afterward
Conscience; is oftentimes no other then Affection and Prejudice and Willfulness
crept into the Chair.

I have neither time nor need to insist any farther for the Proof of that thing
I purposed. From the Considerations already offered, I think we may safely
conclude, That an humble and ready Faith (Casting down Imaginations, and every
thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of Christ) is the only
Expedient both to make and to keep Men Wise.

To the Author and Finisher of our Faith God blessed for ever, be all Glory and
Thanksgiving World without End.

FINIS.

