Piety's Address to the Magistrate. Delivered in a SERMON AT THE ASSIZES HELD
IN WINCHESTER, July 11th. 1695. BY E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester College. And
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1695.

To the Right Worshipful and Honored The Justices of Peace for the County of
Southampton, lately assembled at the Assizes held in Winchester.
SIRS,
WHen the Israelites were in despair of ever getting free from the Egyptian
Yoke, because the Red Sea seemed to be an Invincible Stoppage to their Flight;
God commanded Moses to Lift up his Rod, and That instrumentally divided the
Waters and made Them room to escape. In this appointment of Providence Moses
his Rod was the Complete Emblem of the Magistrates Coercive Power; which is the
only Competent Means under God to recover Men from the Bondage of Reigning
Vice, and to force a passage through their opposing Inclinations, without which it
is morally impossible they should ever get Free. What present need we have that
This Rod of Moses should be lifted up; and what success it promises toward the
public Reformation of Manners; and how Hopeless all other Methods are in
Respect of This, -- is the Argument of the following Discourse: Which You
having honored with a liberal Approbation, I cannot but send it amongst You to
be a farther Remembrance of what is therein offered. To give Advice is a
familiar and Easy Task, and That was Mine; but to take Advice of this Nature,
as You appear to have done, indicates so much both of Wisdom and Goodness, that
I hope the Honor of it will always accompany You in this Life, and follow You
to the Future. To be Able to assist public Virtue is a glorious Power; and
This is in Your Hands: To assist it, is a more glorious Act, and This is in
Your Choice: God invigorate and prosper and Crown Your just Endeavors to do
so. Thus humbly pray's He, who is

Yours, With all Respect and Observance, E. Young.

A SERMON ON 1 TIMOTHY ii. 2.
-- For all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life,
in all Godliness and Honesty.
IN the foregoing Verse the Apostle gives Directions concerning Prayer; He
requires us to pray (in entire Charity) for All Men; and his Choice of Words
points out what it is we are to pray for, (...) in the behalf of all Men: For,
First (he says) there must be Supplications, i.e. we must pray for all, that
God would bestow upon them such Blessings as are needful: Next, There must be
Prayers, to render the Word more distinctly, Deprecations, i.e. we must pray
for all, that God would take away his displeasure, and avert his Judgments from
them: Then, There must be Intercessions, i.e. we must pray, that God would
apply the Means of Salvation to all that sit in darkness; and of Conversion to
all that walk contrary to the Light that is afforded them: and Lastly, There
must be Thanksgivings, i.e. we must Thank God for all the Blessings we see
bestowed on Others; to signify that we have a feeling Complacency in the
Comforts that Others enjoy through God's good Providence; whether it be his
Pleasure that We enjoy the same, or no.

Having given this Direction to pray for All Men in general, he comes, in the
Verse of the Text, to require our Prayers for some particular Orders of Men in
a more especial manner; and that is, For Kings, and for all that are in
Authority: Now there is Room for the Question, What it is we are to pray for in
behalf of These? And some would have it meant by the Apostle that we should
pray for Those in the following Form of Words, ( viz.) That we may live (under
them) a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty: But this
Interpretation, as it is Wanting in Respect to the Governing Powers, so it is
in itself a formal Absurdity; For that to pray on this manner, would be to pray
not at all for Them, but purely for Ourselves; the whole prospect of the Words
extending no farther than our Own advantage. I know it is Lawful to pray that
we may so live under the Governing Powers; But the Question is, Whether such a
Prayer be a Discharge of that Duty toward Them which the Apostle is here
insisting upon? It is Lawful for me to pray that any private Man may do me a
good Office; but would any interpret that such a Prayer were a Prayer for that
Man, or did discharge any part of my Duty of Charity toward Him? And if such a
Prayer could not acquit me of my Duty toward a Private Man; much less can it
acquit me toward Those that are in Authority; whose Care and Character extends
our Duty to larger measures.

We may conclude therefore that This Form of Words was not at all intended for
the Matter, but only for the Motive of our Prayer.

To determine then What we are able to pray for in the behalf of Kings, and all
that are in Authority, This may be the Rule ( viz.) We are to pray for them, in
their Personal Capacities, with the same prospects of Charity that we do for
other Men; but in their Relative Capacities, i.e. as they are Kings and
Magistrates, we are to pray for all such Blessings upon Them as are suitable to
their Relations: All which (in short) may be included in This; That God would
dispose them to, and furnish them for, and prosper them in a due discharge of
their Respective Offices. Now This, as it will be the greatest Blessing to
Themselves; so (the Text tells us that) it will be Consequentially the greatest
Blessing to Us: For This will be the Fruit and Effect of such an
Administration, That we shall be able to live under it a quiet and peaceable
life in all Godliness and Honesty.

From the Words therefore I shall draw These Two Heads of Consideration.

I. The Magistrates Influence upon the public Welfare. And, II. The Proper
Matter of the Magistrates Charge.
As for the Magistrates Influence upon the public Welfare; It appears
evidently from the Hypothesis of the Text; which is This, That if Magistrates
rule Well, Peace, Godliness and Honesty will be the natural Fruits of their
Administration.

And as for the Proper Matter of the Magistrates Charge, It appears as
evidently from the same; For since God has made Magistrates a Competent Means
to procure such great Blessings to humane Society, Who can doubt but that it is
the Proper Business of Magistrates to intend and take care of the same
Blessings, that they are designed to procure?

I begin with the First Consideration; The Magistrates Influence upon the
public Welfare.

It is the known Method of God to draw Good out of Evil; And accordingly we may
observe that there were Three remarkably Good Consequences which followed upon
Sin; For, It brought forth Sorrow; It Occasioned a Redeemer; and It made
Government necessary: Whereof The First is the Natural Cure of Sin. The Second
is the Federal And the Third is the Political

And thus the same Wise Providence that has appointed Vipers and other Venomous
Creatures to carry in themselves Antidotes against their Own Poison, has made
these Consequences of Sin to be Sanative and Recovering, as much as Sin itself
is Poisonous and Deadly.

I. Sin brought forth Sorrow; Which, without sin, Man had never known: But
since he knows Sin, It is Happy for him to know Sorrow; Because (as One of the
Ancients expresses himself upon the matter of this Observation) Peccatum
peperit Tristitiam, and Filia destruit Matrem. Sin brought forth Sorrow, and
the Daughter destroys the Mother. II. Sin occasioned a Redeemer; Of Whom,
without it, there had been no need: But since a Redeemer was needful, Faelix
Culpa! quae tantum meruit Redemptorem; Even Happy Sin! that met with such a
Redeemer; a Redeemer, in Virtue of whose Purchase, greater Beatitude is derived
to Penitent Sinners, than ever was offered or hoped for in the State of
Innocence.
But the Third Observation (which I am to insist upon, as being only pertinent
to the Subject in hand) is This: That Sin made Government Necessary.

It would be perhaps too Curious to dispute Whether there would have been any
Government in the World, if so be Man had not sinned. We know there is a
Government of Order among the Angels that are Sinless; And such there might
have been among Men; Especially considering that even Then the Difference of
Superior and Inferior, and consequently the Right of Rule and Subjection,
would have been founded by Nature itself in the ordinary Course of humane
Geniture: But This we are sure of: There would have been no need of any
Coercive Government; No need of Laws, which (the Apostle says) are set not for
the Just, but for the Unjust; Laws enforced with Penal Sanctions, and asserted
with Prisons, Whips and Gibbets; There would have been no need of These. Now
This is the Government that Sin has made Necessary, and therewithal made
Necessary its Own Restraint and Cure.

The present state of humane Pravity, Man's proud Appetites and Injurious
Passions, has made Government necessary with all its Arts and Instruments of
Coercion: So Necessary, that humane Society cannot possibly subsist without it:
So Necessary, that the most Tyrannous Government that ever was in the World, is
more Eligible than No Government: Because, while the Government is never so
Tyrannous, that Tyranny can only express it self in the Enormities of a Few;
the Multitude must in the mean time be kept within the bounds of Right and
Reason: Whereas in Case of No Government, Every one is let loose to act the
same Insolences and Wrongs. The Tyranny of Government may Cut men short in
some desirable Commodities of Life, as Ease and Plenty; but it cannot in the
mean time but assert them to the enjoyment of those which are far Greater; I
mean those mentioned in the Text, Peace Godliness and Honesty: For should not
These be asserted, the Government it self would moulder and go to ruin: When
the Magistrate takes not Care of these Best of things, he is Perfidious to
Himself, he supplants his own Dignity, and cuts down the Bough he sits upon.

For as Society cannot subsist without Government; so neither can Government
subsist without Peace; Nor Peace without Honesty; Nor Honesty without
Godliness: So that if we do but consider the necessary Dependence that these
things have one upon another, we shall see the Reason, why every Government,
that will be Just to itself, must necessarily provide for the Maintenance of
them All: And Magistrates, tho we should suppose them to be in themselves
neither Peaceable, Godly, nor Honest; yet must they take care that the Public
be so, in regard of their own Interest, which must unavoidably sink without it.

I. Government cannot subsist without Peace; And this secures that Peace must
be provided for by Law: A Kingdom divided against itself cannot stand: and a
Kingdom is divided against itself not only by public Tumults and Rebellions;
but likewise by the neglect of Private Injustices and Wrongs. Rebellion beats
down the Fabric of Government at Once; but every private Outrage, if
encouraged by Impunity, pulls out a Stone; and so renders the Fabric loose and
weak: Nor will Rebellion stay long behind so fair a Pretext as is the Want of
Particular Justice and Protection. II. Neither can Peace subsist without
Honesty. Honesty is sometimes taken in simple Opposition to those Vices that
are Injurious, as Fraud, Violence, Breach of Contract, and the like; All which
are Immediate disturbers of Peace: But This is a Restrained sense of the Word;
For Honesty, in its proper latitude, is opposed to all manner of Vice, and so
it is in the Text; And we may affirm, that Peace cannot subsist without
Honesty, even in this Latitude of signification: Because, There is no Kind of
Vice but what is in effect an Enemy to Public Peace. Ex. gr.
Neither Idleness nor Luxury seem to have any malignant Aspect upon Others;
they seem to threaten none with ill Consequences but the personally Guilty; The
Idle man seems to propose the enjoyment of his Ease, and the Luxurious man of
his Pleasure, without the design of troubling or molesting any one Else: And
yet when These Vices have reduced men to Poverty (as thither they necessarily
tend) they certainly lead on to Sourness and Discontent, and a consequent
Desire of public Disturbance and Change. Some Vices are destructive to Peace
Directly and at hand; some only at a Distance, and by remoter Influence; But
These are no less to be apprehended by the Government: For that Poison that is
longer working, and more by Circuit, does the same mischief; It kills, and with
this only difference, that men are less aware of the danger. Some Vices embroil
at Home, by Invading Rights, or grounding Animosities, or gathering Factions;
and some expose to Enemies from abroad, by enervating men's Bodies, or
effeminating their Minds, or rendering them purely selfish and regardless of the
Common welfare; whereby the State must necessarily become weak and defenseless.
And thus Every Vice, if propagated, as it will be by License and Impunity, is
destructive to Peace in its own tendency; which Governors, tho Ill men, cannot
but be aware of; Abstracting from the Judgment of Gods Displeasure, which
Governors, when Good men, will chiefly fear. And therefore whoever are
concerned for public Peace, they are in prudence equally concerned to provide
for public Honesty.

But Thirdly, Neither can Honesty subsist without Godliness, that is, without a
true sense of Religion.

For Humane Laws, and the Fear of them can only bind the Outward Man; which as
he will be always seeking to Get loose, so he will not Long want an Occasion:
But when the Inward Man ( i. e.) the Conscience, is bound by the power of
Religion to Good Behavior, the Public needs no farther security; because
Occasion, when offering, will not tempt Such a one to transgress. And therefore
the Etymology is well enough Guest at by Those who say that Religio comes a
Religando, from Binding again; For Humane Laws are the First Bond of public
Quiet, but Religion is the Second and the Stronger. And hence it is that Even
Atheistical Politicians advise their Princes to take especial care of Religion,
and to see it rooted as firmly as possible in the hearts of their People, how
slender hold soever it has of their Own.

This being the Natural Connection between these Three chief Blessings of humane
Society; It is evident that Each of them must fall under the Magistrates Care
by Force of Interest: And how happily the proper Care of Magistrates will be
able to advance those Blessings, I shall choose to show in an Instance drawn
from that Government to which my Text relates; I mean the Roman, although Heathen,
as it Then was.

The First Colony of Men that gave beginning to that Empire, were not more
commendable for their Virtues than the Rest of their Neighbors; Indeed they
had nothing Commendable in Them but only This; That they put themselves under
Government with a firm Resolution to observe whatsoever their Princes and their
Laws should require from them: And from This bare Principle they grew to be the
fairest Instance that ever was in the World, How far Humane Nature may be
improved and elevated by the simple assistance of Institution and Discipline.

As for Civil Peace, to show how inviolably it was preserved among them, I will
only give This Instance; That although they were a People martial and brave, yet
they esteemed it infamous to fight a Fellow Citizen: Insomuch that Duelling was
a way of Vindication perfectly scandalous among the Romans; and when the Point
of Honor engaged any of them to resent a particular Indignity, Their only
Challenge was, To show Who was the Best Man at the Head of the Enemy.

As for their Honesty (in the whole Latitude of the Word) begin where we will,
and we shall find Them Exemplary. So did the Reputation of their Integrity
obtain in the World, that to speak or act More Romano, was taken in the Common
Style, as signifying to speak or act Fairly and Sincerely. So remarkable was
their Justice, that all the World appealed to their Arbitration; as wherein
they were secure that Right should not be born down either by Fear or
Corruption. So strict were They in the Observance of their Promises, that
having promised to send Succor to their Allies upon Occasion, they would not
fail to send it, tho at a time when Themselves lay under the straitest Siege.
For as they had always an Eye to the Assistance of Heaven for the Issue of
their Undertakings, so they thought themselves stronger by their Justice, than
by their Numbers, because more allied to that Assistance: And thus keeping
awake the Consciences of the People, and always acting such things as were
Agreeable to Conscience, tho of apparent hazard, it raised their minds to
confide in their Gods, and made them consequently Fearless, and their Courage
Invincible. So Wonderful was their Conjugal Love and Chastity, that a Divorce
was not heard of at Rome in 500 Years, tho there was nothing to restrain it but
only this Consideration, That it would be looked on as an Act of Ill Fame. The
like I might say of their Industry, Temperance, and Parcimony; and yet withal
they had such an absolute contempt of all dishonest Gain, that Ill Men could
not find room for their Briberies amongst them: Their chief Aim being
universally not Private, but Public Good; and their Glory (as one of their
Generals said upon Occasion) not so much to be Rich, as to Command those that
were so.

In the mean time the Source and Bond of all these Virtues was their studious
Regard of Religion, which their Second King had with all industrious care
planted and fixed amongst them.

And such a Regard they had to the Sincerity of Religion, that while any man
was observed to live loosly and viciously, he fell under a Civil
Excommunication; For that Law of their Twelve Tables, Impius ne audeto, etc.
prohibited all such from joining in the Public Worship, till such time as they
could bring Testimony of their better behavior. And such an entire Veneration
did they pay to their Reputed Gods, that in the distress of Sieges, and fear of
Sacking, Private Men showed more concern for their Temples and their Images,
than for their Own Houses, Families and Fortunes.

Now this Glorious Advance both of Virtue and Piety amongst them proceeded from
the direct Influence of the Government; Which had provided Laws extending to
all Instances of Good Manners; and, for a fence to These, Laws Enforcing
Industry, and Regulating Expenses; and, for a Guardian of all the Rest, The
First Law in their Tables was, Divos cast adeunto, Which in their Own
Interpretation is This, Let Men worship the Gods with Temperance of body and
Purity of mind. Nor were These Laws contented with a bare Promulgation, they
were reverenced and made venerable by a formal Institution; It being the Custom
(as Cicero says it was to the beginning of His days) that the Children should
be instructed in their Laws, and learn an Abridgment of them memoriter, as a
part of their necessary Education.

And yet the Happiness of Their State did not owe itself so much to Their Laws,
as to Their Magistrates.

Most of their Laws they borrowed from the Athenians, upon whom This Reproach
had been cast; That the Athenians showed their Wisdom in making Good Laws, but
their Folly in not observing them: And therefore They of Rome being aware of
this Rock, took especial Care that the Execution of their Laws should be
committed to Grave, Honest and Active Men; and that such Men should be charged
with a vigilant Inspection into the public Manners. Concerning which
Magistrates the Law provided This Caution; Is Ordo vitio careto; Caeteris
Specimen esto; Let that Order be Men of unstained Probity, and Examples of that
Behavior which they require from Others: Upon which Cicero makes This
Reflection, Quod si est, tenemus omnia; If that be observed, we have all we can
wish. Nay to prevent their Magistrates from Supineness and Neglect in the
Execution of their Charge, There was another Ordinance, That all Inferior
Magistrates should be obliged to justify their Administration by bringing in to
the Public Censors, from time to time, an Account of what particular Acts they
had done in order to the maintaining and asserting of their Laws. A most
wholesome Constitution! and which our Own Legislators seem to have had some Eye
upon in their Injunction annexed to the late Act concerning Swearing. Thus were
the great Blessings of the Text, Peace, Godliness and Honesty planted and
established in that Commonwealth for several Centuries of Years, by the pure
Wisdom of the Government, exerting itself through the Care and Diligence of the
Magistrates.

Indeed one cannot contemplate the State and Manners of that People, for so
long as the Reins of their Government were held in steady hands, (for we may
take notice, That as it was the Vigilance of the Magistrates which raised that
People to this pitch of Glory; so it was Their succeeding Remissness that sunk
them from it again) I say, One cannot contemplate the State and Manners of that
People without seeing occasion to reproach the Generality of the present World;
Which, although Christian and under the Influence of greater Light, Obligations,
Encouragements, and Assistances, does yet fall far short of their Common
Virtue; and run to a Dissoluteness mischievous both to the Particular and to
the Public; such as Heathen Rome for many Ages neither admitted nor saw within
her District. A matter fitter for our Humiliation, than our Discourses!

But there is One Argument which the Dissoluteness of the Age usually defends
itself withal, which I cannot but reflect upon from this Occasion.

Let a Man be demanded Why he did any thing Ill, and answer naturally upon it;
he answers, That he did it for his Pleasure; And This is the Truth: But a Truth
so reproachful that upon Second Thoughts he will not own it; And therefore let
him be charged Conscienciously for the same thing, and he takes Refuge in the
blaming of Nature; and seeks to discharge himself from the Scandal by laying it
upon that Corruption with which he was Born; not upon that which he has
Contracted. But unless we could allege That the Roman People (I have been
speaking of) were born Exempt from the Propensions of Common Nature, It appears
that the Charging Nature with this Issue of Corruption, is no other than a
Calumny; For we Impute that to Nature, which is owing purely to want of
Discipline: Nor is it that Corruption we Derive, but that which we Nurse up and
Cultivate by Indulgent practice, which produces such a common Depravation of
Manners; The Remissness of Superiors Concurring in the mean time to the Effect.

I proceed to my Second Head, which is, To consider the Proper Matter of the
Magistrates Charge.

By Magistrates (in this place) I mean the Subordinate Magistrates, to Whom the
Execution of the Laws is committed; with Whom my present business lies, and
upon Whom our Hope of procuring the forementioned Blessings chiefly depends.
For although Kings are joined with Them in the Text, yet my Argument will not be
weak, if I impute the Whole effect to Those of This Order: Because whatsoever
Good is derivable to the Public from good Constitutions, it can be derived
Immediately by none but the Subordinate Powers: The Supreme being as the Head,
whose Office it is to prescribe; the Subordinate as the Hands, whose Office it
is to apply; and it is the Application only that brings the benefit, or works
the Cure. So that the Remissness of Inferior Magistrates will at any time
absolutely Void all the Care and Wisdom of Kings and Legislators.

Concerning These Magistrates therefore I assert, That their Charge requires
them to take respective and distinct Care of Peace, Godliness and Honesty: And
who can doubt it when he reflects That these are the Blessings which by a
sedulous Administration they may procure; and that God's Providence designs no
less in their very Institution than that they should procure them?

They that consider Least what is the Charge of a Magistrate, will pronounce
him obliged to take care of Peace, and to protect Men from Acts of Violence and
Injustice: And if the Magistrate be supine in This part of his Province, he
shall be awakened by the Complaints of those that suffer. But in the mean time
There are Other Acts against Godliness and Honesty, as much Criminal in
themselves, as much Mischievous to the Public, and as much Prohibited by the
Laws as the Former; which yet usually pass without either Complaint or Avenger;
and in respect of which it seems to be the common Vote That the Magistrates
Authority should lie asleep and be passive. Whether it be That, although men would
have their Properties guarded, yet they would not have their Virtues guarded,
they would be at Liberty to loose These when they think fit: Or whether it be
That, if Property be guarded, Men think Themselves sufficient for the Guard of
their own Manners and Consciences: For Man is an overweening Creature, and
full of obstinate Conceit; Insomuch that scarce any among the loose and vicious
but think themselves Wise enough, and Able enough to make themselves as Good as
they please, without any other's Help. And therefore as He in the Poet says of
Jupiter

Det Vitam, det Opes, sanam mihi animam Ipse parabo, Let God give me Life and
Fortunes, I will give my self a Good mind; So most are ready to say of the
Magistrate, Let Him take care of my Safety and my Rights, I will take care of
my Manners and my Religion: But Both are equal Mistakes; For as Human Nature
cannot be made truly Good without the Assistance of God; so neither can it be
restrained from the utmost extravagance of Ill without the awful Vigilance and
Animadversion of the Magistrate.

Whereas therefore the Laws of our Government have made a due Provision not
only against Felonies, Treasons, Larcenies, Batteries and the like, which are
usually prosecuted; but likewise against other Immoralities, which are as
usually overlooked; such as Idleness, Intemperance, Debauchery, Wizardism,
Sorcery, Fortune-telling, Swearing, Profaneness, Neglect of Divine Offices, and
all wild Opinions in Religion that either blaspheme or subvert the established
Truth; It may be opportune to Enquire Whether these Crimes may possibly be
restrained by any Other Means than that of the Magistrates Coercive power? For,
if so; This may (so far) excuse the Magistrates Care in these matters: But, if
not; Their not being restrained will affect the Magistrates Conscience more
than all are aware of.

Perhaps it may be thought That the Power of the Gospel, and the Grace of God,
and the Vigilance of the Church may be a sufficient Means to restrain these
Crimes in a Christian State: Let us see then what Issue may reasonably be
expected from These several Means. And (1.) From the Power of the Gospel.

If Laws could do the Work, none certainly were needful but These of Christ;
which tie all men so expressly to the Offices of their respective Stations, that
the Observance of These would void all other Provision both for the Virtue, and
the Tranquillity of the World: Or could simple Sanctions enforce Laws, none can
be so moving as the Two Interminable states of Heaven and Hell, wherewith the
Precepts of the Gospel recommend themselves to our Observance: But alas! we
find that men make no difficulty to trample upon the Laws of Christ,
notwithstanding the Venerableness of their Author, and the Moment of their
Sanctions, as well as upon those of human Constitution: For although their
Sanctions are so Important, yet the Execution of them is Remote; And men are
made so Shortsighted by the Importunity of their present Appetites, that
Threatenings at such a distance affect them no more, than the Penalties of Our
Laws would do, should they not be executed at all. And therefore Solomon's
Determination may still hold, That sin is restrainable by no possible means but
that of a Speedy Execution, Eccl. 8. 11.

Indeed some have pretended to be of Opinion, That the Gospel is the only Law,
and Christ the only Magistrate that is either Needful or Lawful among
Christians: For this was the Reason why the Anabaptists held Magistracy to be
Unlawful, because it was a Reproach to the Laws and Government of Christ to
presume that Christians had need of any Other. But never was Doctrine more
effectually confuted than This of Theirs was from their Own Example; For never
did Magistracy appear to be more necessary in the World, than it did at that
time, to suppress the Impieties of those Men, who had decry'd it as Needless
and Unlawful.

The Convictions and Precepts and Motives of the Gospel (which is all we can
mean by its Internal Power) we see daily overborn by the Tide of human
Corruption. But then It is True, (2.) That the Gospel has an Assisting Power (
viz.) the Grace of God: And where That takes place, we may not doubt of a
better Issue.

But in the mean time we ought well to consider What it is we mean by the Grace
of God: Mean we a power that will ravish men from the bosom of their corrupt
Inclinations, and force them to be Good in spite of their Reluctance? This
indeed would void both Laws and Magistrates, and render them Useless. But if we
will speak true Sense we can mean no other by the Grace of God than a
Sanctifying Principle, that joins it self to, and cooperates with the Series of
Ordinary Means; of which Means the Coercive power of the Magistrate is one of
the Chief. It is an usual Expression concerning flagitious and loose living men
that They want the Grace of God; Now if we mean thereby that God had debarred
such men from the distributions of his Grace, Our Judgment is Contumelious to
God; Or if we mean that the Grace of God would Forcibly make such men Good, Our
Judgment is Erroneous and False: All the Truth therefore that can be couched
under that Expression is only this; That such Men for want of those purging
Fears, which ought to be wrought in them by their Own Consideration, or (for
want of that) by the wholesome Coercion of the Magistrate, do extinguish and
make void that Grace of God, which has been offered to them In and With the
dispensation of the Gospel; Offered to them (I say) equally as to others, but
wanted success, because Discipline was wanting to concur with the Operation.
Whereas therefore in Scripture the Ordinary Means to Goodness are called the
Grace of God, as well as that Divine Energy which cooperates with these Means;
So we ought to look upon a Good Magistracy, and a Due Execution of the Laws, to
be a great part of the Grace of God to any people: As on the contrary, a Remiss
Administration is no other than a Judgment, which makes all Gods other Grace to
be bestowed in vain upon the generality of Mankind.

Let us see (3.) In what measure the Vigilance of the Church may be hoped to
supply the Defect in this Case.

What Influence the Church can have upon the Manners of Men consists in the
Methods of Exhorting, Rebuking and Censuring: All which after once men have
wasted their Consciences, or taken a loose beyond the Decency of Behavior,
become the most Despisable things in the World. How weak was that Voice of Old
Eli and how Incompetent to restrain a Hophni and Phineas, when he cried, Why do
you such things? Nay my Sons! for it is no good Report that I hear of You. Now
the Voice of an Ecclesiastic in its proper Elevation, scarce amounts to be
Louder than This; or if it be heightened with the thunder of Gods Menaces, yet
it will be contemned by a hardy Sinner as easily as that of Eli was; But it
cannot be so Criminal as that of Eli was; because Eli was a Magistrate as well
as a Priest, and therefore could have spoke with a more Effectual voice, and
such as would have reached more sensibly home.

The Power of the Ministry is no more than Persuasive; But stubborn Nature will
not often be persuaded, there is need of Force: And say not that Virtue or
Religion, when Forced, are nothing worth; What is begun in Force, may end in
Choice; What is begun in Fear, may end in Love; although without Force and Fear it
would have begun. But supposing that Virtue thus Forced should never arrive to
the State of Choice and Love; yet still This Good would follow, that the
Magistrate had done his Part; Besides that, it is no small advantage to the
common Cause of Virtue That men can be brought to be at least Good Hypocrites.

I know the Pastors Exemplary Care and Circumspection is always necessary
(Contempt be upon him that makes Apology for the Defective,) But still This is
a Means insufficient to Reform: For where Sense comes to govern more than
Conscience, there He that comes armed with Mulcts and Corrections is the only
Edifying Man.

To say how Ineffectual the Censures of the Church would be toward this
Purpose, were only to bring under Your Contemplation a deplorable Scandal: Who
would care for being turned out of the Church, of those who seem Careless
whether they are ever In? And as for the Farther Process in that Case, we have
seen enough of its Consequences, to make us wish for Any, rather than That
Invidious and Successless Method.

As therefore the Public Cry is for Reformation of Manners, to see Godliness
and Honesty advanced in common practice, and the Fruit of Peace springing out
happily from that stable root; So we cannot but turn our Eyes upon You that are
the Magistrates; I mean Expressly You that are the Justices of Peace, as being
invested above all other Magistrates with the most competent Means and Power of
procuring this End. No other Hand can cure our Sore; No other hand can reach it
but only Yours. Without You, all our wholesome Laws are like a Box of Medicines
well prepared, but then locked up, while the Diseases spread and reign for want
of Application. Without You, Majesty itself is made Impotent, and can only
deplore our disorders, but not possibly redress them. And what is it we may
expect from Judges and their Circuits? They are necessary indeed so far as
their Business extends; but utterly unable to reach the Root of our Evil: For
to what Purpose of Reformation is the Cutting off some Few, Signal, overgrown
Weeds; while such multitudes are still growing up in the Nurseries of Idleness,
Debauchery and Profaneness? Here it is, in These Nurseries that Vice is to be
suppressed; and Greater Crimes mercifully prevented by Animadversion upon the
first Buddings of them in their Remoter Causes.

It Is You we pray for in our Common Liturgy; That you may have Grace to execute
Justice, and to maintain Truth: And again, That You may truly and indifferently
minister Justice to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the
Maintenance of Gods true Religion and Virtue: What we pray that You may do,
suffer us to pray to do. Lend Your best Assistance to this Cause of Virtue and
Religion; Which is God's Service, and Your Charge, and Every man's Blessing.

As for Virtue, You are able to serve it in the whole latitude of its Province;
Because the Laws have made Every Vice obnoxious to Your Censure: All formal
Crimes have their punishment assigned; and all smaller Misdemeanors are
submitted to your Discretion; Insomuch that the first Seeds of Crimes, whether
they appear in Laziness, Lavishness, Petulancy, Sauciness, Lying, Contumely, or
any other kind of Offensive Behavior, may stand in just awe of Your Authority.
It is not simply from Punishments (Pecuniary or Corporal) that we expect the
Success; Your very Frowns and Rebukes, as on the other hand Your Countenance
and Favor, when distributed respectively, and joined with Your Exemplary
Steadiness, will do the greatest part of the Work.

Religion implores your Care especially in This, That there be no Mockers of
holy things, no Contempt of Religious Worship, no bold Profanation of the Lords
Name or Day: Which are Crimes that necessarily wast and harden Men's
Consciences, and take off all Awe and respect of Duty from their minds. In my
mention of Religious Worship, I spoke not restrainedly to That of our
Established Church, because there are other Allowances by Law; But yet I am not
blamable if I chiefly intended That. I hope You are all of Opinion that there
is no false Reasoning in his Majesty's Preface to his Late Injunctions, where
he says; We are sensible that nothing can more effectually conduce to the
Honor and Glory of God, and to the support of the Protestant Religion, than
the Protecting and Maintaining of the Church of England as it is by Law
established; which we are (therefore) resolved to do to the utmost of our
Power. This Reasoning is certainly sound, as well as it is Authoritative: Nor
yet could any Magistrate, tho he were otherwise persuaded, be less than
Perfidious to the Government, if he did not show more regard to that which is
Established, than to that which is barely Tolerated. Nevertheless, since,
whatsoever be the Arguments of Preference between the particular Ways of
Worship, the Main Point is to be Religious; Whosoever is not so ( Tros,
Tyriusve) let him be made sensible of Your Displeasure. And (if there be any
Love of Christ) have a Watch upon the Socinian Poison: Suffer it not to creep
into Houses, and lead Captive (should I say Silly Women, it would be too much
beneath the haughty pretenses of their Scheme; and therefore I shall choose to
say) Silly Wits; And if there seem to be any Contradiction in the Terms let
Them answer for it, who think there be Wit in Blaspheming. For so it is that
the Wits (such of them as are Profligate) run into this Hypothesis, as well as
the Ignorant and Unstable: Not that They can have any Concern for Religion; but
because they look upon this Hypothesis as a Battery raised to beat down all
Religion: For what Article is there in Religion wherein we may not deny the
Sense or Authority of the Scriptures with as much Reason as we can deny the
Divinity of Christ? Which, I desire You to observe that it carries in it a
Double Blasphemy; the First in Asserting that Christ is not God, and The Second
in Implying, That though he be not God, yet he had an Ambition to be Thought to
be so. (For, since the whole Style of the Scripture points plainly as it does,
This is a Consequence which the Socinians can never evade by all their boasted
Happiness of Interpretation, Because the more Happy their Interpretations are,
the more they demonstrate This Consequence.) And now laying These Two
Imputations together, let any one tell me how they can be Tolerable; How the
First, when charged upon Him, who thought it not Robbery to be Equal with God;
or How the Second, when charged upon Him, Who made himself of no Reputation,
and was the Humblest of Men.

But if You will serve either Virtue or Religion, It is necessary that You be
Vigilant and Active. However Justice ought to be Blind, the Justitiary ought
(like those Ministering Spirits about the Throne of God) to be Full of Eyes;
i.e. he ought to be sedulous in Inspection and Enquiry into the Matters of his
Charge. In Offenses that happen betwixt Man and Man, it is Rational and fit to
stay for a Complaint; Because the Offended Party is so much a Friend to
himself, that he will be sure either to Complain, or to Forgive; which
(generally speaking) is the Better Issue: But in Offenses, where God and Piety
are barely concerned, there, be the Facts never so Notorious, it is possible the
Complaints may be none at all: And therefore He who will not proceed upon
Notoriety in these Cases, without the Formality of a Complainant, will leave
himself very little Opportunity to discharge his Trust.

Some there are that deliberate; Whether a Magistrate should Choose to be
Loved, or to be Feared; But let not That come under Your deliberation; For he
that Chooses Either, has given himself a Bias, that will certainly draw him
from being Just. A Magistrate ought to have no other Prospect than simply That
of doing Justice; And He that does So, may be contented with what will follow;
For he shall be Feared by Ill men, as he should Wish to be; And he shall be
Loved by God and Good men, Which is all the Love that is Desirable.

It Is a Noble Work that I presume to admonish You of: and the Incitement is no
Less So, which offers itself to You from the Conscience of serving God, from
the Glory of serving Your Country, and from the Felicity of serving Your
selves; when You consider what That great Magistrate and Prophet Daniel has
told us (Chap. xii. 3.) They that turn many to Righteousness shall shine like
the Stars for ever and ever.

Grant O Lord we beseech Thee, that the Course of this World may be so
peaceably ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve Thee in
all Godly Quietness; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
FINIS.

