A JUST VINDICATION Of the Questioned Part of the READING OF EDWARD BAGSHAW,
Esquire An Apprentice of the Common Law.

Had in the Middle Temple Hall the 24th day of February, being Monday, Anno
Dom. 1639. upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. called, Statutum pro Clero, from all
Scandalous Aspersions whatsoever.

With a True NARRATIVE of the Cause of Silencing the Reader by the then
Archbishop of Canterbury: With the ARGUMENTS at large of those POINTS in his
Reading, for which he was Questioned at the COUNCIL BOARD.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

And are to be sold in Westminster Hall and Fleet street.

A JUST VINDICATION Of the Questioned Part of the READING OF EDWARD BAGSHAW,
Esquire An Apprentice of the Common Law.
Had in the Middle Temple Hall the 24th day of February, being Monday, Anno
Dom. 1639 upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. called, Statutum pro Clero, from all
Scandalous Aspersions whatsoever.

IT was a Wise and witty Saying of Tertullian, That Nihil veritas, crubescit
nisi solummodo abscondi.
Truth never blusheth but when her face is hid: And therefore the Egyptian
Judges wore the Picture of Truth about their necks in a chain, like as the Jews
did their Philacteries, as things which they greatly gloried in, not only
openly to wear, but publicly defend when there should be cause.

The pulling off this mask from the face of Truth, and the vindication of it
from obloquy and reproach, and of my own name and reputation from scandal and
detraction; and to the intent no stayns of that nature might cleave to my
Winding Sheet when I am dead; are become the only Motives why I now yield,
after so long tract of time since my Reading, to those strong importunities
which I formerly neglected, by publishing, to the common view, my Arguments
upon four Points of my Reading, for the last of which only I was suspended and
silenced, by the means of the then Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom, being
dead, and suffering as he did, I shall speak no ill; and shall not so much
blame him as that Accusator fratrum, who, to curry favor, misreported my
Reading to him, and made me to speak things which I never thought, and him to
do things that were never done before, as to silence a Reader of Law before he
had committed an offense, or was heard to speak for himself: Si accusasse sat
est, quis Julian.
erit innocens, was a most just saying, though of an unjust Emperor.

This sudden and uncouth act of his made a loud noise throughout the Cities of
London and Westminster. A great Peer of the Realm merrily told him at their
next meeting, That he had often heard of a Silenc't Preacher, but never of a
Silenc't Reader before. And the vulgar people, at that time Espousing a
Scottish quarrel increased in their clamor and hatred against him.

This trouble he brought upon himself in meddling with things wherein he had no
skill, and with persons over whom he had no Jurisdiction: for Reading of Law in
the Inns of Court and Chancery (in both which I have been Reader) are, as they
speak in Schools, rather Problematae then Dogmata, Mootes and Questions of Law
(though of the Prerogative it self, the highest of things) for the Ventilation
of Truth, and extricating the obscurities of Law, for the benefit of the
Students in those Societies, then Resolutions and Judgments of Law in
Westminster Hall. And Readers, if they do amiss, are answerable to the
Governors of that Society, at their next Parliament, where the Reader and his
Assistants (being always Benchers) do give an account of that Reading, as I
did (as shall be declared hereafter) and had thanks from them all. And such
acceptance my Reading found with the Gentlemen of that Society (which I shall
with thankfulness ever acknowledge) that scarce any Reader before was ever
attended out of Town with such a number of Gentlemen of the same House.

And as the Archbishop brought this trouble upon himself, so did he thereby no
small injury unto me: for by his Complaint to the King and Council, That I read
against Bishops (occasioned by my Misreporter, for I shall still lay the load
on him;) it was by that means strongly infused into the heads of the people,
that I read against Bishops, whom they then perfectly hated: whereupon, the
year following, without asking, or seeking, or stepping one foot out of my
Chamber in the Middle Temple to that intent, I was by the unanimous vote of the
people chosen Burgess of Southwark in the first place.

Presently after my choosing, a Petition was brought to me by some of the chief
of that Borough, containing in it the total extirpation of Episcopacy, Root and
Branch, as likewise of the Book of Common Prayer, and that I would commend it
to the Commons House (I being their Senior Burgess, and having the first
choice). By this Petition I understood them, but they understood not me, and
therefore I dealt clearly with them, That if the present Episcopacy, which had
so much exceeded the bounds of Law in the exercise of their Jurisdiction to the
grievance of the people, was reformed and regulated according to the Law of the
Land, it would be better accepted, then in their utter abolition; and this way,
I thought the Parliament would go, and so convinced them with Reasons for the
same, that they seemed to me fully satisfied, and the Petition stopped. But
they consulting afterward with Mr. John White, my fellow Burgess, he approved
of the Petition, and hereupon it was delivered into the hands of Alderman
Pennington (one of the Knights for London) who brought the Petition into the
House with sixteen thousand Hands, which being read and debated in the House,
Mr. John Pym (a Gentleman with whom I had familiar acquaintance, and knew his
mind in that point) spoke to this purpose, That he thought it was not the
intention of the House to abolish either Episcopacy or the Book of Common
Prayer, but to reform both, wherein offense was given to the people. And if
that could be effected, and assented to by them, with the concurrence of the
King and Lords, they should do a very acceptable work to the people, and such
as had not been since the Reformation, which was then about eighty years.
Diverse Members of the Commons House agreed with him in a Reformation,
instancing in those famous and most Pious Bishops and Ministers of the
Praelatical party in the days of Queen Mary, which purchased to us that
Reformed Religion we now enjoy, with no less price then their own hearts blood.

As for example, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper and Ferrar were all of them
Bishops. John Philpott was Archdeacon of Winchester, John Rogers and John
Bradford were Prebends of Paul's, and Laurence Sanders Prebend of Lichfield,
with diverse more; these were all of them very godly men, and eminent Preachers,
and most gracious with the people.

For my own part, being then at that debate a Member of the House, I openly
declared my opinion concerning Bishops, Vid. Stat. of Carliel 25 E. 1 and
Cawdryes Case. 5. Rep.
for establishing them in their Function and Jurisdiction, agreeable to Law
(according to what I had done and held in my Reading, without wavering or
warping at all). And told the House, That by the Ancient Laws of the Land the
Crown of England was founded in the state of Prelacy; and ever since there was
a Christian King of England, there was a Bishop. That it was so Incorporated
into Monarchy, that the ruin of one would hazard the ruin of the other: That
it was so interwoven with the Common Law, in so many Original Writs, that the
destruction of it would take away one of the chiefest, Peers of the Common Law
for learning and Pleading in Ecclesiastical matters: That as the Common Law was
favorable to Clergymen, and gave them more privileges then any Humane Law
they could name, so it was strict in correcting and punishing them (of what
rank soever) if they transgressed that Law. And had Judges done their duties
according to their Oaths and Places, by granting Prohibitions to the High
Commission in causes wherein they had no power to hold Plea; and Writs of
Habeas Corpus to such persons, whom they had fined and imprisoned without
cause, Bishops and Presbyters might, for ought I know, have been long since
happily agreed, who clashing together like two Flints, and thereby striking
fire, some sparks of that fire falling, against both their wills, upon the black
Tinder of Independency, inflamed such a violent and furious party of
unreasonable men, quite of another shape, as that (by the just judgment of God
for these their unnatural contentions, joined with the sins of the Nation) they
became instrumental quite to ruin the one, and almost destroy the other.

And I was then, and am still of opinion, That the Crown of England, being a
Monarchy bound up by such apt Laws, for the benefit and peace of Prince and
People, and so apted for the Order and Jurisdiction of Bishops, that I hold it
the fittest for this Nation of any in the Christian world. And I think I am
able, within my Sphere and Profession, to maintain it against any Adversary: Et
cedo mihi quemvis Arbitrum.

And here I have just occasion to profess to all the world, as in truth I do,
That I was so far from the very thoughts of destroying Bishops, that observing
at the time of my Reading, and diverse years before, the great invasions that
were made by them upon the common Law of England, and the Courts of Westminster
Hall, and the scorn and contempt at that time cast abroad upon Professors and
the very Profession of the Law; I knew no other way how to hold them up in
their Functions and just jurisdictions, and in esteem and Honor amongst the
people (which once they had) as by Reading upon that Law which gave them their
just bounds and limits, which if once they should break down, I ever feared
their ruin and destruction; That, like Dear, breaking the Pale, they exposed
themselves to the fury of the people, to be by them hunted, chased, and at last
destroyed; and the whole Clergy of England, from whom they received their
Orders, eminently endangered. And in this opinion of my fear, I had the
concurrence of a most Honorable person, whom I much honored Living, and
lamented Dead, Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton, scarce then to be parallelled
for Piety, Wisdom and Gravity in the whole Nation. And how sad experience has
brought to pass what I then feared; I shall say no more, but silence my self in
the words of that Kingly Prophet, Obmutui, quia tu Domine fecisti.

And thus have I cleared my self from the aspersions and scandals of two
opposite parties whom it was impossible for me to please. The one accusing me
of Faction, that I set bounds and limits to Episcopacy; the other of Apostasy,
that, contrary to Law, I would not take it quite away. And my sticking close to
this opinion, and abhorrency of taking the Scotch Covenant, tending to the
utter abolition of Episcopacy, was the alone ground of that load of afflictions
which lay long upon my Body and Estate, which had quite overwhelmed me, had not
God been a most gracious Father then unto me, by supporting and comforting me
with his Staff under that Rod of his corrections, giving me patience to suffer
rather then to sin; and to resolve, in the words of Zuinglius, Mallem mill
mortes obire: quam contra conscientiam attestari.

And in this my just Vindication, I acknowledge my self much beholden to that
Learned and Ingenious Gentleman, William Sanderson, Esquire.
who lately has Printed the Life and Death of the late King Charles, wherein
he has acquitted me from such Misreports and Scandals cast upon me for my
Reading; And has truly, for substance, related those points of Law for which I
was questioned in my Reading, only he has failed in some circumstances in that
relation, and in the causes of my Silencing by the Archbishop, which I shall
now rectify, that best can do it, that in case that Gentleman shall have
occasion, hereafter, to revise his History, by a second Edition, he may Correct
the same according to that Narrative I shall now declare; wherein I shall
pursue his own Method from the beginning to the end, touching that Relation,
and so conclude.

It is very true, as he there says, That my Reading in the Middle Temple Hall
was the 24 day of February, Anno Dom. 1639. in that very year the troubles were
in Scotland, and the Scots were preparing an Army for England, masking their
misdeeds, against their native Prince, under specious pretenses of Religion,
which mockery of Almighty God, he has since avenged on them with a witness,
which they both find and feel at this day. But yet my Reading was Compiled two
years before, and so completed as that I could not alter it, finding no cause
so to do, in that my Reading had no manner of reference to the pretended
matters of that impious Quarrel.

He proceeds, and says thus, Mr. Bagshawe intended to meddle with
Prohibitions, but not with Tacitus, to follow Truth too near the Heels, for
fear of his Teeth, nor too far off, least he loose it: and so neither to
offend nor to be offended. This, I confess, was in substance much to the sense
of what I spoke, though not in those words; and therefore I will repeat that
part of my Speech which I made to the Benchers, Barresters and Gentlemen of the
Middle Temple, at the beginning of my Reading, in these very words:

In the choice of my Statute I was much perplexed, Part of the Speech.
I first pitched upon the Stat. of Articuli Cleri, 9 E. 2 the five first
Chapters, concerning Prohibitions, an excellent, but an angry Law, especially
to such men who love not to be restrained in their Jurisdiction, and therefore
I left it and fell upon a more pleasing Law, the Statute of 13 E. 1 called
Circumspecte agatis, of Consultations, which gave the Clergy such Jurisdiction
that no Prohibition could take from them: Herein I rested long; I divided that
Statute, gathered many Cases upon it, fully determining to deliver the Law of
the Land concerning all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Kingdom, not only in
the Inferior Courts of Ordinaries, but in that great Court of the High
Commission. The Common Law of England speaking to all those Courts in the
language of the supreme Lawgiver, Hither shall you pass and no further: and
here shall you stay your proud waves.

But I considered the Title of my Statute was Circumspecte Sir W. Raleigh
agatis which put me in mind of the saying of an excellent Historian, That a
man might follow Truth so near the Heels, that it might at last dash out his
Teeth. I do not say this was any Argument to me of parting with so good a
Statute, for it had savoured of Fear and base Affection: Et viro cordato
indigno.

The only reason why I waved those two former Statutes, and resolved upon this
Law I have now chosen, was my respects to the Students of this Society, for
whose benefit I had chiefly destinated these my poor labors, by reading upon
such a Law as was larger in extent, comprehending in it self the two former
more frequent in our books and in Westminster Hall, and of better learning and
use: Et hic Baculum fixi, I never wavered more.

But finding the whole little for words, but a Volume for Learning and matter,
I was forced to confine my thoughts only to the seventh Chapter of this
Statute; and although I had not the happiness to have the help of other men's
labors upon this Law (as not knowing it was ever Read on before) yet I have
adventured to Read upon it, choosing rather to fall alone where I might happily
find either your pardon or pity, then, through the arms of a Guide, where I
could expect neither.

And because I talk of falling, I have no other course then to choose such a
Supporter as will never fail me, and that is your love, which is of such a
Composition, that where it finds out desert it can make it like the
Philosophers Stone, it can turn a base Metal into perfect Gold. This I
earnestly seek for, and hope to find at all your hands: Et sub hac spe ductus
rem aggredior; And come to my Statute.

After which I Expounded my whole Statute, being an ancient Law, according as
all ancient Readers were wont to do, being nine Chapters in the Printed
Statute, but are twelve Chapters in the part Read, consisting upon Petitions of
the Lords and Commons to the King, and his Answers thereupon, whose Answers
made the Law. Out of which Petitions and Answers entered in the Parliament Roll,
the Judges, at the end of the Parliament, did in form of Law, frame an Act of
Parliament, which was Proclaimed and published, and afterward Printed, when
Printing came in use, which was about the time of H. 6. And this was the manner
of Parliaments in E. 3 time and long before.

After I had Expounded my whole Statute, according to the old manner, I thereof
made Ten divisions, according to the then manner of Readers; upon every
division put Ten Cases, as the Historian truly relates; who goes on and says,
That my first Case was this, Whether or no it be a good Act of Parliament
without the Lords Spiritual.

Here is some mistake, for this was not my first Case, for my first Case, upon
my first division, consisted of fourteen points: but this was the first point
of my first Case, and it was thus,

Whether an Act of Parliament may pass and be good by the Assent of the King,
his temporal Lords and Commons (all the Spiritual being absent, or if present,
wholly disassenting?) And I held it might. And here a man would wonder (that by
a Clergy man especially) so clear a point, as the Law makes this to be, should
be brought into question, when I had so great a Champion on my side, as that
Famous, Learned and Pious man Bishop Jewel, in the defense of his Apology
against Dr. Harding, who, with the rest of the Jesuits, held the Statute of 1
Eliz. for Uniformity in Religion, to be no act of Parliament, because no Bishop
or Spiritual Lord assented to that Act; but it then passed only by the assent
of the Queen, the Temporal Lords and Commons; Bishop Jewel stoutly maintains it
to be a good Act, and gives diverse Reasons and Authorities for the same, which
in my Argument of this point herein after expressed, I shall cite at large. And
I thought it a most needful point to be known to the Students of Law, when as
the establishment of the Reformed Religion of the Church of England lay at the
stake upon it; for I read it only for the Middle Temple Hall, not for Lambeth,
and could not imagine that any Charon could have been found that would have
Ferryed it over the water.

The Historian goes on and says, the second Case thus,

If any benificed Clerk was capable of Temporal Jurisdiction at the making of
that Law?

This was not a Case, but an other point of my first Case upon the first
division, it was thus, Whether a Benificed Clerk may by my Statute exercise
Civil Jurisdiction, and be a Justice of Peace? I put not this Case of a Bishop
at all; as being of a higher Sphere then a Clark; but only of a benificed
Clerk. A needful point to be known to young Students, to whom alone I intended
my Reading. For at the time of making my Statute, there was not in England a
Beneficed Clerk, a Justice of Peace; but yet at the time of my Reading there
were never more. In the Argument of which points, I did not at all (as I shall
hereafter make appear) speak against their being Justices of Peace, for that
they might be so by Law, by virtue of the Kings Commission. Only by way of
Caution, in that they might refuse, in respect of their Orders; and I only
declared how the Law of the Land, and the Law of the Church stood heretofore in
that point, and that according to the rule of our Savior, Ab initio non fuit
sic.

The Historian goes on and says, His Third Case thus,

Whether a Bishop, without calling a Synod, has power as Diocesan, to convict
an Heretic?

That which I put was the fourth Point of my third Case upon the third
division, and it was this,

Whether a Clerk that is an Heretic may, at this day, be convicted and
condemned for Heresy, by his own Ordinary alone? And I thought he could not.

This was a most needful point to be known to the Students of Law, by reason of
the obscurity of the Law in it, not only in respect of the definition of
Heresy, and what it shall be said to be, wherein the Law was dark; but
likewise how a Heretic should be convicted. And the Statutes concerning
Heresy being repealed by King Edw. 6. and revived again by Q. Mary, and
afterward all of them repealed again by Q. Elizabeth. But for none of these
was I silenced, but upon another point, upon touching the Jurisdiction of the
High Commission, my fourth division; which I shall after likewise mention, and
set down the Argument of it at large, which puts me upon that Narrative of my
silencing, which I shall, as briefly as I can, perform, and then conclude.

I Read three Lectures three several days, being the 25. the Narrative.
27. and the 29. of March, without any interruption, and with the approbation
of the Students to whom I Read. But on Saturday following, being the 30 of
March, the Lord Keeper Finch sent to speak with me, and in a very friendly
manner told me what reports there were abroad touching the two former points
above mentioned, which I then related to him what they were, and how consonant
to Law; for the manifestation whereof, I told him, I would give him the
Arguments of both those points, and attest them under my hand: And presently
went to my Chamber and brought him my Arguments to which I set my hand, which
after he had read, he spoke to me to this effect, Mr. Reader, I see you have
been misreported, and have had wrong; and seeing you have dealt so freely and
fairly with me, I will do you right to the King and Council: To whom that day
he showed the Notes I gave him, which were examined by them and approved: And
that afternoon, toward night, the Lord Keeper sent for me again, and told me,
That my Opinion concerning those two points were approved of by the King and
Council, only his Majesty desired, That I would declare my Opinion in one
Question, which was this,

Quest. What if the King and Spiritual Lords, with the Commons, did pass an
Act, all the Temporal Lords disassenting, or not being there, whether this be a
good Act of Parliament?

Answ. I told him, That it was: and the Votes of the Temporal Lords were
included in the Votes of the Spiritual. Why then, Mr. Reader, said he, you have
given full satisfaction: And I am commanded to tell you, That you may go on in
your Reading. Whereupon I went home and prepared to read on Monday following
upon the fifth Case of my fourth Division.

But this Case was likewise carried to the Archbishop, in which there was this
Point, wherein I held, That a Beneficed Clark Imprisoned, Deprived and
Excommunicated by the High Commission for enormous offenses (not naming the
particular offense,) that this Clark; notwithstanding, was such a possessor of
a Church as might Plead, Counter-plead and Defend his Right within my Law. This
kind of learning being not within the Conusance of the Archbishop, was so
heightened to him by my misreporter, that the same afternoon, the King sitting
in Council, my Case was brought by the Archbishop to the Council Board, and
that point found in it, and much complained of. The Earl of Manchester being
there, and formerly a Reader of the Middle Temple, and knows that it was the
manner of Readers to lay the points of their Case so close, that what seemed
strange to the hearers, when the Readers came to argue, he made those things so
clear, that usually the Reader came off well; and then told the King, That he
thought I grounded my point upon a Case in Law in the 5 Report, fol. 57 where
one Spewit brought a Q. Imp. against the Bishop of Exceter for refusing his
Clerk, to which the Bishop pleaded that he was Schismaticus inveteratus, not
naming the particular Schism; this was held by the Judges no good Plea. And
thereupon Judgment was given against the Bishop for the Plaintiff, who
thereupon had his Clerk admitted.

And because Readers were accountable to their Governors, the Masters of the
Bench, and if they did amiss, would severely punish them, he advised that no
such thing might be done to a Reader, as to silence him from Reading, and
thereby make a great noise and disturbance, but to let him go on, and if he did
amiss, then to think of punishing him afterward; and to this the King and
Council assented. But the Archbishop, fearing I would fall foul upon the High
Commission (which I never intended, but in as fair and good terms as I could,
deliver the Law, as will appear by my Argument of that point, which I have
likewise hereunto annexed, as I have done the rest) made it his most earnest
suit to the King, That I might be suspended from Reading; who at the rising of
the Board, willed my Lord Keeper to tell me from him, That I should desist,
which the Lord Keeper did the same day: But withal, advising me, as from
himself, to go to the Archbishop and give him satisfaction.

After this Speech with the Lord Keeper, I returned home and acquainted my
Masters of the Bench with the Kings pleasure, who the next morning went to the
Lord Keeper, who confirming the same, I was by them advised to desist from
Reading.

And whereas the Historian says, That after the Reader had been twice at
Lambeth, without admittance, the third time he spoke with the Archbishop.

Herein it a great mistake, and not without some wrong both to the Archbishop
and me, which I shall thus make appear;

Readers of Law, during the time of their Reading, do hold up the ancient
honor and dignity of a Reader, on whom, for that time, is devolved the
Government of the House. They have four Cubbard men, ancient Barresters of the
House to attend them in their Reading, and four Stewards to attend them in
their Feasting, for the Inviting their Guests of Noble Rank, and ten or twelve
men of his own to attend his person. In the maintenance of which dignity, on
Tuesday the fourth of March (the natural course of my Reading not ending till
Friday following) I sent two of my men to the Archbishop, to know his pleasure
when I should wait on him, he sent me word by Mr. Dell his Secretary, on
Thursday the 6 of March, that he did appoint eight a Clock in the morning;
according to which hour I took with me Mr. Rog. Pepys (late Chief Justice in
Ireland) the next Summer Reader, and other my Cubbard men, with my Servants,
and went with them in a Barge to Lambeth: And so far was the Archbishop from
making me dance attendance, that as soon as the Archbishop had notice I was
come, he presently came out of his Chamber, with his Hat off, and met me in the
great Chamber there, and walked with me in that posture from thence, almost to
Lambeth Stairs.

The first Question he asked me was this,

Quest. Mr. Reader, Had you nothing else to do but to Read against the Clergy?

Answ. I answered, My Lord, my Statute was pro Clero, and I read not at all
against them, but for them.

Well, says the Archbishop, you shall answer it in the High Commission Court.
My answer was this, That I knew the utmost power and Jurisdiction of that Court
by Law, and that I had neither spoke or done any thing that that Court had
Jurisdiction to punish.

Quest. But had you no other time (says he) to do it but in such a time?

Answ. My Reading was made long before the troubles in Scotland, and was not
made for them but for England; and I was confident there was nothing in it that
could have offended him, if his Lordship had been rightly informed.

After this Speech he was very silent, and walked with me without speaking a
word until he came near Lambeth Stairs, and then I spoke thus to him,

My Lord, if you have any thing else to say to me, I am ready to give you
satisfaction, for I was sent to you by some of my Honorable friends for that
purpose.

His Answer to me was this,

Farewell, Mr. Reader, and much good do it you with your Honorable friends. And
so we parted and never spoke together afterward: He taking water in his Barge
to Whitehall, and I in mine to the Middle Temple.

I was sorry for the many troubles that fell upon him afterward, though they
were in no sort occasioned by me: for such was the malice and hatred then, and
after, of the Scots against him, and such influence it had upon the people,
that they never left prosecuting of him till he had quenched their fury with
his Blood on Tower Hill.

On the 15 of May following, according to the manner of Readers before they are
made Benchers, in the Parliament Chamber in the Middle Temple, when the
Benchers of the House were there all assembled, and the Barresters called in
(it being a Parliament of Attendance) I then, according to the manner of
Readers, after my Assistant had made a Report of my Statute, of my Divisions
upon it, and of my Cases upon those Divisions, and what acceptance it had in
the House, I gave to their Masterships this account of my Reading, in manner
following:

I chose for my Statute 25 E. 3 called, Statutum pro Clero, waving two former
Statutes wherein I had much labored, Part of the Readers Speech in the
Parliament Chamber in the Middle Temple May 15 following.
Articuli Cleri, made 9 E. 2 and Circumspecte Agatis, made 13 E. 1 because I
found the Statute of E. 3 late Law, and one of the best that ever was made for
the Clergy. I gave diverse reason of my choice, the main was this, The Honor I
bare to my Profession of the Common Law, by advancing it above the Civil and
Canon Laws, and all other Ecclesiastical Laws exercised within this Kingdom,
from which they all have their being and Foundation, as the Lord Prisot truly
notes, 34 H. 6 fol. 40.

To this performance I was invited by a Law of Gratitude which I owed to my
Education, being bred at the Feet of a Judge Nicoili
Gamaliel in the Law, that Married my Mother, and to my Alliance to three
Judges more, all of them Readers of the Middle Temple, and all Northamptonshire
men, where Chief Birron Sanders.
from my Childhood I have lived.

Besides, in the choice of this Statute I thought I should Judge Morgan. Judge
Harvey.
deserve thanks from the Clergy, by the discovery to them of the many favors
and privileges they received, chiefly, and principally by the Common Law, to
which Law, above all men in the Kingdom, they are most beholden. For I do not
only speak it here, but I dare write it under my hand, That four of the nearest
and dearest things Clergy men have at this day, viz. The blessing and happiness
of true Religion: The enjoyment of their Lives and Liberties: The Society of
their Wives, and the benefit of their Churchlivings in Glebe and Tithes (to
speak in a Lawyers phrase, though, as the times are, I be jeered for it) they
have, hold, and enjoy them all by, from, and under the Common Law.

Sed quanta de spe decidi: I little thought that by Explicating and unfolding
the Privileges and Liberties of the Clergy, I should tie a knot upon my own,
which afterward fell out: for upon the discovery of one of my Cases, touching
the High Commission, in the Points of Fine and Imprisonment, proper for a
Lawyer to handle (the Statute of 1 Eliz. and the Kings Commission upon it being
both within the Verge of the Common Law) it so came to pass, that a Hercules
Pillar was set upon my Reading, and a ne plus ultra Engraven on them. Whereupon
I desisted, remembering that of Solomon, In the word of a King there is power,
and who may say unto him, What do thou? But yet that Hawley or Fonel that
revealed my Case to my prejudice, and caused the first abortion to a Reader
that ever was, Sit nigri Carboni notandus: and let that be hispunishment.

There ended my Reading, of which I may say as Lipsius said of one of his
Works, That it was Omne meum, and nihil meum. It was omne meum, in respect of
the frame and composition, having no help from any Reader upon that Law: and it
was Nihil meum, in that I founded it upon Reasons and Authorities of Law, which
saved me from ruin, and gave me a public clearing for uttering any thing that
was not according to Law.

But though I have done with my Reading, I have not done with my Speaking, for
I was not silenced from that. I have something to speak, by way of
thankfulness, to this Honorable Society, and so conclude.

And in this respect I am not ashamed to tell you of my debts, that I owe is
much to this Society, as, in the relation of a Reader, I am really worth. For,
consider a Reader in both his capacities, in his Reading, and in his Feasting,
they were virtually, and in a manner both from you. My Reading was but a
repeating a Lesson of Law which I have been learning in this House this 30
years, and my Feasting, in respect of the many Gifts I received from your
Masterships, my Companions of the Cubbard, the Ancients of the Bar, and others
of this Society, was but a kind of orderly and solemn distribution of all your
Bounties.

And in dividing my Obligations per seperalia Capita, to your Masterships, to
my Cubbardmen, to the Gentlemen of the Bar and under, my debts are rather
increased then made less.

To your Masterships, for your free Choice and calling me to this place: For
had you not called I had never come; and had you not encouraged after you had
called, I should have fallen back.

To my Assistant and Companions of the Cubbard for their learned Arguments of
my Cases, and defense of them afterward from injury and misconstruction.

To all the Gentlemen, for their virtuous deportment in the Church of God, in
the Hall, in the whole House, which was so orderly and generous, that I thought
them so many Ancients; Juvenes aetate: sed senes moribus. And therefore when a
complaint came to me against any Gent. I knew not how to admit of any fault by
my Ear, that could not see any by mine Eye. And that Honor they did me in
their Ultimum Vale, beyond my desert, and as they well know, beyond my
expectation, I shall never forget.

I will close up all in this one Period; I have rendered my thanks to you all
Voce, my Conscience tells me I owe it much more Cord: and my Conversation
shall teach me to do it Opere habent, and opera suam linguam. And though you
have by these favors to me made me your Companion in Company, in Conference,
and now in Council, yet my Love, my Duty, my Thanks shall make me a Servant to
you, and to this whole Society for ever.

After this Speech I had thanks from them all Seriatim, and was made and
confirmed a Bencher.

And now, having finished this Narrative, I shall, according to my promise,
publish all my Arguments at large touching those four Points mentioned before
in the Narrative.

The Readers Arguments upon the four Points mentioned before in his Vindication.
POINT I.
WHether an Act of Parliament may pass and be good by the Assent of the King,
his Temporal Lords and Commons, and all the Spiritual Lords being absent, or if
present, wholly disassenting? And I hold it may.

A Jove principium: This is a Point which mainly concerns our Religion,
established by the Act of 1 Eliz. which passed by the assent of that Queen, her
Temporal Lords and Commons (all the Spiritual Lords disagreeing) which, if no
good Act, then is not our Religion confirmed by Parliament. This Point I framed
from the opinion of as learned a Bishop as ever this Nation enjoyed since the
hour it enjoyed him, I mean Bishop Jewel in the defense of his Apology against
Dr. Harding, lib. 6. c. 2. divis. 1. where the said Act of 1 Eliz. for the
Uniformity of Prayer and Sacraments is denied to be a good Act for want of the
concurrence of the Bishops. The Bishop affirms it to be a good Act: and his
words are these Verbatim:

Where you would seem to say, That the Parliament holden in the first year of
the Q. Majesty's Reign was no Parliament, for that the Bishops wilfully refused
to agree to the godly Laws there concluded, you seem therein to bewray some
want of skill. The wise and learned could have told you, That in the Parliament
of England, matters have evermore used to pass not of necessity by the special
consent of the Bishops and Archbishops, as if without them no Statute might
lawfully be Enacted, but only by the more part of Voices; yea, although all the
Archbishops and Bishops were never so earnestly bent against it. And Statutes
so passing in Parliament, only by the Voices of the Lords Temporal, without the
consent and agreement of the Lords Spiritual, have nevertheless always been
confirmed and ratified by the Royal assent of the Prince, and have been Enacted
and published under the names of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal.

Read the Statutes of King Edw. the First, there you shall find that a
Parliament solemnly holden by him at St. Edmondsbury, the Archbishops and
Bishops were shut forth, and yet the Parliament held good, and wholesome Laws
were there enacted, the departing, or absence, or malice of the Lords Spiritual
notwithstanding.

An. Dom. 1296
In the Records thereof it is written thus, Habito Rex cum suis Baronibus
Parliamento and Clero excluso Statutum est etc.

Likewise in Provisione de Martona, in the time of King H. 3. Anno Dom. 1273.
Stat de Marton. cap. 9.
where matters were moved of Bastardy, touching the Legitimation of Bastards
born before Marriage; the Statute past wholly with the Lords Temporal, whether
the Lords Spiritual would or no; yea, and that against the express Acts and
decrees of the Church of Rome. The like hereof, as I am informed, may be found
Anno 11 R. 2. cap. 3. Howbeit in these Cases I walk somewhat without my Compass:
Touching the Judgment hereof, I refer my self wholly to the Learned.

Thus far goes that famous Bishop.

This Opinion of the Bishop I shall confirm by considering the Law in two
Points.

Point 1. Whether an Act of Parliament may pass by the Temporal Lords only,
the Spiritual Lords being all present, but disagreeing ad disassenting to the
Act.

And this was the very Case in passing of that Act of 1 Eliz. For in the
Journal of that Parliament, it is said, That all those matters which in that
Parliament concerning the Church Service and Sacrament, the Bills passed
dissentientibus Episcopis, with a particular enumeration of their names which
dissented; as likewise two Orations are recorded in the Journal to be made by
Dr. Scot Bishop of Chester, and Dr. Fecknam Abbot of Westminster, against that
Act.

Now that this was a good Act of Parliament, though all the Bishops disagreed,
it is manifest by the course of all Parliaments; for the Bishops sit in
Parliament, not as they are Spiritual men, but by reason of their Temporal
Baronies annexed to their Dignities; Nonratione Nobilitatis, as Stamford speaks
Pl. Coron. fol. 153. sed ratione Officit. And therefore if the voices of the
greater number of temporal Lords exceed theirs, the Act shall pass as the Act
of the whole Lords House, and their voices shall be involved in the greater
number of the Temporal Lords; and so shall be the Act of all the Lords, as well
Temporal as Spiritual: Andso is the Book of 11 H. 7. fol. 27. Bro. Parl. 107.
And so is the Act-Roll of 1 Eliz. Ex assensu omnium Dominorum tam Spiritualium
quam Temporalium. And so is likewise the Printed Act, and so it ought to be.
This will better appear, by considering the diverse forms of Penning of Statutes
from the time of Magna Charta to this day.

1. Rex statuit, as Magna Charta, and other old Statutes.

2. Statuimus and Ordinavimus, as 27 E. 1. Stat. de Finibus, And both these
forms are good; for in them both are implied the Lords and Commons.

3. Be it enacted by the King, with the assent of the Lords and Commons,
according to the Book in 11 H. 7.

4. But the best form of all is, Be it enacted by the Authority of Parliament:
And so are the Books of 7 H. 7. fol. 14. Bro. Parl. 76. and Crompton,
Jurisdict. of Court, f. 12.

The proofs of this Point will further appear in handling the second Point,
which I now come to.

Point 2. Whether an Act of Parliament may pass, all the Spiritual Lords
absenting themselves from the House of Peers? And I think it may.

That this may not seem strange, I will back it by Authority in Law, by
Example, and Reasons.

1. For Authority in Law. It is the resolution of all the Judges of England, 7
H. 8. 184. Kelwayes Reports, in these words; Nostre Sur l'Roy port assets bien
tener son Parliament per luy ses Surs temporal and Commons tout sans
l'Spirituall Surs. i. e. Our Lord the King may well enough hold his Parliament
by himself, his Lords temporal, and Commons, without the spiritual Lords at all.

According to this resolution, there are many Examples. The Parliament summoned
at Edmonds-Bury, which the Bishop 24 Ed. 1.
mentions, was a good Parliament, and yet all the Prelates were excluded, and
upon very great Reasons; which is not mentioned by the Bishop. That K. E. 1.
being exercised in martial affairs, levied a great sum of money of Laity and
Lamb. P^^amb. of Kent, fol. 276. Chartim.
Clergy for the supply of his wants, the whole Clergy refused, upon a
Constitution of Pope Boniface the 8th. That if any Clerk gave to a Layman any
part of his Spiritual Goods, he should forthwith stand Excommunicate: Whereupon
at this Parliament, by the King, the Temporal Lords and Commons, (all the
Bishops and Clergy excluded) it was enacted, That their Persons should be out
of the Kings Protection, and their Goods subject to Confiscation, till they
submitted themselves to the Kings favor, and yielded their obedience

So in the Parliament of 11 Rich. 2. The Appeals, Judgments and Executions of
that Parliament, were approved, notwithstanding all the Spiritual Lords were
absent. And Rot. Parl. 11 R. 2. m. 6. Artic. 9. the cause of their absence is
there at large set down by a notable Protestation of William Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the behalf of him and his Clergy.

Stat. 38 E. 3. c. 1. Against Provisors and Provisions of the Pope, it is there
said to be made by the King, with the assent of his Dukes, Earls, Barons, and
Commons, without mentioning the Prelates, which it seems did purposely absent
themselves. For Rot. Parl. 38 E. 3. m. 2. the Prelates make an express
Protestation of their disassent to the Ordinances made against the Church of
Rome, which may turn to the prejudice of their Estate and Dignity.

So the Statutes of 3 R. 2. cap. 3. and 7 R. 2. cap. 12. were enacted and
passed by the King, the Lords Temporal and Commons only, without the Prelates.

The Reasons of this are these:

1. The first is given by the Judges, 7 H. 8. cited before: For that, say they,
the Spiritual Lords have not a place in Parliament by reason of their
Spiritualties, but by reason of their Temporal Possessions; which is the reason
that the Bishop of Man comes not to the Parliament, because he has no Temporal
Barony annexed to his Bishopric: And diver Abbots and Priors, to the number of
27. that had Baronies annexed to them, came to the Parliament, until the
Statute of Dissolution of Monasteries. And the time when both Bishops and
Abbots were first made Barons of this Realm, is said to be in the 4th. year of
William the Conqueror, as appears by the late Irish Report, Case of Tenures,
p. 34, 35.

2. It would be mischievous, if in some Cases Acts should not be made without
the Bishops; for no Bishop is by his Order to come to the Parliament when
Judgment of Death is given upon any man, as notably appears by the Statute of
11 R. 2. cap. 2. and the Parliament Roll I cited before. And at this time the
Baronage is wholly in the Temporal Lords to pass such an Act: For no Bishop is
a Baron in respect of his person, but of his Temporalties; which is the reason
that he is not tried by his Peers, as the temporal Barons are, but by ordinary
Juries, as fell out in the Case of Fisher Bishop of Rochester, temp. H. 8. And
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, 1 Mar. who were both tried by common Juries.

So Hill. 17 E. 2. Rot. 87. dors. Adam Bishop of Hereford, being indicted for
diverse Felonies, and joining with Roger Mortimer, was arraigned in the Kings
Bench. and tried by a common Jury.

The like was of John de I Will Bishop of Ely, Trin. 30 E. 3. Rot. 11.

The Readers Argument upon the Second Point.
WHether at the time of making my Statute 25 E. 3. a. Beneficed Clerk might by
Law exercise Civil Jurisdiction, and be a Justice of Peace? And I think he
could not.

I put the Case of a Beneficed Clerk, not of a Bishop; and how the Law was in
this Point, at the time of my Statute.

Which, because the practice is otherwise at this day, I will fully and clearly
prove it.

I will first begin with the Law of the Church, called in our Books, The Canon
Law.

Look the Decrees of Gratian, cause. 21. q. 2. c. Pervenit and Distinct. 88.
Extra. de vita and honestate Clericorum; and Extra. Ne Clerici vel Monachi,
etc. and you shall find these things expressly decreed, That they are not to
take Lands to Farm, nor to traffic and trade, (with which agrees the Statute
of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. still in force,) nor to be Stewards and Bailiffs of great
men, nor to be Sheriffs or Justices, nor to meddle in secular affairs, upon
this ground of the Apostle Paul to Timothy, Nemo militans Dei implicat se in
negotiis hujus seculi: They are spiritual Soldiers, and may not meddle in
worldly businesses.

Object. But it will be said, This is the Popes Law, which is now abrogated.

Answ. I will therefore prove it by much better Law. And first, by the Canons
of the Apostles, Can. 6. Thus, Episcopus, aut, Presbyter, aut Diaconus
seculares curas non suscincto aliter deponitur.

The Imperial Constitutions, Code lib. 1. tit. 3. Sect. 17 Placet nostrae
clementiae ut nihil commune Clerici cum publicis actionibus habeant vel ad
Curiam pertinentibus cujus corpori non sunt annexi.

The Provincial Constitutions which in our Ecclesiastical Courts are of as much
Authority as Aristotle in the Schools. In a Constitution of Stephen Langhton,
Archbishop of Canterbury, it is thus said, Praesenti decreto Statuimus ne
Clerici Stefhen Langhton. Tem. Johan. R.
Beneficiati sive in sacris ordinibus, sint senescalti aut Balivi nec
Jurisdictiones exerceant seculares praesertim illas quibus Judicium sanguinis
sit annexum. Linwood de Immunitate Ecclesiae, fol. 194.

Put more fully by the Legantine Constitutions of Othobon, which I will repeat
Verbatim:

Grave ac sordidum reputamus: Quod Clerici quidem terrena Const'tut. Othobon.
lucra foeda petulantia and avida voracitate jurisdictionem a laicis recipient
secularem ut Justitiarii nuncupentur sive Ministri Justitiae quam non possunt
sine clericalis ordinis injuria ministrare. Nos igitur horrendum hoc vitium
extirpare volentes, etc. And then provides that the man which commits such
offense ipso facto, ab officio and Beneficio sit suspensus.

And that the Common Law of England excluded Clergymen from being Justices of
the Peace, at or about the time of making my Statute, it appears by the Stat.
of 34 E. 3 cap. 1 In every County of England shall be assigned, for the keeping
of the Peace, one Lord, and with him three or four of the most Valiant men of
the County, with some learned in the Law: Not a word is here spoken of
Clergymen. And what is meant by Valiant men, is well expounded by the Statute
of 13 R. 2 c. 7 That Justices of Peace shall be made in all the Counties of
England of the most sufficient Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen of the Law of
the said Counties. And it appears Rot. Par. 13 R. 2 n. 13 that this Statute was
made at the prayer of the Commons, and with the assent only of the King, the
Lords Temporal and Commons, the Spiritual Lords having formerly protested in
Parliament, 6 R. 2 Rot. Parl. nu. 5 that they had not to do with matters of the
Peace.

The first Clergymen that I find to be Justices of Peace by any Statute^, are
the Bishops of Ely and Durham, for the I Will of Ely and Durham, and the
Archbishop of York, for the Liberty of Hexam, 27 H. 8 cap. 25. But then there
is a provision by that Statute, to make their Temporal Chancellers to be
Justices, for the excusing them, as I conceive, from their personal attendance
at the Sessions.

Object. But it will be objected, They are made Justices of Peace by the Kings
Commission, and may be punished if they should refuse.

Answ. It is rara avis to hear of a Minister punished for refusing to be a
Justice of Peace: For by Law he may refuse.

By his Orders he may refuse, as I conceive, and by virtue of his Consecration.
For in the book of Ordination of Priests and Deacons, confirmed by the
Parliaments of 1 Ed. 6 and 1 Eliz. he is there charged by the Bishop, To give
himself wholly to his Spiritual Vocation, and wholly to apply himself to that
one thing, and to draw all his cares and Studies that way, and to that end.

And this not all, but the Bishop does require a promise of the Ordained Priest
to that purpose; for the Bishop asks him, If he will be diligent in Prayers,
and Reading Holy Scriptures, etc. laying aside the study of the World and the
Flesh: And the minister answers, That he will endeavor himself so to do.

All which said together, will amount to a good excuse of a Clergyman from
secular employment.

As in truth it did of late to the Lord Keeper Coventry, in the Case of one Mr.
Samuel Johnson, Clerk, Son and heir of that Johnson that was the extraordinary
kind Husband, from whence was the Proverb of Drinking to Mr. Johnson. This man
was lately made High Sheriff of Rutland shire, and pleading his Orders of a
Clergyman to the Lord Keeper, he was forthwith discharged, and another Sheriff
chose in his place.

There is a Writ in the Register, and in Fitz. Not. brev. 175 b. named, Breve
quod Clerici non eligantur in officio Ballivi pro terris suis, which lies in a
stronger Case then this is. As if a man holds diverse Lands of a Lord of a
Manor, to be a Bailiff, Bedel, or Receiver, if this man be once made a Clerk,
and afterward chosen unto such an office, the Lord may Distrain, in case the
child should refuse; yet this Writ will compel the Lord to let him alone and to
dismiss him. And the reason is given in the Writ it self, Because the Law
supposes him to be so continually employed in works of Piety and Hospitality,
that he is not at leisure to attend no secular affairs.

The same reason may be given for a Clerk made a Justice of Peace.

Object. But it will be objected, That my Statute is for the Clergy, but I seem
in this opinion to be against it.

Answ. I answer, That in this I am for the honor and honesty of the Clergy:
For in those Provincial Constitutions which I mentioned before, the Clergy are
there enjoined to abstain ab omnibus eis quae honestatem little deformant. And
Linwood, a principal Author of the Canon Law, gives this instance of that
deformity, Deformatur haec honestas cum Clericus se immiscet in negotiis
secularibus, Linw. lib. 3. De vita and Honestate Cler. fol. 87.

So that by their Law it is a dishonest thing for Clergymen to meddle in
secular affairs.

The Readers Argument upon the Third Point, being the Fourth Point of his Third
Case, upon the Third Division of his Statute.
WHether an Heretic may, at this day, be Convicted and Condemned for Heresy
by his own Ordinary alone? And I think he cannot.

It is a great Question and mainly concerns the life and liberty of the
Subject, and deserves a much larger debate then I can now afford it. I being
opposed herein by a learned Dr. Cosens.
Civilian, sometimes Dean of the Arches, in the first part of his Apology for
Ecclesiastical proceedings, fol. 81. who denies Fitz Herberts opinion, Not.
brev. 269 D. to be Law, who says, That a man cannot be convicted for Heresy
but by the Archbishop and the whole Clergy of the Province in their general
Council of Convocation. But this Civilian (with diverse more of his mind) does
hold, That an Heretic, both before the statute of 2 H. 4 c. 15 and now at this
day, may be both convicted and condemned to be burnt by his own proper Ordinary.

For the clearing this, three Questions do naturally arise,

1. What shall be said such an Heresy for which a man shall be condemned to
the fire?

2. Who shall be the Judge that shall Convict for Heresy?

3. By what Law is it, Common or Canon, that an Heretic, after conviction,
shall be burnt?

Quest. 1. For the first, it appears by the Canon Law, Linw. cap. de Hereticis,
fol. 213. that there are no less then 88. sorts of Heresies, which is the cause
that the Canonists cannot agree about the definition of an Heretic. I will
name but two of their best definitions.

1. The first is in the fourth book of the Institutes of the Canon Law, cap. de
Hereticis, fol. 248.

Hereticus est qui vanae gloriae principatus sui causa falsas Launcellot.
opiniones gignit vel sequitur. If this were Law, how many Scholars would at
this day be burnt for Heretics?

2. I come therefore to a second Definition, given at home in our Provincial
Constitutions, cap. de Hereticis, fol. 211. where Linwood having toiled himself
with about twenty Descriptions of an Heretic, falls upon this as the best,
Omnin, (says he) censetur Hereticus qui non tenet id quod docet and sequitur
sancta Romans Ecclesia. Hence it was, that by their Law a man was questioned for
an Heretic for very small things, viz. For eating flesh in Lent; for standing
out an Excommunication, though it was perhaps for some extorted Fees of the
Court. Nay, you shall find, 1 H. 7. fol. 17. That a man was questioned for
Heresy, upon the Statute of 2 H. 4. c. 15. because he held an opinion, That
one might pay his Tithes where he pleased, and not to his own Vicar; when as by
the Counsel of Lateran, Tithes were only to be paid to Parsons and Vicars of
the proper Parish: and so he, as an Heretic, offended contra sanctiones
Ecclesiae. And I dare be bold to say, That in that bloody Roll of Martyrs,
which began from the first year of H. 4. to the last year of Q. Mary, there was
not a man burnt for holding any thing contra Canonem Scripturae; not an old
Arrian, which is the Socinian at this day; nor an old Pelagian, which is now
the Arminian: But for holding Opinions contra sanctiones Canonicas, as says
the Writ De Haeretico comburendo, founded upon that Statute of 2 H. 4. which
was the reason that upon the grievous complaint of the Commons, 25 H. 8. cap.
14. That the cruel Statute of 2 H. 4. and a Proviso in the Act, That men should
not be questioned for Heresy, for maintaining Opinions against the humane Laws
and Policies of the Bishop of Rome; but for Opinions that were contrary to Holy
Scripture.

And accordingly was the resolution of the Judges, Trin. 9. Jac. Rot. 2248. in
a prohibition to the High Commission in Sir Henry Vinor and Pellings Case: That
Heresy shall not be understood all that which the Canon Law makes Heresy; but
that which is contrary to the Holy Scripture, and the four first General
Councels, according to the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. And with this agrees
that true and ancient Definition of Heresy by old Grosted Bishop of Lincoln in
H. 3. time; Haeresis (says he) in Greek, is Electio in Latin; Et est
sententia humana sensu electa sacrae Scripturae contraria palam acta and
pertinaciter defensa.

Quest. 2. The second Question, and which fully decides the point of my Case,
is this, Who shall be Judge in the conviction of an Heretic? Whether the
proper Diocesan, according to the opinion of this Civilian, and other Civilians
agreeing with him? or according to the opinion of Fitz Herbert, it must be by
the Convocation of the Clergy of the Province.

And I hold, That the Bishop of the Diocese is not to be the only Judge, but
that it must be done by the Convocation of the Clergy of the Province. Which
because of this opposition against me, I will prove, first by Reason, secondly
by Authority, thirdly by Example.

1. For the First. The ancient Ecclesiastical Laws of England never gave
further power to the Bishop or Ordinary, but according to his Calling to
proceed to Ecclesiastical Censure, not to fine and imprison, much less to kill
or burn, which are temporal acts, not spiritual, until this power was given
them by the Statute of 2 H. 4. Only I find, that before this time a Bishop had
a greater privilege over a Clergyman, than over a Layman: For, by the
Constitutions of Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, temp. H. 3. Lind. fol. 141.
a Clergyman might be imprisoned by his own Ordinary in two cases; spiritual
Fornication, as Heresy, and corporal Fornication, as Incontinency, as appears
by that Constitution, and the Statute of 1 H. 7. cap. 4. still in force.

But when as Heresy came to be punished with death, the Law would not trust
the Ordinary alone in such a case, but referred it to the whole Province of the
Clergy, for these two Reasons.

1. The power which the Law gave to the proper Ordinaries, was that of the
Master to the Servant, or rather of the Husband to the Wife, to admonish and
correct, not to kill and burn.

2. For avoiding of partiality and ignorance, which might be in one man, but
could not so easily be suspected to be in many; and therefore the condemnation
of an Heretic was done with great solemnity, as the Writ supposes, N. bre.
269. Thomas Archiepiscopus Cant. etc. de consilio and consen su omnium
Coepiscoporum nec non totius Provinciae suae in concilio suo Provinciali congre
gati, etc.

2. And according to these Reasons are, in the second place, the Authorities of
Law. Fitz Herberts Opinion, fol. 269. D. the form of the Writ, mentioning it to
be done by the Clergy of the Province. Neither is there any Writ to be found,
which gave the power to the Bishop alone. It is the resolution in Cawdries
Case, 5. Rep. fol. 23. and 2 Mar. Little Brook, That the conviction of an
Heretic must be by the Clergy in their Convocation; for all the while the
Statute of 2 H. 4. was in force, this Writ was not used, by reason of the Act;
for the Sheriff might, by that Act, merely by the command of the Bishop,
without the Kings Writ, burn Heretics: Which was for that reason taken away by
the Statute of 25 H. 8. and afterward revived by 1 Mar. whereupon, in her days,
two cruel Bishops, Gardener and Bonner, did burn more Heretics then were
burned from H. 4. time, till 1 Mar. And a very strange and lazy Reason is
given by the Judges 2 Mar. Br^^^it. Heresy, why a Bishop should convict and
burn an Heretic without a Writ, Purcee q. fuit troublesome de appellex
Convocation de tout l' Province; Because it was troublesome to call a
Convocation.

3. I will prove it by the aptest Example which can be named; viz. William
Sawtree, so named in the Writ, who was burnt in the time of the Statute of 2 H.
4. and was the Protomartyr, the first in England that was burnt for Heresy;
who was convicted by the whole Convocation of the Clergy, as appears by the
Writ, Fitz. Not. bre. 269. and the Acts of the Church at that time.

This William Sawtree was of Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, which has this
Honor, that Martyrum primus Martyrum doctissimus, and Martyrum piissimus, were
all of Pembrook-Hall: Martyrum primus was William Sawtree; Martyrum doctissimus
was Bishop Ridley, Bishop of London; and Martyrum piissimus was John Bradford,
Prebend of Paul's, both burnt in Queen Mary's days. William Sawtree was Parson
of St. Margarets in Lynne, within Norwich Diocese. The Bishop of Norwich
quickly met with him, before whom he did abjure; and afterward relapsing, upon
the Certificate of his own Bishop, he was by Thomas Arundel, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, (the framer and contriver of that Act of 2 H. 4. as I can prove,)
and the whole Province of Canterbury, convicted of Heresy: And although the
Statute of 2 H. 4. was made ere he was burnt, yet the Prelates were fearful to
proceed according to the new form in that new Act; but proceeded against him
according to the ancient course of Law, by conviction in the Convocation.

His notorious Heresies were these. 1. That he would sooner worship a temporal
King, or any other man, rather then a wooden Crossor Crucisix. 2. That a Priest
or Deacon was more bound to preach the Word of God, then to say the Canonical
hours. 3. That after the words of Consecration, the Bread was bread us it was
before, and not the Body of Christ.


The Objections against this my opinion by that learned Dr. of Law, are two
Authorities cited by him, but no reason of them given at all.

Object. The first is 10 H. 7. fol. 17. b. to prove that a Bishop may convict
for Heresy before the Act of 2 H. 4.

Answ. To which I answer, There is no such thing, but rather the contrary: For
that which is there said, is only the opinion of Frowick, viz. That a Bishop
may, by the Statute, arrest for Heresy, whereas before he could but, for that
or any other Ecclesiastical matter, send out only a Citation. Certainly, if he
could not arrest, which is the less, he could not condemn to the fire, which is
the greater.

Object. That he heard in Queen Elizabeth's time, the two Chief Justices, the
Chief Baron, and diverse Judges, with other of that Queens learned Council, to
be of opinion, That at this day the Bishop of the Diocese may convict for
Heresy.

Answ. To which I answer, That it is but his Hearsay; and seeing he names not
the time, nor the Judges, nor their Reasons, the old Rule may be applied to
him, Quae sine ratione objiciuntur pari facilitate rejiciuntur.

Quest. 3. By what Law is it that a man is burnt for Heresy, the Common Law,
or by the Canon Law, called, in our books, the Law of the Church?

I answer, That it is by the Canon Law, not by the Common Law.

Object. But it is said by Briton, lib. 1 cap. 17 and by 2 Mar. Littte Brook,
That an Heretic shall be burnt b the Common Law.

Answ. To which I give this answer, The Common Law is taken two ways, 1.
Strictly. 2. Largely.


The Common Law strictly taken are those ancient grounds and Maxims of Law
which agrees with the Fundamental Law of Reason: largely taken, it is the
allowance and approbation of the grounds and customs of another Law. This
destinction is warranted by Dr. and Student amongst his six Grounds of Law.

As for instance: It is said in our books, 9 E. 4 19 H. 6 21 1 E. 4 and diverse
other books, That such and such men shall not have their Clergy by the Common
Law, as you may read at large, Stamf. pl. cor. lib. 2 cap. 42 And yet cap. 41
that Clergy was an ancient privilege of holy Church, and had his beginning by
the Canon Law, and not by the Common Law, says Stamford.

So I say in our Case, This burning for Heresy, being nothing else in that Law
but a breach of the Decrees of the Church, was a Brat of the Canon Law, and had
its Original merely from that Law, Anno Dom. 1184 by Pope Luoius the Third, and
confirmed by Pope Gregory the Ninth, in the Fifth book of the Decretal
Epistles, cap. 9 fol. 360 as you may read there at large. And therefore for
the honor of the Law of England, when at the time of the first hatching of
this cruel Law many of the Paterini and Publicani who held the opinions of the
Waldenses were by multitudes burnt in France; and the same course was much
pressed upon King Henry the Second, then King of England: Rex Anglorum Henricus
seiundus (says Roger Hovenden an ancient Historian) id nullo modo fieri
permisit in terra sua, licet ibi essent quamplurimi. Neither was any burnt in
England till the Statute of 2 H. 4 was made, if I may call it a Statute, for
the truth is, both the Statute printed in English amongst the Statutes, and the
Statute in Latin amongst the Provincial Constitutions of Tho. Arundel, differ
much from the Parliament Roll; for the truth is, that Act of 2 H. 4 was never
assented to by the Commons, as may appear by the Title of the Roll, which is,
Petitio Cleri contra Hereticos, tit. 48. And whereas in the Act it self it is
said, Praelati and Clerus supradicti ac and etiam communitates dicti Regni
supplicarunt. These words, Ac etiam Communitates dicti Regni, are not in the
Parliament Roll which I have seen; for both in that Roll, and in the Latin
printed Act, when the Law comes to be Enacted, it runs in this form of words,
Qui quidem Dominus Rex ex assensu Magnatum and aliorum Procerum ejusdem Regni
concessit and statuit, etc. where there is no mention made at all of the
Commons. And therefore to help this fault, the words of aliorum Proceruns are
thus rendered in our English Statute, And other discreet men of the Realm,
whereby is employed the assent of the Commons; which word Proceres was never so
Englished before, till the Clergy made this Construction of it.

And therefore by the grievous complaint of the Commons against the injustice
and cruelty of that Law, it was upon their complaint, by the Statute of 25 H.
8. c. 14 quite repealed and annulled, as you may see in that printed Statute,
and in Fitz. Not. brev. fol. 269 D.

The Readers Argument of the Fourth Point, put in his Fifth Case, upon the
Fourth Division of his Statute.
WHether the Fine, Imprisonment, Deprivation and Ex-communication of a Clerk
for Enormous offenses (and no particular offense named) be good or void in Law?
And I think the sentence to be void and against Law.

This is a great and a high question, and much concerns the Liberty of the
Subject (a most precious thing). Libertas est res inestimabilis, was the Motto
of the Emperor Justin. upon the reverse of his Coin. And in this point Magna
Charta is broken in two Chapters, cap. 1 Habeat and Ecclesia Anglicanae
libertates suas illaesas, and here is an English Clergyman undone: And cap.
29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur nisi per legem terrae, and here is a free
Subject quite destroyed in his Goods, by his Fine; in his Land and Living, by
his Deprivation; in his Body, by his Imprisonment, Take him Jailer; in his
Soul, by his Excommunication, Take him Devil; For that is the meaning of that
sentance, Tradatur Satanae.

In the discussion of this great Point there will arise four material
Questions, needful to be handled.

1. Whether the High Commission can inflict this punishment, or any part of it,
but for high and enormous offenses? And I think it cannot.

2. Whether the High Commission can Fine and Imprison for all enormous
offenses, or only some? and what those are? And I think it can Fine and
Imprison (being mere temporal acts) but only for some enormous offenses.

3. Whether the High Commissioners in their Sentence of Fine and Imprisonment,
etc. are to express the particular enormous offense, that the Kings Court may
judge of it? And I think they are in their Sentence to express the particular
offense, or else their sentence is void.

4. Whether the Construction of the Stat. of 1 Eliz. c. 1 for Fining and
Imprisoning for enormous offenses, belongs to the Kings Temporal Judges, or
to the Judges Ecclesiastical? And I think the Exposition of that Statute
belongs to the Kings temporal Judges.

There are five more questions concerning the High Commission, which I will
omit to speak of, as being not so pertinent to my point, and too long to be
handled, though otherwise of great use to be known.

1. When the first Ecclesiastical Commissioners went forth? for at the time of
making my Statute they were not used, all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, being
then in the Ordinaries Courts.

2. What was the nature of the Oath, Ex Officio, which was used upon some of
those Ecclesiastical Commissions? and for what reason the Oath was taken away
by the Stat. 25 H. 8 cap. 15.

3. What was the form and manner of proceeding in those Ecclesiastical
Commissions? A needful question, and very useful to be known at this day: For,
Misera est servitus ubi jus est vagum aut incognitum.

4. What Fees were due to Pursevants, Clerks, Registers, or other Officers
employed in such Ecclesiastical Commissions?

5. Because those Ecclesiastical Commissions were by the King granted sometimes
to mere Laymen, as 31 H. 1 cap. 14 to Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, etc.
Sometimes to Laymen and Clergy men, as at this day, Whether Common Lawyers did
not then, and might not now plead at those Ecclesiastical Commissions Vide
Stat. 24 H. 8. c. 12.
as they do now before the Judges Delegates?

But these are not so pertinent to my present point, and therefore I will only
speak of the first four.

Quest. 1. Whether the High Commission can inflict this grievous punishment,
put in my Case, or any part of it, but for high and enormous offenses, and not
for all offenses? And I think and do hold, That the High Commission cannot
punish but for high and enormous offenses, upon these words of the Statute of 1
Eliz. c. 1 (Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Contempts and Enormities) and
that for these Reasons:

Reas. 1. From the signification of the words High Commission, and Enormous
offenses, or Enormities.

It is called, High Commission, not that one Commission of the Kings is higher
then an another, for the King is the same in all his Commissions. Neither is it
called, High Commission, by reason of the greatness of the persons to whom it
is directed, for in the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer of the Peace, and of
the Sewers, the persons are equally as high and as great: But it is called High
Commission, as the late Bishop of London, Dr. King Expounded it in Mr. Fermers
Case, Parson of Charwelton in our County, because they had jurisdiction of high
and great offenses, and not of petty and slight omissions, as he was then
questioned for.

The word Enormity, or Enormous offense, is well Expounded by the Statute of 2
E. 3. c. 2. to be a great and horrible Trespass, as it is there called: For the
Commissions issued forth upon that Statute of Oyer and Terminer, were to be
revoked when the trespass was but petty and slight, and was not enormis seu
horribilis transgressio. And this appears plainly in the Register, fol. 125. a.
by the Writ there, De Revocatione brevis de audiendo and terminando; and the
Reason is given in the Writ, Quia non est enormis laesio.

Reas. 2. The second Reason is taken from the Foundation of the High
Commission, grounded upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. It appears by the main scope
and intent of that Act, That the Commission founded upon that Act, was to issue
forth principally for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical Estates and Persons
of that time, and for the correction, reformation and ordering of the same.

Now the Ecclesiastical Estate of that time stood thus.

Queen Mary died November. 17. 1558. Queen Elizabeth called her Parliament Jan.
23. following, with a full purpose to restore and establish the reformed
Religion, happily begun by her Brother K. Edward the 6th. and to abolish the
Jurisdiction of the Pope; all her Bishops at this time forsook her, but only
Anthony Kitchen, Bishop of Landaff; Cardinal Pool, Archbishop of Canterbury,
died the same day Q. Mary died; Heath, Archbishop of York, that should in that
vacancy have set the Crown upon her Head, refused to do it, only Owen
Oglethorp Bishop of Carliel performed that Solemnity. Hereupon that Parliament,
consisting of the Temporal Lords, provided for the good and safety of the
Queen, and of true Religion, by petitioning her for this Ecclesiastical
Commission. By which Commission which went out in the first year of her Reign,
being but Twenty Sheets of Paper (but now above an Hundred) Fourteen Bishops
were deposed, and many more of the Popish Clergy deprived: And in this first
Commission, the chief persons named in it (if not all) were temporal men; and
the offenses and enormities which that Statute principally intended and
enquired of, were the denying of the Queens Supremacy, and the withstanding the
Reformed Religion then established, and other crimes in a second respect.

Reas. 3. The third Reason is taken ab Incommodo: For if the High Commission
should have Jurisdiction of all Causes whatsoever, great and small, then will
the ordinary Jurisdiction of Bishops in their several Diocesses quickly vanish
and be extinguished, and the Subject grievously vexed, in being fetched up one
hundred or two hundred miles, and more, from his abode, whereas he might have
Justice in the Ordinaries Courts nearer home: For the High Commission has its
Jurisdiction all over England, and Ireland, ( Scotland being not then united to
the English Crown, and therefore not extending to it) which was never the
intent and meaning of that Act of 1 Eliz. And for these Reasons, many
Prohibitions have been granted to the High Commission, out of the Kings Courts
of Westminster, when they have meddled with inferior offenses. As,

Mich. 44 and 45 Eliz. C. B. between Tailor and Massy, for carrying Corn on
Holy Days, and giving irreverent speeches to the Minister, and whistling and
knocking at his door, and saying, He made Music for his Daughters wedding: A
Prohibition was granted for these things, as too light for the High Commission.

The like Prohibition was granted out of the Court of Common Pleas, Mich. 42
and 43 Eliz. Rot. 503.

Trin. 44 Eliz. C. B. between Robert Pool Clerk, and Thomas Guy; a Prohibition
was granted to the High Commission for holding Plea for the assaulting and
laying violent hands on the said Pool, being a Parson, upon this Reason, For
that they were not offenses proper for the High Commission, but for the Bishop
of the Diocese to meddle with. And in all these Prohibitions, and many more
that I could vouch, the words in the Record inducing the Prohibition are these:
Licet omnia and singula premissa in articulis praedict. specificat non sunt
laesiones enormes, nec offensa adeo gravia unde praedict. Commissionarii dicti
Domini Regis virtute actus praedict. de Anno primo dicto Dominae Reginae Eliz.
cognitionem habere possint seu debeant. As it appears in the Case between
Vivers and Pellings in the Common Pleas, Sexto Iacobi, Cok, Entry's fol. 465.

Quest. 2. Whether for all those enormous offenses of which they have
Cognizance and Jurisdiction by the Letters Patents, they can fine and imprison?
And I think they cannot. My Reasons are these.

Reas. 1. The first Reason is this, The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction restored by
the Statute of 1 Eliz. to the Crown, was that which was then usurped by the
Pope: Now it is confessed to my hands by all the Civilians, That the Pope did
not at that time, nor any time else, exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
within this Kingdom by Fine and Imprisonment, which are temporal acts,
belonging to the temporal Sword; but only by the spiritual Censures of the
Church, belonging to the Keys, which are six in number, Suspension,
Sequestration, Deprivation, Degradation, Interdiction, and Excommunication. And
therefore I do conclude, That the Law of Fining and Imprisoning was never given
to any Clergyman, by any Spiritual Law of this Realm, and used at the time of
the Statute of 1 Eliz. was made; of which I will speak of anon.

Reas. 2. The second Reason is taken out of Dr. and Student, lib. 2. cap. 29.
which is of singular Authority in this Case, he being as well an excellent
Canonist, as a Common Lawyer: Where he puts the Case, That if the Church should
decree that an Heretic should forfeit his Goods, that Decree were void,
because the Goods of men be Temporal, and belongs to the Kings Courts. And I
think (says he) that the Ordinary could not have set a Fine upon an Heretic,
until it was so ordained by the Statute of 2 H. 4. c. 15. Whence I infer, That
if an Ecclesiastical Court cannot Fine by their Law, A fortiori it cannot
Imprison.

Now that the High Commission Court is a mere Ecclesiastical Court, it appears
by the form of the Prohibitions directed to them, by which it is called Curia
Christianitatis Commissionariorum Dom. Regis in Causis Ecclesiasticis. Cok.
Entries, f. 465.

We must therefore enquire, what the Law was of Fining and Imprisoning at the
Common Law by the High Commission, at the time of the making of the Statute of
1 Eliz? For no Law or Statute since that Act has given them that power. And I
find but two Cases, in all my reading and study in it, wherein the High
Commission have power to Fine and Imprison:

1. The one is by the Statute of 2 H. 4. cap. 15.

2. The other is by the Statute of 1 H. 7. cap. 4.

By the Statute of 2 H. 4. every Bishop might Fine and Imprison in his Diocese
for Lollardy, then counted Heresy and Schism, which is now repealed by the
Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. and therefore I will speak no more of it.

The other is the Statute of 1 H. 7. which is still in force; by which Clerks
only, and not Laymen, convicted before their Ordinaries of Adultery,
Fornication and Incest, or other fleshly incontinency, shall be by them
committed to Prison; and that no Bishop shall be chargeable by Action of false
Imprisonment, for such commitment. Wherein this plainly appears, That an Action
of false Imprisonment had lain at the Common Law, for imprisonment by the
Ecclesiastical Court, though it had been of a Clergyman only, who owes
subjection to his Ordinary. Out of these two Cases, I know no Law for Fining
and Imprisoning by the High Commission. And of this opinion were all the Judges
of the Common Pleas, delivered under all their hands to King James, in answer
to the Lord Hubbarts Argument for the High Commission, wherein he spoke as much
for their Jurisdiction, as could possibly be spoken by man.

There are three strong Objections against me, which being answered, will make
my opinion more clear.

Obj. 1. The Kings Commission by his Letters Patents, which reckons up all
Ecclesiastical Causes, gives power to fine and imprison without restriction.

Answ. 1. This I deny; for I have read the Commission over and over. It is 17
December. 9 Car. 1 pars. in dorso number. 5. in the Rolls, it is directed to many
temporal Lords, To all the Bishops, To all the Judges then in being (except
Judge Crook.) I have seen the docket under the Attor. Genesis Noyes hand, with the
large additions which never any High Commission had before. And yet where it
speaks of punishment for crimes, it has such restrictive words as these, viz.
By lawful ways and means, according to the tenor of the Laws, according to the
Statutes aforesaid, etc.

Answ. 2. But admitting there were none of these restrictions by the
Commission, yet the Law of the Land gives this exposition to all the Kings
Letters Patents, That if they be contrary to the Laws of the Land, the Letters
Patents are void. And therefore the express Book is 8 H. 6. 19. That Letters
Patents contra legem and justitiam are void. And agreeable to this are the
Books 11 H. 4. fol. 73. 7 H. 6. 27. 1 H. 7, 23. 3 H. 7. 15, 20. 1 E. 4. 11. 18
E. 4. 7. 10 H. 7 Cromp. Jur. f. 13, etc. Upon this Maxim in Law it directs
Potest, quod de Jure potest. Now Fining and Imprisoning being though so penal
to the Subject, as by the great Charter of Liberties, c. 29 provided to be per
legem terrae, which is the Common Law; and therefore all the Commissions of the
King, which give power to Fine and Imprison, are ever backed with some Maxim
of Law or Act of Parliament to warrant them; as the Commission of Sewers, which
gives power to Fine and Imprison, is by the Stat. of 23 H. 8 c. 5 The
Commission of Banckrupts, which gives power to Fine and Imprison, is by the
Statutes of 13 Eliz. c. 7. 1 Jac. c. 15. and 21 Jac. So are the Commissions of
Oyre and Terminer, and of the Peace too long to remember: For if it should be
otherwise the liberty of the Subject would soon be destroyed, in which the
Prerogative of the King chiefly consists, according to the Kings own
Declaration, in his answer to the Petition of Right, 3 Car.

Obj. 2. The High Commssion is an Ecclesiastical Court, where the Civilians are
only admitted to be Pleaders; and in their Law it is a Rule, Quicquid placuit
Principi Legis vigorem habet. And it is true, There is such a Rule in their
Law, upon the misunderstanding whereof Tho. Harrison, Clerk, who at Common
Pleas Bar called Judge Hutton Traitor, seems to excuse himself at his
Arraignment in the Kings Bench, saying, The King when he saw cause, might, by
his absolute power, dispose of our goods, etc. and we ought not to defend our
selves by Law; and so, said he, was the opinion of the best Orthodox divines in
the Kingdom.

Answ. To which I answer, That that Law has no such sense, but the quite
contrary; and that appears by Bracton an excellent Civilian, and Chief Justice
of England, lib. 2 c. 9 and Stamf. pl. Cor. fol 99 and 100 Nihil Rex potest cum
sit Dei Minister and Vicarius quam quod de jure potest: Nec obstat id quod
dicitur; Quod Principi placuit legis vigorem habet? Quia sequitur in fine legis
Regiae quae de imperio ejus lataest? Non quicquid de voluntate Regis est
praesumptunt: sed quicquid Magnatum suorum concilio and habita super hoc
deliberatione and tractatu recte fuerit definitum: And with Bracton agrees
Vlpian a learned Civilian. And therefore I will conclude this Objection with
King James, in a Parliament Speech of his 1609. They that shall persuade Kings
not to bound themselves within the limits of their own Laws, are Vipers and
Pests both against them and the Commonwealth.

Object. 3. The third Objection is, That there are many Presidents of Fining
and Imprisoning by the High Commission besides those Cases of Heresy, Schism
and Incontinency.

Answ. 1. To which I answer, first, for 40 years the Law of the High Commission
was not known to the Subject, by reason the Letters Patents were not enrolled.
The first Inrollment of them was done in Chancellor Egertons time, and by his
command.

Answ. 2. it may be true, that Fines were imposed by the High Commission for
Adultery, Fornication, Usury, etc. But it appears upon search, that in all Q.
Elizabeth's time none of these Fines were levied upon any Judicial process out
of the Exchequer.

Answ. 3. Many Writs of Habeas Corpus have been granted out of the Kings
Courts, out of those Cases of Heresy and Incontinency. As Mic. 9 and 10 Eliz.
Rot. 1556 Thomas Lee, an Attorney of that Court, was Imprisoned for hearing
Mass (a great Crime) by the High Commission, and delivered by Habeas Corpus by
the Lord Dyer and the other Judges then living, and present at the making of
the Act, because they had not authority to imprison. For to what purpose was
the Statute of 23 Eliz. c. 1 made for Fining and Imprisoning those that heard
Mass, and for 20. l. a month for absence from Church, if the High Commission
had power to Fine or Imprison in either of those cases?

So Mic. 18 and 19 Eliz. C. B. one Hind was imprisoned by the High Commission
for refusing to answer Articles upon Usury, and delivered, by Habeas Corpus by
my Lord Dyer and the rest, because that Court had no Jurisdiction in that Case
so to do: both which Cases are reported in the first Edition of my Lord Dyer,
though left out in the second Edition.

The like president of hearing Mass was Trin. 7 Jac. in Banco Regis, in
Warringtons Case.

Mic. 42 Eliz. Simpsons Case, imprisoned by the High Commission for Adultery:
but resolved by the Judges, That the High Commission could not imprison a
Layman for Adultery, but only proceed to Ecclesiastical Censure.

The like for Adultery was Pas. 8 Jac. Meltons Case.

12 Jac. B. R. Bradstons Case, adjudged that the High Commission could not, by
the Statute of 1 Eliz. upon orders for Alimony between husband and wife, Fine
and Imprison men. 11 Jac. the like for Alimony in one Brocks Case, a Herald at
Arms.

I could vouch many more Presidents, but these are sufficient; I come therefore
shortly to the third and fourth questions.

Quest. 3. Whether the H. Commission ought not in their sentence to have
expressed the particular offenses, and not to say in general enormous offenses?

Ans. I think they ought, or else their sentence is void. And the reason is,
because it has been resolved in that famous Case, 3 Car. in the Habeas Corpus,
by Sr. Edmund Hampden, and upon further debate in Parliament upon the Petition
of Right, that a general Cause is no Cause for an Imprisonment. For it is
requisite when men are fined, deprived, imprisoned and cast out of their
Freeholds, that the Judges of the Realm, who have Conusans of such punishments,
should be certified of the particular cause, that they may consult with Divines
whether the offenses be enormous or no. And so is the resolution of the Judges
in 5 rep. Specots Case. f. 58.

The general sentences of the Ecclesiastical Judges, have in all ages been
found fault with. In 25 H. 8 c. 14. The Commons complained in Parliament, That
men were condemned upon the Stat. of 2 H. 4 c. 15 to be burnt for Heresy in
general, and not what Heresy, and so was the Writ De Heretico comburendo,
without expression of any particular Heresy, which was held to be a cruel and
an unjust Law, and therefore repealed by the said Act of 25 H. 8. l

5 Jac. Fullers Case of Grayes Inn, who was imprisoned by the B. R.
High Commission for Schism in general, without saying what Schism, and
resolved upon the return in the Habeas Corpus, that it was void; and therefore
they made a special return, that he said, The proceedings in the High
Commission were Papistical.

The like Mic. 3. Jac. B. R. Berryes Case upon a Habeas Corpus; the return was,
that he was committed by the H. Commission for certain causes Ecclesiastical.
This was adjudged to be naught and too general, and then they make a second
return, That he was Committed for giving saucy speeches to Dr. Newman, which
was likewise adjudged void, as too general.

But our very question, with which I will conclude, was Mr. George About 7 Car.
Huntleys Case, a Kentish Minister, who was Fined, Imprisoned and Deprived by
the H. Commission, for refusing to Preach a Visitation Sermon upon the command
of the Archdeacon: and the sentence was for grievous and enormous offenses. And
upon an Ejectione firm, brought by the said Huntley against Austin in the
Kings Bench for his Parsonage: All the Judges there, upon a solemn debate, and
in my hearing, adjudged the sentence to be void for the generality and
incertainty.

Quest. 4. Whether the Judges of the Realm, or the Ecclesiastical Judges have
the power and authority of Expounding enormous offenses within the Stat. of 1
Eliz. c. 1.

Ans. And I think it clearly belongs to the Temporal Judges, as clearly as the
Exposition of Texts of Scripture belong to Clergymen, as the now Attorney
General told Harrison at his Indictment Sir Jo. Banks
13 Car. in the Kings Bench for calling Judge Hutton Traitor.

It is very true, the Civilians grant this power to the Kings Judges for
Expounding Statutes concerning Temporal things, but deny it concerning
Spiritual things.

This thing Dr. Ridley in his View of Civil and Ecclesiastical Law (a book much
cried up amongst them) takes upon him to prove, but fails in it. For the truth
is, only the Judges of the Common Law have this power: And to prove it is to
prove a Principle. For from the beginning of Magna Charta to the end, all the
Statutes and Laws, concerning the Clergy, are expounded by the Judges.

Nay, in 10 H. 7. f. 17. in the matter of Heresy, the highest Ecclesiastical
Cause, the Judges do adjudge, That the saying a man may pay his Tithes to other
than his own Vicar, contrary to the Decree of the Church by the Council of
Lateran, was not Heresy. And therefore the imprisonment of the party for
saying so was against Law.

So the Judges, 2 R. 3. decided a point of the Civil Law by the Common Law.

And in the Parliament of 3 Car. in the Petition of Right, concerning
Ecclesiastical Liberty as well as Temporal, it is acknowledged by the King,
That the Exposition of the Laws and Statutes of the Realm belongs to the
Kings Judges and to none else.

FINIS.

