The Second Volume OF THE REMAINS OF THE Most Reverend Father in God, And
Blessed MARTYR, WILLIAM LAUD, Lord Archbishop OF CANTERBURY.

Written by HIMSELF.

Collected by the late Learned Mr. Henry Wharton, And Published according to
his Request by the Reverend Mr. Edmund Wharton, his Father.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Keble at the Turk's-Head in Fleet Street, Dan. Brown
without Temple Bar, Will. Hensman in Westminster Hall, Matt. Wotton near the
Inner Temple Gate, and R. Knaplock at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

TO THE READER.
THE late Learned Mr. H. Wharton, when he published the History of the Troubles
and Trial of Archbishop Laud, in the Year 1695, finding that all the Papers to
be printed with that Work could not be brought within the compass of one
Volume, reserved these for a Second Part: If God had pleased to continue his
life, they had been published much sooner, together with such an account of
them as he would have thought necessary: But he was prevented in so good a Work
by that stubborn and incurable Distemper of which he dyed. In his Last Will all
the Manuscript Papers relating to Archbishop Laud are ordered forthwith to be
delivered to his Father, (the Reverend Mr. Edmund Wharton, now Rector of
Saxlingham in Norfolk,) that so he might cause them to be transcribed, and
fitted for the Press: In compliance therefore with that his dying Request,
these Papers are now sent into the World.

AN Historical Account OF ALL Material Transactions Relating to the UNIVERSITY
OF OXFORD, FROM ARCHBISHOP LAUD's Being ELECTED CHANCELLOR To his RESIGNATION
of that OFFICE. Written by Himself.
ALL THE PASSAGES From April 12. 1630. Which concern the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD,
since the first Nomination and Election of the Dr. Frewen Vicechancellour.
Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM LAVD, Lord Bishop of LONDON, to be
CHANCELLOR. Anno 1630.
Pars Anni ab Electione mea ad Cancellariat. OXON.

DIE Lunae, viz. 12 die Aprilis Anno Dom. 1630. habita erat Convocatio, in qua
significavit Dr. Frewen The Election of the R. R. Father William Laud Bp. of
London, to be Chancellor.
Vicecancellarius, accepisse se a nunciis fide dignis, Honoratis. Academiae
Cancellarium, Guilielmum Pembrochiae Comitem fatis concessisse; ideoque ad
Electionem novi Cancellarii procedendum esse; Deinde succincta praefatione
Venerabilem illum Senatum hortatus est, ut hoc in negotio, seposito partium
studio, solius Academiae commodo and honori studeret; cum hoc habuerit remedium
quo affectum dari possit, ut desider at issimus Pembrochius minus desideraretur.

Quibus praefatis, ad Scrutinium pro Electione Novi Cancellarii Universitatis
hujus Oxoniensis processerunt

QVo Scrutinio per Venerabiles Viros, Doctorem Frewen Vicecancellarium,
Magistrum Rodulphum Austen, and Magistrum Henricum Stringer, Procuratores,
Vniversitatis, accepto and fideliter computato, Honoratiss. Vir, Reverendus in
Christo Pater, Dominus Guilielmus Episcopus Londinensis, a Sanctioribus
consiliis Serenissimae Regis Majestati, numerosiore Suffragiorum calculo
electus erat in Cancellarium Vniversitatis Oxon; Et pro Electo per Magistrum
Austen Procuratorem Seniorem pronunciatus est.

Deinde statuit Convocatio and decrevit, Doctorem Bancroft, Doctorem Prideaux,
Doctorem Smith, Doctorem Duppa, Doctorem Juxon, Doctorem Aylworth, Doctorem
Clayton, Magistrum Estcot, Coll. Wadhami, Magistrum Williamson, Magistrum
Cook, Coll. Magd, Magistrum Stroud AEdis Christi, Magistrum Hunt Coll. Novi,
Magistrum Johnson Coll. Magd. Magistrum Barker Coll. Novi, una cum
Vicecancellario, Procuratoribus, Registrario Vniversitatis, tribus Bedellis
superioribus, duobus inferioribus, and Stationario, Londinum mittendos, vel
majorem partem eorum, qui Convocationem Londini haberent, in qua simpliciter
rogarent Honoratiss. Virum and Reverendum in Christo Patrem, Dominum (...)
Episcopum Londinensem, a Sanctioribus Consiliis Sereniss. Regis Majestati, ut
Vniversitatis nostrae Patriocinium and Tutelam in se susciperet, and Literas
Patentes Vniversitatis, quibus Officium Cancellariatus Oxon. ei conceditur,
acceptaret; and ut interesse possint ejus Admissioni, Juramentorum
praestationi, and aliis actis in hoc negotio expediendis.

Placuit eodem tempore Venerabili Coetui Convocationis Doctorum, Magistrorum
Regentium and non-Regentium, ut Literae Patentes, quibus Officium sive Munus
Cancellariatus tenetur and stabilitur, Communi Sigillo Vniversitatis
munirentur, antequam Delegati praedicti Londinum proficiscerentur.

Acta habita, and gesta Londini 28 die Mensis Aprilis Anno Dom. 1630. viz Die
Mercurii post Meridiem inter horas secundam and quartam, pro Admissione
Honoratissimi Viri GUILIELMI Providentia Divina Episcopi Londinensis, a
Sanctioribus Consiliis Sereniss. Regis Majestati, ad Cancellariatum
Universitatis Oxon.

QVibus die and horis, in loco Celebri Civitatis London, vulgariter vocato
Convocation At London-House for Admission of their Chancellor Elect.
The Doctors Commons, convenerunt Venerabilis Vir, Dr. Frewen, in SS. Theologia
Professor and Vicecancellarius Vniversitatis Oxon. Reverendus in Christo Pater
ac Dominus, Dominus Johannes Providentia Divina Episcopus Dunelmensis,
Insignissimi Viri, Dominus (...) Paddye, in Medicina Doctor and Eques Auratus,
Dominus Henricus Marten, in Legibus Doctor and Eques Auratus, Dominus Nathanael
Brent, in Legibus Doctor and Eques Auratus, Dominus Carolus Caesar, in Legibus
Doctor and Eques Auratus, cum longa and numerosa serie Doctorum in omnibus
Facultatibus, Magistro Rodolpho Austen, Magistro Henrico Stringer,
Procuratoribus Vniversitatis, cum multis Baccalaureis in SS. Theologia, and
Magistrorum Regentium and non Regentium magno comitatu. Quo in loco Reverendus
in Christo Pater ac Dominus, Dominus Johannes Episcopus Dunelmensis, habitu
Episcopali indutus, Doctores Purpura, Magistri ornamentis Gradui suo
competentibus amicti, justis ordinibus bini atque bini procedunt, tribus
Bedellis superioribus aureis Monilibus decoratis, duobus Bedellis inferioribus,
una cum Stationario Vniversitatis Oxon. erectis Columnis praeeuntibus ad
Palatium (...) in Christo Patris ac Domini, Domini Guilielmi Episcopi
Londinensis etc. Vbi ad Palatium devenerint, in augustam Cameram ascenderunt.
Ibi Vicecancellarius in Cathedra in superioriparte Camerae sibi destinata
insedit, hinc atque hinc Doctores, deinde Procuratores more Academico coram
Vicecancellario, postea Magistri reliqui sedilibus recto ordine collocatis
consedere. Ac statim Venerabilis Vir, Doctor Frewen Vicecancellarius, causam
illius Convocationis significavit, ut cum Honoratiss. Pembrochiae Comes,
Academiae nostrae Oxoniensis nuper Cancellarius, animam exhalasset suam,
Reverendusque in Christo Pater ac Dominus, Dominus Guilielmus Providentia
Divina Episcopus Londinensis etc. ad Cancellariatum Academiae Oxon. sit
electus, ad Ejus Admissionem procederetur.

Quibus praefatis, ex altiore Cubiculo Palatii descendunt Honoratiss. Comes de
Dorset, Honoratiss. Comes de Danbye, Honoratiss. Comes de Cleveland, Vicecomes
Dorchester, Honoratiss. Vicecomes Wentworth, Praeses Concilii partium
Borealium, Reverendus in Christo Pater, Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Bathon. and
Wellensis, Episcopus Landavensis, qui in intervallo jusdem Camerae tantorum
virorum honoribus and reverentiis aptissimo consederunt.

Omnibus sic compositis, Reverendus in Christo Pater, Dominus Guilielmus
Episcopus Londinensis etc. tribus Bedellis superioribus, duobus inferioribus
and Stationario praeeuntibus, Honoratissimum, Reverendissimum, and Venerabilem
Coetum Convocationis ingressus est, seditque in (...) collocata in suprema
part Camerae praedictae coram (...), Pulvinari juxt a apposito: Cujus
reverentiam, tanto Patre dignam, auspitatissima Oratione salutavit Venerabilis
Vir Dr. Frewen Vicecancellarius, votaque Academiae expressit erga tantum
Reipub. Literariae Patronum. Cui primo Literas Patentes ab Academia missas
tradidit Communi Matris nostrae Vniversitatis Sigillo signatas; Secundo,
Cancellariatus sui Sigillum; Tertio, Librum; Quarto, Claves; Denique,
Bedellorum Columnas: Quibus oblatis and porrectis, ad (...) Domini Vicecan.
alta voce lectae fuerunt Literae Patentes Cancellariatus praedicti per Johannem
French, Notarium Publicum and Registrarium Vniversitatis Oxon. Literarum tenor
sequitur.

OMnibus Christi Fidelibus, ad quos praesentes Literae porrectae sive exhibitae
The Letters Patents of the University.
fuerint, Vicecancellarius, Magistri, and Scholares Universitatis Oxon. Salutem
in Domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos praefatum Vicecancellarium, Magistros, and
Scholares dedisse ac concessisse, ac per praesentes dare ac concedere pro Nobis
ac Successoribus nostris, Honoratissimo Viro, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri
Domino Guilielmo Episcopo Londinensi, a Sanctioribus conciliis Serenissimae
Regis Majestati, Officium, Munus, Praefecturam, and Dignitatem Cancellariatus
Universitatis Oxon. praedictae, nuper per ipsam Convocationem Doctorum,
Magistrorum, Regentium and non Regentium, rite and legitime (facto scrutinio)
per Procuratores nominato and electo, Habendum, tenendum, occupandum, and
gaudendum Officium praedictum praefato Honoratissimo Viro, Reverendissimo in
Christo Patri, Domino Guilielmo durante termino vitae suae naturalis; Cum
omnibus Libertatibus, juribus, praeeminentiis, and pertinentiis quibuscunque ad
illud Officium quoquo modo spectantibus, vel cum eodem Officio ante hac
usitatis. Damus insuper and per praesentes concedimus praefato Honoratissimo
Viro, Reveverendissimo in Christo Patri, Domino Guilielmo, tenore praesentium,
potestatem and authoritatem Vicecancellarios, Commissarios, and sufficientes
Deputatos suos de tempore in tempus per Literas suas Sigillo suo obsignatas
nominandi, praeficiendi, and constituendi; necnon omnes Curias, Leetas, Dies
festos and juridicos Universitatis praedictae habendi, utendi, and celebrandi
in tam amplis modo and forma, quam aliquis Cancellarius Vniversitatis
praedictae anteactis temporibus habuit, tenuit usus fuit, vel celebravit, aut
habere, tenere, uti, vel celebrare potuit aut debuit. In (...) rei testimonium
Sigillum Commune Universitatis Oxon. praedictae apponi fecimus. Datum in Domo
Congregationis Universitatis praedictae 24. die mensis Aprilis, Anno regni
Illustrissimi Domini nostri, Domini Caroli, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Sexto; Annoque Domini, secundum
Computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1630.

His praelectis, Magister Austen, Procurator senior, accuratam habuit Orationem
coram Reverendissimo in Christo Patre Domino Guilielmo, etc. eidemque de Regiae
Majestatis Authoritate agnoscenda and de Allegiantia sua Juramenta ministravit:
Quae Honoratissunus Vir ac Reverendissunus in Christo Pater, Dominus Guilielmus
etc. posita Dextra super Pectora in verbo Honoris praestitit de fideliter
praestando omnia and singula, quae ad Officium Cancellariatus Universitatis
Oxon. pertinent, idem exhibente Vice-Cancellario. Quibus peractis, ad Munus
sive Officium (...) praedictus Honoratissunus Vir, Reverendissimus in Christo
Pater ac Dominus, Dominus Guilielmus, Providentia Divina Episcopus Londinensis,
and a sanctioribus Consiliis Serenissimae Regis Majestati, Admissus est.

Quo Munere accepto, Honoratissunus Dominus Cancellarius gravissimam and
elegantissimam habuit Orationem. In qua Academicis omnibus gratias egit maximas
propter singularem eorum amorem in ipsum collatum, sposponditque in rebus
omnibus, tam quae communi utilitati Matris Academiae infervirent, quam quae
bono usui and ultitati (...) privati accederent, se semper eis praesto futurum.
Deinde (...) and deputavit Venerabilem Dr. Frewen continued Vicechancellour.
Virum, Doctorem Frewen Vice-Cancellarium ejus in reliquum Anni subsequentis;
retro tradidit ei (...), Sigillum, Claves; Bedellis omnibus Columnas; and
postea Epulae lautissimae apparatae sunt pro cujusvis Ordinis dignitate.

Tenor autem Orationis Reverendissimi Domini Cancellarii sequitur in haec verba.
NON expectatis, scio, Viri Literatissimi, cultissimi Academici, ut long a The
Chancelor's Speech.
vos aut compta Oratione excipiam. Fateor, Amor vester and Merita omnia possunt
a me jure vendicare: Sed hinc aesuetudo perorandi, illinc stylus parum
rotundus, hinc lingua haesitans, illinc memoria febre non lassata modo, sed and
penitus exusta, mihi abunde impedimento sunt. Loquendum tamen mihi est, and in
hac Doctissimorum Corona, qua cinctus sum: Loquendum; sed quam laxo Stylo,
parum refert, quum vos in supplementum Oratorem, and gravem and dulcem,
attulistis.

Mihi non vacat esse tam diserto, nec facile invenio, unde incipiam, adeo me
distrahit dicendorum copia. Gratiae, scio, agendae sunt Vobis, and almae illi
Academiae, quae corpore quodam abbreviato Vos estis. Et gratias ago, non (...)
lingua mea promere didicit (exiles illae!) sed quas Cor vestrum nimis in me
propensum potest concipere. Magnum est, quod in me contulistis, Munus, vere
magnum, and quo multi Heroes (...) dum fruebantur, non levi se honor auctos
existimarunt: Nec mirum; cum in tam altum Parnassi locum ascendere, est omnia
accipere, quae Musae dare possunt.

Atque hic succurrit mihi Illustrissimus ille Heroes, mihi nunquam sine Honoris
praefatione dicendus, cajus praesidio nuperrime orbata est Academia. (...)
Vobis and Patronus and Pater extitit: Patronus, Vos and Vestra pro posse (quod
magnum fuit) defendendo; Pater, se and sua donando; nec vulgaria illa, sed quae
haberi ullibi vix poterant, sumptu non parvo emit, ut daret. Notius est, quam
ut Test indigeat, nihil Ei magis charum fuisse, quam Salutem, Honorem, and
Faelicitatem istius florentis Academiae. Decessit Ille sibi suo tempore; Nobis
heu (...) cit o decessit: Quem Rex serenissimus fidelissimum, (...)
observantissimum, Ecclesia amicissimum, Academia beneficientissimum semper
experta est. Ego, quum Eum a primo fere in Aulam ingressu Maecenatem semper
habui constantem and prudentissimum; nunc ve-Vestro munere ipsi succenturiatus
sum. Onus eo gravius humeris meis impositum sentio, quod Viro tam Claro, Vobis
tam charo, Successor sim futurus.

Sed quiescit Ille in suo and omnium Domino. Redeundum est; nam dum doleo
Clarissimum Virum oculis ereptum nostris, paene oblitus sum mei. Sed memini
dixisse me, magnum esse, quod in me contulistis, Munus sine dubio magnum;
seipso tamen, modum rei si perpendamus, Majus. Contulistis enim Cancellariatum
Academiae vestrae ante hac, and saepius; sed semper Magnum in Magnos
contulistis. Et Honor iste semper ascendebat, descendebat nunquam, usquedum
nunc in me; nec solum in me Minorem, sed and immerentem, sed and prorsus
nescientem; addo etiam (non ut beneficio quicquam detraham, sed ut affectus
vestros indicem) Nolentem, and contra meipsum omni conatu (Deum and
conscientias quorundam astantium testor) molientem, descendebat. Amoris vestri
impetus hic fuit; cui nunquam par ero, ut me in gremium Matris meae Vestraeque
reduceretis Quod Vobis faustum, precor, sit; (...) mihi non potest non esse
pergratissimum, sic, and tam fervidis affectibus, honorari.

Vnum tamen placuit vobis errorem, eumque magnam, (sicu t solet errare, quum
errat, Amor) Amori vestro immiscere; Ipsam nempe mei Electionem. Nisi enim me
augurium fallat, and sim falsus animi, melius multo consultum foret Vobis and
Academiae, fortasse and mihi, si hunc honoris, fateor, sed and invidiae
cumulum, in alivs and fortiores humeros placuisset imponere. Quippe poterat
Munere isto (quod hic collocasse, quid aliud paene est, quam perdidisse?) Novus
aliquis, and qui plus posset, Patronus conciliari. Ad me vero quod attinet, non
indigebam his stimulis, qui, etiam ante hunc collatum honorem reputabam me
quasi unum e Vobis: Nec erat quitquam intra sphoeram activitatis meae, ad quod
praestandum sponte non fuerim paratissimus. Adeo ut hoc tam ingenti Beneficio,
action quidem Amoris vinculo me vobis devinctum agnoscam, promptiore vero ad
benefaciendum animo, non sentiam.

Videtis, ut Amoris vestri sive error sive aestus, Navem Academiae gubernandam
tradidit homini, cui been Velle quidem adest, caeterum nec Ars suppetit, nec
Rudentes, nec Anchora satis firma. Quae spes itaque appellendi ad portum, si
qua forte oboriatur Tempestas? certe nulla; nisi Rex, pro innat a sua erga
Literas and Literatos bonitate, quam a Patre piissimae memorioe and Regum, dum
vixit, doctissimo hausit, dignetur Ipse Maecenas (...) audire, and me sibi
constituere sequestrem in iis, quoe ad Vos spectabunt; Imo nisi pro
misericordia illa, quoe est super omnia opera ejus, plusquam aliquid descendat
a Rege Regum and Domino Dominantium, Ille, spero, qua est Pater Luminum a quo
omne datum, quod bonum, aperiet oculos meos, ut videam, diriget gressus meos,
ut sequar ea quae Academiae Matri meae, semper honorandae, and Vobis
Confratribus meis utilissima, amplissima, honoratissima futura sunt.

Reliquum est, ut Vos, Viri gravissimi, Seniores Israelis nostri, (nam (...)
Moses solus potuit omnia) humeros vestros una mecum supponatis oneri. Et nisi
it a faciatis, Deus bone! in quales quantas angustias me conjecistis? Sed
videtur vel ipse Aspectus hic Academicus nescic quid boni mihi polliceri;
eundem nempe Amorem, majorem, (si fieri potest) and non, ut antea, errantem, in
exhibendo mihi auxilium, quod and Vos deceat, and me sublevet.

Et certe, ipsa Academia (qua nescio quid mihi charius esse potest) doctrina
simul and moribus, pietate simul and sobrietate, pace simul and unitate, sit in
omne aevum florentissima, in Vobis aeque ac in me situm erit. Academia enim tot
ditata Collegiis, quot and qualibus vix dotata est quaelibet per Europam alia,
non aliunde pejus audit, quam ex fracta and jacente quasi Disciplina. Eam de
postliminio restituite, reducite in gratiam vestram; and antiquam statim
videbitis Academiae pulchritudinem. Neque enim Anus haec canitie vener and a
rugas novit contrahere, nisi prae moerore and anxietate ob collapsam
Disciplinam.

Sunt, quae hic plura dicerem. Sed Dies serenus est; and talis, opto, sit Vobis
and mihi. Nolo Diem hunc querelis obnubilare; quae ne tunc quidem sunt gratae,
quum forsan necessariae. Opto omnibus, singulis Vobis, (...) universo, salutem,
serenitatem, quam nulla unquam nubila tempeslas, quae undique perflare humana
solet, aut abscondat aut (...).

Concludam cum Apostolo: De caetero, Fratres, Quaecunque sunt vera, quaecunque
pudica, quaecunque justa, quaecunque Sancta, quaecunque amabilia, quaecunque
bona sunt: Addo, Quaecunque ad aedificationem Ecclesiae Christi, quacunque ad
obedienl am erga Christium Domini, quaecunque ad pietatem, and pacem populi Dei
pertinent: Si qua virtus, si qua laus disciplinae; haec cogitate, haec agite ad
unum Omnes. Et pax Dei, quae exuperat omnem sensum, custodiat corda vestra and
intelligentias vestras in Christo Jesu ad vitam aeternam. Amen.

So soon as I was admitted to the Chancellorship (which God know's I little
expected) I thought it my Duty to reform the University, which was extremely
sunk from all Discipline, and fallen into all Licentiousness: Insomuch that
diverse of the Governors there complained to me, that if remedy were not
applied in time, there would scarce any face be left of a University. Hereupon
I resolved within my self to set close to a Reformation. And though I
understood most of the Defects of the University (as having lived there many
years, and for diverse of them a Governor): Yet the first thing I thought fit
to do, was to lay Order taken for weekly Letters from the Vicechancellour.
a Command upon the Vicechancellour for the time being, that he should give me
an account by Letters every week of all necessary Occurrences which happened in
the University, pertaining to Exercise or Manners: with a Promise, that he
should weekly, without fail, receive a Letter from me, expressing what I
disliked or approved, and with Directions what should further be done for the
good of That Place. This Course I constanly held, and found so much good by it,
that I resolved, as often as I made a New Vice Chancellor, to renew the like
Charge, and to pursue it with like diligence. Which, when time served, I did,
and shall (God willing) so continue to do, as long as I shall live Chancellor
of the University.

The Statutes of the University had lain in a confused heap for some Concerning
the making and settling the Statutes.
Ages, and extremely imperfect in all kinds. The Reformation of the Abuses,
which grew thereby, and the reducing of the Statutes into Order and Form, with
the Addition of some New, for the necessity of the Present times, had been
often attempted, and particulary by Cardinal Woolsey and other Great Men in
their several times; but was never brought to any perfection; nor indeed to any
thing at all: But the business left, where it was first undertaken. I did ever
foresee, that it was not possible to make a Reformation, or settle That Body,
unless the Statutes were first perfected. And yet it was evident also, what
great difficulties attended That work: For it had been twice undertaken during
my own time in the University; and both times it came to nothing. At the Last
time it was attempted, I was Named in Convocation one of the Delegates my self.
By which means I had opportunity to see, where the difficulties and impediments
lay, but was not then able to remove them. Afterward coming to be Bishop of
London, and finding my Lord the Earl of Pembrock much troubled at some unworthy
proceedings There; I told him, he would never have remedy, until the Statutes
of the University were reduced into a Body and settled: And withal acquainted
his Lordship, wherein the Difficulties lay. Hereupon, at his entreaty, I set
down, what way was to be taken and followed for effecting That work: And began
at the naming of the Delegacy below in Convocation. Which Delegacy was no
sooner named, and my Directions sent unto them, but my Lord of Pembroke died,
and I was chosen Chancellor after him, and took up this work, where it was
then left, and resolved to go on against all Difficulties, which were like to
oppose me in the Body of that University: Which, being very sick, was desirous
enough to be well, but not pleased with the sourness of the Cure. Besides, such
Bodies never want Factions; and many There, that were willing enough to have a
Cure, were not so well pleased, it should be wrought by my hand. But This and
many other Difficulties I overcame with Care and Patience; and went on with the
work.

S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations etc. I am given to understand, To Dr. Tolson the
Vicechancellour's Deputy about two disorderly Sermons.
that on Sunday last I was wellcomed into my Chancellourship of Oxford with two
very ill Accidents, in either Sermon one. The first, I hear, was committed by
one of Exeter College, who preached directly against all Reverence in Churches,
and all Obeisance, or any devout gesture in or at the receiving of the
Communion. And if this be true, belike we shall not kneel neither.

The other, as I am informed, was by one Mr. Tucker of your own College; who
was not content only to justify the Five Articles, commonly called
Arminianism, but he would needs lay an Aspersion upon the Synod of Dort. In
both which he has directly gone against his Majesty's both Proclamation and
Instructions, prohibiting all men of all sorts for a time to preach either way
concerning them; that so those unhappy Differences, likely to rend this Church,
as well as others, might sleep first, and dye after.

I know not, whether Mr. Vicechancellour did convent these men or no. If he
did, your labor is past: If he did not, then I pray do you: and take two or
three Doctors to you. I would not be too sour at my first coming-in: And yet I
would not have Sermons of such ill example lead the way into my Government
There. I hope, a strict Monition, that they run no more into these Errors,
will serve the turn for this first time. But if you find, that it will not,
then I pray go so much farther, as the carriage of the men and the merits of
their cause shall require.

I know, these Sermons were provided before I was Chancellor, but yet I know
too, that the blame will fall on me more than upon another man, if such things
as these pass without Censure. I pray, as you showed your Love to choose me, so
be careful to maintain my honor in upholding the Peace and the Government of
the Place. For God knows, what blustering may follow upon That unhappy accident
of Mr. Tucker's. Thus not doubting of your Care herein, I leave you to the
Grace of God. And shall ever rest,

LONDON House. May 7. 1630. Your very Loving Friend, GVIL. London.


S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations etc. your Deputy, Dr. Tolsen, To Dr. Frewin
Vicechancellor, about observing Formalities.
has done very well in some Business in your absence, which I hope you will
perfect. Now I have a little more Business for you, in which I must desire you
to have a special Care.

I am given to understand, that Formalities (which are in a sort the outward
and visible Face of the University) are in a manner utterly decayed, not only
abroad in the Streets, but also in the very Schools, Convocation and
Congregation-houses, and at Latin Sermons: In so much that strangers, which come
thither, have scarce any external Mark, by which they may know they are in a
University. If this go on, the University will lose ground every day both at
home and abroad; and especially with his Majesty, who is a great Lover of Order
and Decency in all Seminaries of good Learning. And he has already given (...)
strict charge to look both to this and other particulars in their several times.

I pray therefore call the Heads of Colleges and Halls together with the
Proctors, and read these Letters to them; and with my Love remembr'd to them
all, let them know I am welcomed into my Chancellourship with many complaints
from very great men. I hope, all are not true: And I hope, such as are, you and
they will All in your several Houses join pains and hearty endeavous to see
them rectified, as I shall in due time severally propose them.

At this time I think it necessary, the Heads should fairly bespeak their
several Companies to fit themselves with Formalities fitting their Degrees,
that when the Act comes, (God bless you with Health, that it may hold with
honor and safety) the University may have Credit by looking like it self: And
then I doubt not but it will be it self too. For it will not endure but to be,
as it seems. And I desire you would bespeak your Companies fairly. Both,
because I presume, most men There in their generous and liberal Education will
be such lovers of Order, that they will run to the practice: And because I
heartily desire, that as I am chosen Chancellor with a great deal of
unexpected Love; so I may be enabled ever to Govern with a like measure of it.
My heart ever was, and I hope ever shall be, set to do That Place all the good
I can. And I shall take it for one of God's greatest Temporal blessings upon
me, if I may have your joint Concurrence to perfect the good I wish. And I will
not doubt, but that you do so love and honor That our Venerable Mother, that
you will cheerfully afford me This assistance.

When you have made this Entrance for Formalities at the Act, (for which I now
give time and warning) then the better to settle them, and all other Points of
Government, I pray take care to go on with the Delegacy for the Statutes, that
there may be a settled and a Known Body of them. My ever honored Predecessor
began That work with Care. I know, you will give me leave to pursue it to your
good and His honor. In the next long Vacation it were happy, if that Body of
Statutes might be finished. But whether it can or not, I heartily pray you
against Michaelmas Term look the Register, and provide such Tables, as were
wont to be published upon S. Mary's doors, for observance of the known
Statutes, and that then you proceed to the execution of them accordingly.

I know, you and the Governors There will pardon me this Care, when you shall
know what lies upon me here, and what begins already to be expected from me by
a most Gracious Prince, who is very Zealous of the honor of That Place. And
this yet I shall promise and perform. I will not be sudden upon you, nor (...)
with you in any your businesses Neither will I proceed in any thing, but that
which shall promote the honor and good of your selves and That famous
University. And in this way he that gives me best assistance shall be most
welcome to me. So for this time I take my leave: Commending you All to God's
gracious Protection; and shall rest,

May 28. 1630. Your very Loving Friend, GVIL. London.


S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations etc. This is the first Occasion, My first
Letters to the Convocation.
which I have had to trouble the Convocation. And before I begin with the
Business, I think it very fit to give you all very hearty thanks for the great
Love and undeserved Favor, which you would needs bestow upon me, quite beyond
my Expectation, and cross to my desires. Yet since it has pleased God so to
dispose both of you and me in this business, I shall endeavor to the utmost of
my power to answer your expectation, and to discharge the burden of this Honor
to as much advantage of That Venerable Mother of my self and you, as the best
understanding I have can lead me to. And whenever any thing shall come to
your knowledge, in which I may do That Body service, I hope you will not fail
to acquaint me with it, and in such time as the opportunity of doing what is
fit may not be lost. Else I may be disenabled to serve you by your own default.
But these are but Verbal Thanks; and I have desired to be as real as I might;
and therefore shall trouble you with no more of this.

The Business I am to acquaint you with is, to let you know, that A (...) in
Christ Church given to the Hebrew Reader for ever.
his Majesty did very graciously accept your Letter of Thanks for the (...)
bestowed upon the Hebrew=Reader: Whose Patent I caused to be sent, and approved
by you, before I would suffer the Seal to pass. And now it is passed, and That
Place so both enriched and honored, I hope you will take care that the Reader
thereof, as well as the rest, do the Duty of his Place. For the study of That
Language is too much neglected, and not without the great prejudice both of
That University and the Church.

Since this, I have received from you the Book of Verses in honor of the
Prince, which I have likewise delivered to his Majesty, with a full
representation of your humble and dutiful Respects to his Majesty, and of your
hearty Prayers both for himself and his Royal Posterity: Which he, with all
Grace and Favor accepted. I could heartily have wished, the Book had been here
any time of the last week, that it might have prevented the Christning. But
howsoever, it is very welcome Now.

It is not long, since I writ to Mr. Vicechancellour about some care The
observing of Formalities.
to be taken for Formalities, both against the Act, and so after to continue at
Michaelmas Term. And I make no doubt, but all men will be willing to continue
the honor of That Place, and in That kind. It is the Hedge and the Fence of
those things, which are of far greater consequence. In those Letters I omitted
one thing, which I think fit now to be remembered. It is a great Abuse, and
long continued against the Degree of a Master of Arts. I know, it is very fit,
that That Degree, upon which the Orders of the University do so much rely, both
in Convocations, Congregations, and elsewhere, should be had in more esteem
than it is. But this can no ways so well be done, as by their due Obedience to
Governors in their several Places, and by their own Valuing and Esteeming
themselves above all Inferiors. And for my part, I shall do my best to keep up
the price they set upon themselves. For it is a great dishonor to That Place,
that in all Public Assemblies, yea and when they meet in open street,
Bachelours of Art, nay Boys, will not know their places. I hope, the Delegacy
will so order the Statutes, which they have in hand (to the lasting honor of
my most Worthy and Honorable Predecessor) as that the Degree of a Master of
Arts shall hereafter be better esteemed in That Place; which is the only way to
recover the ancient Credit of it Abroad.

The last thing which I have at this time to recommend unto you, is, The not
spolling of his Majesty's Game.
that you would All be careful, that the University may stand right in his
Majesty's Good Opinion for not spoiling His Game. There was very lately a
Complaint made to me about it: and I, fearing the worst, writ to the
Vicechancellour: But he gave me so discreet and so sufficient an Answer, that I
not only did, but had cause to think all was well. Since this, I find that
Complaint, or some other, has gone farther. I heartily pray you therefore to
take the best care you can, especially You, that are Governors and in Office,
to look to the Abuses tho, and then with Gods assistance I will take care, that
no man's sinister Report shall do you prejudice Here. Thus not doubting of the
Love, and Affection, the Care, and the Moderation of any man for the Good and
the Honor of That most noble Body; I leave you all to the Grace of God, and
shall ever rest,

To my very Loving Friends, the Vicechancellour, the Doctors, the Proctours,
and the rest of the Convocation of the Vnivsierty of Oxford.

Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, GVIL. London.


S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations etc. The time now draws on for Dr. Smith Warden
of Wadham College apopinted Vicechancellour.
the Nomination of a New Vicechancellour according to the Course held by my
Honorable Predecessors in That famous University. In this little time, in
which by your Favors I have had the Honor to Govern, I have found the present
Vicechancellour Dr. Frewen so Careful and so Discrect in That buisy Place, that
I should, though Dr. Smith.
it were to his great pains, put him to the trouble of another year, were it
not, that I consider, how full of able and sufficient men the University is for
the Discharge of That Office. Besides, I have ever thought it most for the
Honor and the Profit of the University, that the Governors there should have
the pains and the experience of That Place divided amongst them. In which
Resolution I shall still continue, till I shall receive better reason to the
contrary, than I can give my self. For this present year therefore I have
thought sit to lay the Burden of This Place upon Dr Smith, the Warden of Wadham
College: And do so choose him thereunto, as a Man whose Integrity and Abilities
to Govern I have known and observed for diverse years. These are therefore to
Pray and Require you to Allow of this my Choice; and to give him your best
Advice and Assistance both in this and all other Business, which shall concern
the Good and Honor of That famous University. And so I bid you heartily
farewell; and rest,

To my Loving (...) the Vicechancellour, the Doctors, the Proctours, and the
rest of the Convocation of the University of Oxford.

FULHAM-House. July 9. 1630. Your very Loving Friend and Chancellor, GVIL.
London.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
PRrudentissima Literarum tuarum Monita summo tum Obsequio tum A Letter of
Thanks from the University, for my Letters to Them.
Gratitudine accepimus. Ex quibus abunde constat, neminem melius Provinciam
gerere, quam qui invito suscepit; utpote qui Onus pensat, non Honorem, and
quaerit potius Invidiae occurrere quam (...) gloriari. Gratulamar itaque (...)
tuae, cui ferendum hoc onus Imperii humiles (...) ingesserunt. Grutulamur
Modestiae, quod agree hoc feras: Benignituti, quod tamen feras: Curaeque demum
Paternae, quod adeo studiose perferre decreveris. Penitus hoc antea persuasum
inerat nobis, amantissimam hunc fore Academiae Patrem, qui fuit (...) Filius;
Caput concinnatissimum, qui fuit Membrum; and posse nos itidem accommodatius,
uberius, foelicius agere sub Capite Congenito quam Insitivo. En (...) jugum!
Arts jam temperat Religio, eruditos Vir Bonus, juvenes Expertus, togam
plusquam Togatus, Mitraque Presbyteros. Nunquid capiti naturali beatius cum
membris convenit, quam Tibi nobiscum? Sentit Illud, quicquid partium inferiorum
commodo inservit: Sentis etiam Ipse. Facultates Illud omnes, quibus imperat,
etiam continet: omnes Academicas and Ipse contines. Exercet Illud mollem, sed
potentem in sequaces artus influxum: Exerces etiam Ipse; spirituque superne
diffuso ductum abique (...): In ipso limine non minus Literarum incremento
consulis, quam Literatorum patrocinio; aeque Habitus decori ac Togae moribus;
and Honori nostro simul domi forisque vim omnem intendis. O (...) Academiam,
quae certe audit Britanniae Oculus, at plane caecam sine Te! Ipsi Oculo Tu
prospicis; and nostro Lumini auxiliarem hunc diem immittis, quo si esset
orbatum, in tenebris perspicaciam amitteret. Lenibus Tuis ac saluberrimis hisce
mandatis, sicut Tu quidem, ita malumus and nos respondere Facta, quam verba.
Invenies itaque Parnassum bicipitem Mitrae tuae figuram non immerito exprimere,
and Musas Episcopo suo facile se daturns in quemvis tam venerandi Dictaminis
modulum effingendas. Non Te fore speravimus sine oculis Vigilantiae Caput,
neque Nos invenies sine pedibus Obsequii Corpus.

Reverendissimo Patri in Christo, GUILIELMO Episcopo Londinensi, Cancellario
suo Honoratissimo.

E Domo nostrae Congregationis. (...) 10. 1630. Honori vestro Deditissima
Oxoniensis Academia.


BEatitatem Amplitudinis asquequaque censuit, Reverendissime Cancel Dr. (...)
the Hebrew Reader's Thanks for the Prebend of Christchurch, procured by me.
latie, prudentior indoles, quod possit, meritum coeleste, quod velit
opitulari. Vtrumque vestra beneficentia inclaruit. Vtriusque particeps fuit
plurimorum necessitas; praesertim Literaturae Ebraicae. Et opportune.
Sacro-sancti quippe idiomatis gloria, quae apud Transmarinos, fama scilicet
Reformata splendescentes, eminet, hucusque apud Nos Eclipsin passa est. Danda
fuit ingeniorum neque industriae, sed Viatisi indigentiae. Norunt Judaicarum
rerum periti, nobile Ebraismi studium non vili pretio mercandum. Patrimonium
enim ingens exhauriunt Biblica, Talmudica, Rabbinica, Lexicographa, Grammatica,
aliaque volumina linguam Israeliticam supra vulgus Ebraeorum inbibenti
necessaria. Ista sunt, quae alunt Artem, and nobilitant Artisicem: Quae si
negata fuerint, (...) Ars, vilesoit Artifex. Vt tandem igitur apud Anglos (...)
uterque, nec diutiori remora sufflaminetur pia surgentis and Ecclesiae and
Academiae ambitio, utrumque sub auspicatissima Majestate ditavit and honoravit
vestra manus auxiliatrix: Musasque Ebraeas beneficentissimae vestrae
Paternitati aeternum obstrictas fecit. Eccam spiritu facile vaticinante
Professorum Hebraicorum seriem, usquedum evanescat inter Oxonienses Tuos
Academia, lauds tam divini Muneris (...) juxta idiotismum sacrum, in saeculum
and ultra decantantem. Non etenim unicum pauperculum me quoad spem dotavit
magnifica vestr a providentia, sed revera sobolem infinitam. Ita (...) ex ore
Infantium and lactentium (Hiero-Psaltae formula est) (...) durabile
magnificentiae testimonium, sive, ut LXX senum premit vestigia D. Messiah)
(...) laudem, and, quae benignitatis est (...), vota praecurvendo, spem
superando, nullius precibus sive blandis sive importunis delinitus, perfecisti.
Professionis iccirco Regiae auctum privilegium meritis vestris, ut par est,
acceptum refert ipsa vestra Academia, in obsequium gratitudinis unanimiter
conspirans. Ne meo denique desim officio, qui gratia ista proximius locupletari
sperem, liceat mihi, Praesul Amplissime, personam successorum meorum induenti,
Almae Matri in obsequio famulari. Sic Ecclesiae profectum, Academiae honorem,
Literarum augmentum meditari diu pergas. Votisque tuis benedicat, dignitates
augeat, foelicit atemque aeternam reddat Pater misericordiarum

Datum Commit. Oxoniensium solennibus, e Coll. Om. An. Anno (...) Christi 1630.
Reverendissimae vestrae Clementiae addictissimus, Johannes Morris.


AGainst the beginning of your Term, and so for Direction of all the year, I
shall be bold to give you these few Advertisements following, till the Statutes
may be perfected.

First, I pray keep it in memory with the Heads, that there be no Certain
Advertisements given the Vicechancellour at Michaelmas (...), October. 6: 1630.
more Gowns made out of the ancient Fashion of the University. Secondly, That
no Man have his Degree, till he has done all his Exercise, under what pretense
soever. Thirdly, That you admit none to Cumulate. Fourthly, That no man be
suffered to proceed Bachelour of Divinity that is not Master of Arts, unless he
have staid full 14 years, since his being Bachelour of Arts: nor any Bachelour
of Law to be Bachelour of Divinity, unless he have spent as many years in the
University, as he should have done, if he had gone the longer and the more
chargeable way by the Arts. Last of all, You shall do very well to make
Congregations fewer, and let them draw their business together, and not trouble
the whole University and your self so often for every Boy's business.

I pray, be strict in these; and if it be the cause, you have fewer Doctors the
next year, the matter is not great. For if there be none for a year or two,
there are enough already for a longer time. And for my part, I am as willing
there should be none, as to have the University disordered by them.

THis day I received a complaint from Oxford, concerning the Restraint, An
Order De accumulandis Gradibus. October. 11. 1630.
which I had advised should be put upon Dispensations, which were then grown
too common in all kinds, to the great disgrace of the University. But in the
consideration of this Point there arose some Debate concerning the
Dispensatiens de accumulandis Gradibus, by reason, that some were come to the
University to Accumulate, which dwelt in remoter parts, and were now ready to
do their Exercise, and could not be sent back without their Degrees, but it
must needs tend to their great disreputation, charge, and prejudice. In regard
whereof there was earnest suit made to me by Dr. Prideaux, then the Kings
Professor in Divinity, and by Mr. Bell, Esquire-Bedell in Arts, that this
restraint de accumulandis Gradibus might not be suddenly put upon the
University: but that there might be a Day prefixed and warning given, that so
no man might be taken upon the sudden; As appears by Dr. Prideaux his Letter,
which hereafter follows. In the mean time I presenty settled this Difficulty
with such a moderate Restraint as in short time effected, what I intended, and
presently took off all further muttering in the University.

Right Reverend Father in God,
ON Friday last Mr. Vice Chancellor acquainted us amongst others Dr. Prideaux
his Letter De Accumulandis Gradibus.
with your Honors Advertisements, with your Dislike of Accumulating Degrees,
which heretofore has been too Customary. We must all acknowledge with
Thankfulness your Fatherly Care, and Gods Blessing through your wisdom and
vigilance, in reforming many things, which were out of frame. For my own part,
I shall hold him an unworthy Member of This Place, that with all readiness
conforms not himself to such warrantable and fit Proposals; and should be loath,
that any man be more forward than my self in performing all due Obedience to my
Superiors. But I trust, your Honor will not take amiss, if I interpose thus
far: That sufficient Notice be first given of your Pleasure in this behalf,
before execution be urged. I speak it to this purpose. Here is one Mr. Balye,
an able Man both for Scholarship and Means, and his Majesty's Chaplain, who
upon supposal of Accumulating, as heretofore, has ever since the Act been at
great charge Here, and taken pains to perform his Exercise for his Degrees.
This was before any intimation from your Lordship of stopping Accumulating:
which if it presently take place, his hopes, travels, and expenses are
frustrated, and his return must be to his great prejudice. He was a Fellow of
Exeter College, of good esteem. There is one Mr. Hodges, a Fellow of Lincoln
College, almost in the like case. Our humble suit is, that these Men, thus
before engaged, may Pass with your Lordships Leave. Others, as your Wisdom
shall think fit, may for the present have Notice given, that they expect not
the like Easiness; Especially the Residents Here, whose negligence has abused
this Favor, meant rather, as I take it, to Strangers of worth, than to them.
Of This I held it my Duty to inform your Honor, as desirous to stand in your
favorable Opinion with others under this your Government: Amongst whom I shall
faithfully endeavor in Realities to express my self,

Exon Coll. October. 11. 1630. Your Lordship's ready to be commanded, John
Prideaux.


S. in Christo.
Worthy SIR,
I Received Letters from you this week. They found me at home My Answer to Dr.
Prideaux his Letter de accumulandis gradibus.
under some Indisposition of body by reason of a Cold caught in my
Court-Attendance. I thank you heartily for your Love, and expression of
readiness to join in the necessary upholding of Government in that famous
University, whose flourishing shall ever be the first and at the highest in my
desires.

For the particular you mention de Accumulandis gradibus, I am not only
content, but thank you for your Interposition: Because as my desire is to
Propose nothing, but that which is Just and Honorable for that Place; so I am
very willing to Propose it in such manner, as no man of quality may have just
cause to except against.

In my Indisposition (of which I am not yet free) I must crave your pardon to
be Brief, and not write that over again, which I have written in that Point to
Mr. Vicechancellour, who, I think, will call you and the rest of the Heads
again, and read my Answer, which I make no doubt will settle this business. Yet
this I must tell you, Mr. Balye (howsoever you write an honest and an able
Gentleman) has very far and more ways than one forgotten himself to Mr.
Vicechancellour, and not spared me. For my part I pity his Passion, and shall
pass it by, if Mr. Vicechancellour be satisfied. And this I do for his Father's
sake, and in hope, that he will make this his Warning; else I would quickly
make him know, that my Proposals there are far from Tricks to catch him or any
others. You shall discharge your Love to his Father, and your Care of him very
freely, if you shall chide him into better Temper.

The main of my Answer I hope you will expect from Mr. Vicechancellour, in
regard of my present Weakness. And I shall end in a constant belief, that for
the Government of the University, and all necessaries incident thereunto, I
shall find you very ready and real, as you promise. For which, as I now give
you thanks, so of it I shall be ready to give you testimony; and for it to show
you all such respects, as may be due, or fit from the Place I bear; and with as
much Favor, as to any Governor in that place. So I leave you to the Grace of
God, and shall rest,

Fulham-House. October. 15. 1630. Your loving Friend, GVIL. London.


I write you this with mine own hand. I pray hereafter be very careful of
Concerning Act Questions.
the Act-Questions. The late Question about the Sickness (though somewhat
qualified from the first proposal) was very unreasonable, and somewhat else
too. His Majesty took great distaste at it, and commanded me to write to you
about it. You were at that time gone into the West, and I forbear; and do now
only give you this private Advertisement, which none knows, but your self: Not
doubting but you will make good use of it, and such as is fit.

IT seems there are but two rubbs appearing in this first Meeting. A Clause of
my Letters to the Vicechancellour de susceptione Gradus Baccalur. in SS.
Theologia. October. 15. 1630.
The one about a Statute for nine years allowed (it seems) for men not Masters
of Arts to be Bachelours in Divinity. I pray search, whether there be such a
Statute or no. If there be not, I think it fit my Order should hold. If there
be, I will not violate it; but think it very fit, it should be abrogated. For
since seven years is required of a Master of Arts, and Resident in the
University, where he may study; I think fourteen years is little enough for a
Bachelour of Arts or Under-graduate abroad, who as he went away young, and with
less grounds of Learning; so his time being taken up in preaching, must needs
be less able for Controversy-learning. And this is all I shall say for That.

For Cumulation, I must needs profess, I never liked it. And it supposes, De
gradibus accumulandis.
of and in it self, an unnecessary Delay of the first Degree, or a needless
Have of the Second. There are two things objected, which makes me take it into
second consideration. The one is, that University Records have been searched,
and that time out of mind Cumulations have been admitted, yea and sometimes by
a Statute, provided, that all Exercise for both Degrees were performed. I pray
therefore, desire in my name so much patience of the Heads, as to have these
Records viewed by all or some of them appointed thereto by your selves. And if
you find it so, then I shall be contented to do, as hereafter follows. But give
me leave to tell you by the way, That though I dislike Cumulations in
themselves, yet I do it much more for that, which I observed, when I was so
happy, as to live among you. For then it was common (and some are yet living
who Cumulated so) either quite to Dispense with the Exercise of Bachelour of
Divinity, (which is the great and necessary exercise of the Town) or turn it
but into a Sermon Neither of which I shall endure.

The other is, that if I intend to hold the strictness of this Course, it might
seem fit, that a time had been prefixed, before it be put in execution, that so
no man might be taken upon the sudden, as Mr. Balye and Mr. Hodges are reported
to be. To this, I must needs confess, that a long Custom, though never so bad,
especially if time out of mind, should have a Warning-peal before 'its
dissolution, and that no man should be struck on the sudden. My Answer
therefore is, that either I did give warning at the last Act to the former
worthy and careful Vicechancellour, or else very fullness of it in my thoughts
thrust it out, and made me believe I had written it, if I have not. And which
of these is true, my bad Memory will not ascertain me. Next therefore I think
it very fit, there should be both a time prefixed, and notice given. Both which
I shall thus far leave to your consideration. First then, because the Records
are with you, I pray call the Heads, and view them touching this point of
Cumulation. Then if you find the Wisdom of our Ancestors in former times, when
Government was stricter, and Degrees not so frequent, to have allowed them, I
shall then leave you fairly to represent, what you find and think. Provided,
that there be no Dispensation for any Exercise, the least, but that all be done
as Statute requires. And provided likewise, that none be admitted to Cumulate
upon any pretense, that are resident in the University, or that live within 30
miles, and may so come without great either trouble or charge. And whatsoever
you shall upon view of these Records by mutuas consent agree unto, I shall not
without great reason vary from. And at this Meeting you may take it into
deliberation, what is fit to be done for Mr. Balye and Mr. Hodges. For I have
no will to prejudice any man upon a sudden. Neither did any man give me the
least notice, that Mr. Balye lived at charge in town for that purpose. And for
notice given, I know not what more can be done, than that Publication of it be
in every College, that so they, which are abroad, may know by their Residing
friends, what to trust to.

GVIL. London.


Right Reverend Father in God
I deferred to answer your Lordships Letters, until Mr. Vicechancellour Dr.
Prideaux his Thanks, and an Answer to my former Letters.
had acquainted us with your further Directions, to which it had reference.
Nothing so much takes an ingenuous mind, as undeserved Favors. For which I
hold my self so obliged to your Honor, that, I trust, my future Expressions
shall justisie my Thankfulness. This Bearet having occasions to see London, I
thought the fittest to write by, as being able to supply, by word of mouth,
such circumstances, as I may chance to omit, and your Lordship be willing to be
informed of. We are All bound to praise God, and to pray for the Continuance of
Your Happiness, that so thoroughly set your thoughts to Reform that, which is
amiss amongst us, and to recover that Luster of the University which latter
times had somewhat neglected. For Cumulations, I see not (...).
what could be more deliberately set down, than your last Advertisement. The
Proceeding at nine years for Bachelours and sometimes Under-Graduates
(howsoever in use heretofore by Custom and the hint of a Statute) in all reason
at this time needs Reformation, especially the Case among Divines being now
otherwise, than when that Indulgence was given. Fourteen years might well be
required (as your Lordship intimates) in Supplicants of That condition. And if
so they Pass, it may be held a Favor. Mr. Balye accounts himself made by your
Lordship's Goodness. He has been well chid, and acknowledged his folly to Mr.
Vice Chancellor, who, he hopes, is satisfied. That The Act Question.
untoward Question the last Act was never approved by me, in those terms it
passed, but I stand not to execute. Now I understand by your Loving and
Fatherly Advertisement, what will be expected of me, I shall by God's Grace
take a Care hereafter, that no such occasion of Exception be given. Two things
yet remain concerning my Place, which I make bold to tender also to your
judicious consideration. The neglect of Divinity disputations for Term these
five years last past, through tergiversations of the Actors. And the Proceeding
of diverse in Law of late, to the prejudice of Divinity. Mr. Thimble can inform
you at full in both particulars. I am fearful to trespass further upon your
weighty employments; But with my hearty prayer unto God for your health and
happiness, rest,

Exeter Coll. October. 25. 1630. Your Honor's most ready at Command, John
Prideaux.


Right Reverend Father in God,
BY your last to me, and your Direction to Mr. Vice Chancellor, Dr. Prideaux
his Thanks and Acknowledgement of the Justness of my Proceedings.
which he lovingly imparted unto me, I have received that comfort of your
undeserved respect and favor, which shall ever ty me to a thankful
Acknowledgement. Yesterday Mr. Vice Chancellor convented us concerning Term
disputations. It took so well with all, that by a joint consent it was
presently thought fit to second so reasonable and seasonable a Proposal with
immediate Execution. This was thought would make way, that when the time
comes, prefixed by your Lordship, there would be no failing, and intimate to
your favorable Consideration, what concurrence there is amongst us in due
Obedience, where Directions are so Just, Judicious, and necessary. Concernig
the late proceeding of Lawyers, we cannot desire more, than your Lordship
resolves upon. In any thing, that my Assistance may be useful to Mr.
Vice Chancellor, or otherwise, I trust, my faithful endeavors shall make
good, how unfeignedly I desire to show my self,

Exon. Coll. Novem. 24. 1630. Your Lordships Most ready at Command, John
Prideaux.


May it please your Lordship,
IF it be not too boldly done of us to interrupt your Lordship's The Proctors
of the University their Thanks concerning Reformation.
greater Affairs, we should hope, that you would be pleased to accept with
favor these few lines from us, which are, according to our humble Duty and
Service, to congratulate your Lordship's honorable Reformation of the
University, so well begun. We cannot, nor can any man else, dissemble it. The
Corruption was gotten up high, and come to stand almost in praecipiti. Some
medicinal hand was of necessity, and that speedily to undertake the Cure. Which
God (who well saw the weightiness of the work) would, should be no other than
your Lordship's, though your Lordship would not. There were others more
Powerful: Your Lordship would have been our Friend however. It would be
envious, you were sickly, and the like. But the Infallible Eye saw you, and
what it purposed to effect by you, whilst you walked thus under the Fig Trees
(that we may so speak) and Covert of your excuses. Truly it was strange to see
such backwardness at the Undertaking, and yet now such Readiness and Skill in
the Execution. We see it, and must with all gratefulness acknowledge, amongst
your manifold and great Occasions both for Church and State, no pains spared,
no opportunity omitted, either by Word or Letter, that may any way advance the
business in hand. From this Zeal of your Lordship to Learning and the welfare
of the University, there is no ingenious breast amongst us, but takes fire, and
would be glad to be seen though amidst the dependence of so worthy an
Enterprise. Our selves, in an inferior Distance, are even angry with our
selves, that we have not hitherto signified to your Lordship our forwardness in
our Places. But now we assure your Lordship, as we have not been altogether
negligent for the time past, so from henceforward to be industrious in what
belongs to us, in taking notice of Formalities, in laying hands upon the reigns
and liberty of Dispensations, and looking to the performance of other Duties.
As for the point of Dispensations, and Proceeding of Bachelours, which now
draws on, somewhat it may seem to be out of the way of the Proctours. But it is
so poor a thing to the Universal good, that we would request your Lordship, not
to entertain so much as a thought, that we make the least account of it. And
since we understand your Lordship's Desire, we shall put on resolution to make
stop of all manner of Dispensations (we mean for defect of time, or of that
nature) and this without any mincing of the matter, or deriving the Cause or
Envy farther, than our selves. Truly it would be a foul Shame for any, more for
us, to be found either backward or lukewarm to Good Order, when our Chancellor
himself is seen to press so nobly for it. Besides the reward, that we may look
for, that when in after-ages your Lordship's Honors shall be recorded, and
this Reformation amongst the rest, I, and amongst the chiefest, (O it has a
Genius, and must live!) we also may claim to have our Names read for those, in
the time and circuit of whose office so great a work was undertaken. Thus
humbly craving Pardon for our boldness, we rest,

Oxford. Nov. 29. 1630. At your Lordships Service To be commanded, Ralph
Austen. Henry Stringer. Proctors of the University.


About this time the Principality of St. Edmund's-Hall became Concerning the
Principal of St. Edmund's Hall.
void by the death of Dr. Rawlinson. And the Provost of Queen's College and the
Fellows there made choice of Mr. Ayrie to succeed him. This Claim for the
freedom of Election, and a Queen's-College Man to be elected, they had formerly
made under the Chancellourship of the Lord Archbishop Bancroft, who promised
them very fair for the next avoydance, but prevailed with them to let his
Nomination stand for Dr. Rawlinson. Now they write their Letters to me, and
humbly besought me, that their Choice of Mr. Ayrie (who had been of their
College) might stand. And withal they sent me up their Writings and Evidences
which they had to show, that the Right of Election of a Principal to the Hall
aforesaid was in the Provost and Fellows of Queen's College, and not in the
Chancellor of the University, as the rest of the Halls are. After much Debate
and full Consideration taken, I writ to the Vice Chancellor, as follows.

S. in Christo.
Sir,
I Have now at last with much ado got a little time to look over the To the
Vice Chancellor concerning the Choice of a Principal of St. Edmund's-Hall.
Evidences which the Provost of Queen's College sent unto me concerning their
Right of the Choosing of the Principal of St. Edmund's-Hall. Upon view of the
Deed from the University, (in which I find the Chancellor a Party) and of the
other Disputes raised concerning this business, when the Right Honorable the
Earl of Dorset was Chancellor, all which concluded for the Right of the
College to Choose, I think their Right is unquestionable. And the rather,
because I find, that the Right Honorable my late Predecessor, the Lord
Steward upon view of these Writings, declared in a Letter of his, the Right to
be in the College. And for that the Provost and Fellows of Queen's College have
not only made this Claim to their Right of Choice, but have also from time to
time made actual Choice of the several Principals successively, whenever That
Place has been void, and have at this time made their humble suit unto me for
Confirmation of their Right: I am very willing to preserve this their Right
unto them: And do hereby Pray and Require you, as my Deputy there, to give Mr.
Ayrie, whom the Provost and Fellows have lately Chosen, Admission into the
Principality of the said Hall, and all such Rights, as are thereunto belonging.
And this I am content to do for the love of Justice, without reflecting upon
the suddenness of their late Choice, which might have been done with more
Respect to me, and less Hazard to themselves. So for this time I leave you to
the Grace of God; and rest,

LONDON House. March 4. 1631. Your very Loving Friend, GVIL. London.


DIe Mercurii, viz. vicesimo die Aprilis Anno Dom. 1631. habita An Act
concerning the Commission for Fees.
deliberatione a Venerabili Viro Dr. Smith Vice-Cancellario, un a cum aliis
Collegiorum and Aularum Praefectis de quibusdam negotiis ad Vniversitatem
spectantibus, per Collegia and Aulas denunciandis. Cum innotesceret
Commissionem Regiae Majestatis authoritate editam and emissam fuisse quibusdam
Viris Primariis ad inquirendum de Feodis and Salariis in Curiis Justitiae and
ratione Officiorum debitis: Nec constaret quantum haec Commissio ad
Vniversitatem pertineret: Placuit Vice-Cancellario, cum consilio and consensu
reliquorum Collegiorum and Aularum Praefectorum tunc praesentium, Dom. Doctori
Bancroft and Dom. Doctori Zouch (de aliis negotiis, ut videbatur, brevi
Londinum profecturis) commendare, ut hujusmodi Commissionis copiam impetrarent;
qua obtenta, melius consulere cum Honoratissimo Cancellario nostro valeamus, ne
quid gravius patiatur Vniversitas nostra Oxon. per Commissionem praedictam,
contra Consuetudines and Privilegia antiquitus indulta Vniversitati praedictae.

Acta, habita, and gesta fuerunt suprascripta, die and anno praedictis, in
praesentia mei JOHANNIS FRENCH, Registrarii Universitatis OXON.

EA est Beneficiorum tuorum amplitudo, Honoratissime Cancellarie, Thanks from
the University for my Care of their Liberties.
quibus Academiam nostram indies cumulare satagis, ut conturbare nobis necesse
sit, ac ne verbis quidem (quorum interim apud nos vilem and parabilem esse
oportet annonam) paria cum meritis Tuis facere liceat. Te tamen, quae est
Benificentiae tuae indolet, ne ingrati quidem debitores, nedum tarda vel cassa
nomina deterrent, quo minus beneficia tua beneficiis, ne perpluant, porro
pertegere, eaque ultro auctum ire pertendas. Veluti quod nuper Academiae, nec
huic tantum, sed and saeculo imputasti, cum Tua unius opera habitus est Musis
is honos, ut honoratissimus Senatus Regius legem, quam aliis dare consueverat,
a nobis acciperet. Hancque (...) sibi legem in posterum dixerit, ut si quid in
suis Edictis scriptum fuerit, quod per Privilegia Academica jus non sit juberi,
ejus iis Edictis nihilum jubeatur. Circumcisum scilicet and abrasum est hac
Cautione (...) quodcunque, cujus obtentu antehac Villani jura ac privilegia
Vniversitatis invadere and involare solebant, Honoratissimi Senatus jussa
capessere simulantes, revera juris sui pomaeria, ultra quam jus and fas est
proferentes. Et hujus quidem Benesicii gratiam Tibi, Honoratissime (...), in
solidum (...) agnoscimus. Quo adnitente, factum est, ut Honorissimus Senatus
Jussa sua in antecessum simul ac semel interpretari, consultius duxerit, quam
Villanis dubiam and ancipitem eorum Syntaxin permittere, qui ea interpretari,
quam exequi, malunt. Plus tamen est, quod Honoratissimis Viris hoc nomine
debetur, quam cui solvendo unquam pares esse possumus. Quamvis igitur in tali
obligationum genere nulla praestatio functionem recipiat, aut in solutum
imputetur, nisi ab ipso reo siat numeratio: Quia tamen Veneratio Honotarissimo
Senatui debita majorem a nobis exigit reverentiam, quam ut Scholasticis and
inanibus Literularum formulis ipsorum tempora morari audeamus, de quibus nihil
deliberari potest sine publico dispendio: Nostri officii parts optimo quidem
nomini, sed tamen vicario, Tibi, Honoratissime Cancellarie, delegamus. Tu Illis
pro nobis, nos Tibi pro Te, pro Illis, gratias agemus, Deus O. M. Te quam
diutissime Ecclesiae and Academiae huic nostrae sospitem and incolumem
praestet. Sic vovent

To the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bp. of
London, Chancellor of the University of OXFORD.

Honori Tuo addictissimi Clientes, Magistri and Scholares Universit. Oxon. Mr.
BRUCH e Coll. AEn. Nas. Procurat.
Mr. DOUGHTY e Coll. Merton. Procurat.


S. in Christo.
Sir,
THese are to Pray and Require you in his Majesty's name, that a My Letters to
the Vicechancellour about the publishing of Mr. Page's Book concerning Bowing
at the Name of Jesus.
Book lately Printed at Oxford, and made by Mr. Page of All Souls-College, be
presently put to sale and published. It is, as I am informed, in defense of the
Canon of the Church about Bowing at the name of JESUS, and modestly and well
written. And his Majesty likes not, that a Book boldly and ignorantly written
by Mr. Prinne against the Church, should take place, as the Churches Opinion
against her self, or as unable to be answered by the Church. If Mr. Page stick
at your Commands, show this Letter for your Warrant and his. So I leave you to
the Grace of God, and shall ever rest,

Fulham. June 22. Your Loving Friend, GVIL. London.


The occasion of this Letter was, that Mr. Baker, Secretary to my Predecessor,
The occasion of the next foregoing Letter.
(who no doubt, was privy to the business) had written to Mr. Page touching the
contrary; whose Letter here follows.

Good Mr. Page,
MY Lord of Canterbury is informed, that you are publishing a Mr. Baker's
Letter to Mr. Page about the not publishing of his Book etc. In my
Predecessour's time.
Treatise touching the Question of Bowing at the Name of JESUS, an Argument,
wherein Mr. Widows foolishly, and Mr. Prinne scurrilously, have already, to
the scandal and disquiet of the Church, exercised their Pens. His Grace has
formerly showed his dislike of them both, and hearing, that you take up the
Bucklers in a Theme of so small necessity, and of so great heat and distemper,
which will draw on new Replies, (for Prinne will not sit down, as an idle
Spectatour) and beget bitterness and intestine contestations at home amongst
our selves, he is much offended, that you do stickle and keep on foot such
questions, which may better be spoiled and silenced, than maintained and draw
into sideings and partakings. And therefore I am wished to advise you to
withdraw your self from these or the like domestic broils; and if your
Treatise be at the Press, to give it a stop and check, and by no means to
suffer the same to be divulged. For if you do, notwithstanding this Admonition,
proceed in the same intention of publishing it, you will repent you, and
perhaps draw more on your self of trouble and discontent, than you will reap
Credit or Advantage by the pursuance of so useless an Argument. If you were out
of your Cell, and saw the World abroad, you would not meddle with things of
this nature, wherein the Governors and chief Pilots of the Church discern more
harm and tempest to the Church, than you, that are unacquainted with
Ecclesiastical Estate, and the well ordering of it, can any way by Speculation
attain unto; no more, than a Scholar, that can read a Lecture of Theorical
Music, is able to play on a Lute or a Viol by his Bookish Rules, and
proportions of Sounds, which are there taught. I pray you to look hereunto, and
say, that a Friend advised you. And put not your self on a Business, whereof
you see but the Beginning. So with my Love remembered unto you, I rest,

Lambeth. May. 31. 1631. Your very loving Friend Will. Baker.


S. in Christo. Annus Cancellarii Secundus.

AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. The year is now at an end Dr. ( Smith
continued Vice Chancellor a Second year.
of my Vice-Chancellour's Government. And when I look back upon it, I must
needs acknowledge, he has taken a great deal of pains, and showed himself a
very discreet, able, and worthy Governor: And in all the passages of this
year, I do not find, but that he has given you all great satisfaction;
especially, in his Care for Order and Formalities; which, I hope, you will so
far like, as that you will make it away to recover the Ancient Honor of that
famous University in things of greater Consequence. And though the University
be full of able and discreet Governors; (to whom we shall, God willing,
hereafter commit this Office of Trust) yet because I have found Dr. Smith's
great Care in this former year, and because the First year does but enable his
Experience the better to manage the Second; I am desirous to put him to this
years pains also; And do therefore make choice of him to be my Vice Chancellor
for this year following. These are therefore to pray and require you to allow
of this my Choice of Dr. Smith, and to give him the best Counsel and Assistance
in all businesses, which may any way concern the Government and the Honor of
that famous University. And so I bid you very heartily farewell, and rest,

To my Loving Friends, the Vicechancellour, the Doctors, the Proctours, and the
rest of the Convocation of the University of Oxford.

Fulham. July 4. 1631. Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, GVIL. London.


S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. I have made all the convenient My Letters
sent with his Majesty's to the University about Fees. July 4. 1631.
speed I can, (as you well know) to have the Body of the Statutes of the
University digested into Order, and made fit for present use, as occasions
might be offered, and still heartily pray you for the quickening of that work.
For by that Delay, which has been made, a great inconvenience has been like
to arise to the prejudice of the Privileges of the University. For whereas I
thought the Moderation and ordering of Fees in the University, if any thing be
amiss therein, might have staid, till that Body of Statutes had been drawn up,
and then have been rectified under the Head belonging to it; it seems now far
otherwise. For I find, that a Friend of the University's gave intimation to
some Heads of Colleges of some things, which might be very prejudicial to your
Privileges, if they did proceed. I knew his Majesty had given out a Commission
to Examine Fees, and that the Commissioners were quick and strict; but I had
never seen the Commission; nor did I so much as dream, that the Universities
were included; or that his Majesty had any purpose, they should that way be
looked into. And therefore when Dr. Bancroft came unto me directed by Mr.
Vice Chancellor and diverse of the Heads of Houses upon the aforesaid
information, to make search after the Commission, and privately to acquaint me
with it, and to desire my Endeavor with his Majesty, that no foreign
Commission might come in, to the prejudice of the University Privilege; I was
much troubled at it. And the more, because I found, things had been so
privately carried from the knowledge of the Chancellours of both Universities.
But it fell out exceeding well, that I had notice of this business. For within
few days after, my Lord of Holland, upon like Information, had speech with me
about it. But his Majesty's resolutions for proceeding put us both to seek what
course to take, till at last we resolved to go Both together to him, and humbly
to move him in the University's behalf, that no Foreign Power might be sent to
the prejudice of their Privileges. And after much Debate, his Majesty was at
last very graciously pleass'd to grant our requests: Provided, that each
University respectively would meet, and by themselves reform, whatsoever was
found amiss in any Fees received and taken by any in the University, of what
Office or Condition soever. And that this Reformation of Fees should be made
according to the Letter and Tenor of his Commission. Hereupon he presently
called for Mr. Secretary Cook, and commanded him to direct a Letter to the
Chancellours of both the Universities, to give them Order for this business.
Which Letters of his Majesty you shall find here enclosed: And the like are
already His Majesty's Letters to be Registered
gone to Cambridge. And I must, and do pray and require you, that they be
published according to Course, and Registered, and Obeyed in all Points, as is
fitting: Assuring you, that if this be not done, his Majesty's Commissioners
will reform whatsoever you do not. And And for my part, I think it is happy we
came so timely to the knowledge of it. For if the Commissioners had once entered
upon it, it would have been a matter of far greater difficulty to take them
off, than it was now to stay them. And certainly, if ever it be my hap to know
That honorable Personage, that gave the first Information I shall give him
hearty Thanks for his Love to the Universities. For this breach once made upon
your Privileges might have laid open a wider gap in many other particulars of
like nature.

When you have Registered these Letters of his Majesty, I must pray you to send
the Original back to me. And for the Business it self, because his Majesty
look's for a speedy reformation, the best Counsel I can give you is this: That
the Delegates, which have the consideration The Delegates to settle presently
the Business of Fees.
of the Statutes now before them, may, by your direction and command, take the
Head about Fees next into Consideration, and settle that business presently,
that the other University may not outstrip us in Obedience to his Majesty.

Thus not doubting of your Care herein, nor of the University's conformity; and
expecting as present remedy of this Abuse, as may be made, I leave you to the
Grace of God, and rest,

To my Loving Friends, the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctours, and
the rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

Fulham July 4. 1631. Your Loving Friend, and Chancellor, GVIL. London.


The Tenor of the King's Letters Fallows,

CHARLES R.
RIGHT trusty, and Right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, His Majesty's
Letters to me about the (...) of the (...).
and Right Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and wellbeloved Counselor, We
greet you well. We have long had a gracious Intendment for the good of our
Subjects to rectify the Proceedings of all Courts and other Places, as well
within Liberties as without, in matter of their Fees and Duties which they
Challenge. To this purpose We have granted a Commission to some Lords of our
Privy Council and others, to Examine what they find amiss, that a remedy may be
found for the Abuse, where and in whomsoever it is, and the Fees of all
Officers, and Courts reduced to that which they were found to be allowed in the
Eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory: And this Commission we shall
pursue, till we have settled those things with Honor and Justice to the great
ease of all our Loving Subjects. Now whereas you, taking notice of this our
Intendment to reduce the Fees of both our Universities, (where you are our
Chancellours) as well as other places to the same Standard, have made humble
suit to Us, that this Commission may not trench upon the Liberties granted to
the Universities by our Royal Progenitors: These are first to let you know,
that We will as carefully preserve the Rights and Privileges of our
Universities, as We or our Progenitors have given or confirmed them: And then,
that our further Will and Pleasure is, that presently (to prevent our
Commission) you write expressly to your Deputy-Governours in either University,
to Will and Require them in Our Name, to rectify and reduce all Fees given to
Officers, Readers, Bedels, Registers, or others, for Degrees, or any thing
else, to That quantity which they bore in the said Eleventh year of Queen
Elizabeth. For the Abuse is great and burdensome unto them, which bring up
their Sons in Learning: And We will remedy it by Our Commission, if you
(according to your Places) do not see it remedied to our hands. And We are the
more Careful for Our Universities; Because we have not forgotten, that Our
Royal Father of ever blessed Memory gave Bountiful Gifts to supply diverse wants
There, which We assure Our self were not given, but with an intent, that when
they were possessed, the Fees should lessen, at least return to that just
proportion, to which we have limited them in our Commission. So We grant your
Suit, not to break the Liberties of our Universities, by sending another Power
upon them: But withal, We require you both, to send to our several Universities
rsepectively, that We may have present Redress of this Abuse; and that a Table
may be made according to the elevene th of Queen Elizabeth, and hung up in the
Congregation, and in some convenient place in every College and Hall, that
every man may know, what Fees he is to pay, and no man presume to take beyond
the Allowance in that Table, as he will answer it at his Peril: And we shall
look for an Account of this from you both respectively. Given under our Signet
at

To Our Right trusty and Right Wellbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl
of Holland, Chancellor of Our University of Cambridg: And to the Right
Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved Counselor, William
Lord Bishop of London, Chancellor of our University of OXFORD.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
GRatias agimus periculis quae te reddunt nobis indies chariorem, and lumen
Thanks from the University about their Fees.
pretiumque adjiciunt tam Vigilis Patroni merito. Rem perdifficilem
eluctabimur, si opera tua non simus foelicissimi. In moderandis Academiae
fraenis, nunquid opus est oculatiori Providentia? Tu quidem vix emicantia
periculorum semina a longinquo praevides, eaque aut prudenter caves aut
fortiter evellis. Nunquid opus est anxietate and cura? ubi nusquam occurrit
periculum, solicit circumspicis, indagare non desinis, quod metuis invenire,
ac totus quieti nostrae insomnis incubas. At nunquid suavi opus est in
adducendo militia? Non sinis imponi nobis vim necessitatis, vel in iis etiam,
quae ad nostrum spectant emolumentum: Sed aeque sanandi modo ac ipsi consulens
sanitati, aut ea imperas, quae sponte volumus, aut prius velle fias ea, quae
imperas: Ac tum demum, ubi voti ardor incaluit eundem Obsequii studio
ingeminatum accendis, non segnius, quam ventus secundo flamine proni impellit
cursum fluenti. Liberalium amici Artium sub Feodorum onere, and graduum
venalium caritate jam diu suspirarunt, diu tacuerunt. Quibus aderat morbi
eradicandi and animus and potestas, defuit exequendi ansa: donec Medicus
Epidemicus, hoc ulcus ubique recisurus, utpote in Curiis universis grassatum,
nos itidem, quamvis a saeculo seclusos, communi tamen peste laborantes,
communis convolvisset asperitate remedii, and Exoticae Potestati tradidisset
una corrigendos. Vtilis fuit medicina, invisa manus; sanari optabile, sanari
vero a parum benevolis fuit quaedam Foelicitatis miseria: praesertimcum in
Extraned Censura Exemplum lateret, viamque sterneret usurpabili Laicorum
tyrannidi. Quid ergo dicemus, Regi in mentem venisse, ut nos dormiscentes
solummodo expergefaceret? Certe ea mole fertur Majestas, ut semel commota aegre
possit vel ipsa se sistere. Expergesecit quidem, sed quod nihil tentavit
amplius, Tui opus Patrocinii agnoscimus. Benignitati Augustae Deo cum proximae
tum simillimae tribuendum, primo quod nostri causa excanduit, tum postea quod
nobis domesticam proprii sinus animadversionem indulsit: Sed quod Regem prius
pacatum invenimus, quam iratum, and mente subito compositum, quasi rugas ideo
tantum induisset, ut exueret, hoc sagaci tuae Providentiae, and maturo
tribuimus Intercessui. O Aulae and Academiae vinculum! O qui Regem nobis per
lenitatem, Nos Regi per obsequium attemperas, sive plus nostri affectus, sive
gratitudinis, sive obedientiae velis, nequid unquam, quod velis, desit, cape ad
summum omnia. Nobis dulce erit Prudentiae tuae animum summisse dedere in
durissimis: Sed levamini commodoque nostro aurem morigeram praebere, and jussu
subire, quae ultro expetimus, quanta hilaritatis ecstasi properemus! Sub tali
jugo incurvari lucnum est. Crescit ex imperio libertas; dominatur, dum paret,

E. domo nostrae Congregationis. July 25. 1631. Honori vestro devinctissima,
Oxonien. Academia.


July 26 1631. The first Stone of my Building at St. John Baptist's College was
laid.

NOW that this intended Good may come the fuller upon the My Building at S.
John's
University, a great help must come from you and your Successors, from time to
time in That Office. And first, while the awe of this is upon them, you must
call for the present performance of those things, which his Majesty enjoined;
especially, the present drawing A (...) of my Letters to the Vice Chancellor
concerning Boots, Taverns, and the Kings Declaration, etc. Sept. 23. 1631. This
Letter was here placed out of order, to the end there might come nothing
between the great Business which follows.
up of the Statutes concerning Appeals, and of the standing Delegacy of the
Heads of Colleges and Halls, to meet every week or every fortnight at least,
as well in Vacation as Term, both to consider of the present businesses of the
University, and to prepare such things, as are fit for Convocation. Which
Statutes of this Delegacy, and the Appeals were they once settled, would ease
half of the business of the University, and repay all the pains that is or can
be taken about them. Next, I pray call the Heads together, and give them
warning concerning their several Companies, That no man of what degree soever
(and therefore much less Youths) be suffered to go in Boots and Spurs together
with their Gowns. And if any Head of a House permit it in his own College,
whither my Authority reaches not, I shall complain where he will be unwilling
to Answer. And for your self I pray and require you, that if any man be seen
abroad with them in Town out of his College, you presently proceed against him
according to such (...), as you have De (...) Scholastico, etc. And the like
for haunting of Inns or Taverns, or other Drinking-Houses, (...) Masters of
Arts, that should give younger Youths better example. And that all Bachelours
of Arts, as well (...) as others, Bachelors of (...) to uncover their heads
when they meet their Superiors in Degree or be in presence with them.
receive a strict command by their several Governors, that while (...) any
(...) they pass along the (...) or any public place, they uncover their heads
and do that reverence which beseems them, to any Doctor, Bachelour of Divinity,
Master of Arts, or Bachelour of Law or (...), whom they shall meet or be in
presence with. And that you proceed to the punishment of all such as fail in
this kind. And (...) I pray acquaint Dr. Prideaux and Dr. (...), that I will
look they shall read their several Lectures as the Statutes require. And if Dr.
Prideaux and Dr. Fell to read their Lectures according to the Statutes. The
keeping of his Majestys Declaration urged: And to punish Offenders against it.
they read treatably, that their younger Auditors may observe by writing (if
they please) one Lecture may be broken into many, to their own great (...), and
the greater profit of them that hear them, and a Face of the University be kept
in that particular. And last of all, these are strictly to require you, that
since his Majesty has so lately and fully expressed himself for the keeping of
his Declaration in all points, that you show your self very careful in that
particular, and that you proceed impartially against Delinquents any way, that
neither one nor the other may have cause to say, that you favor a Party. And
you have great reason to be watchful in this, because you know it was objected
against you at Woodstock in Dr. Potter's Case: which though it appeared
palpably false, yet it may and ought to be a Summons to you to look warily to
your self. And some eye it is fit you should bear toward me even in this
particular, that my Government be not slandered by it.

Septem. 23. 1631. GVIL. London.


In this year there arose a great stir in the University by some factious The
troublesome (...) arising in the (...) against Government.
men, which labored to disturb the Government both in their Sermons and in
Convocation, and by secret Plotings. Their professed aim was, to dissolve the
Delegacy appointed for the ordering and settling of the Statutes, and to set
the Proctours, in as cunning a way as they could, against the Chancellor, till
they had almost brought all Disorder into the U niversity. How far they
proceeded, and what issue their plots had, will appear in the Acts following.
The Head of all these Tumultuous stirs was by violent presumptions conceived to
be one whom it least became for his Coat-sake: And I shall spare his name,
rather for his Coat than himself.

Right Reverend, My Honorable Good Lord,
I Have not hitherto troubled your Lordship with Letters of Information Dr.
Duppa's Letters to me concerning the late Disorders in Oxford.
concerning any of our University-affairs, knowing into what sufficient hands
you have committed the trust of them, from whence I imagine you receive a
weekly account. But such has been the height of our late Disorders both
without and within the Pulpit, that should I not some way express, that I am
troubled with it, I might be thought a very insensible Member of this Body,
which you govern. For these late stirs are not of an Ordinary nature; but
strike at the very Root of Government, which now lies bleeding. The
Vicechancellor's d power is Questioned: The Proctours, that should assist him,
receive the Appeals of Delinquents from him: The Delegates such, as are rather
Parties than Judges. And I could wish this were all. But this Gangrene will
spread farther. For the University by these means is likely to become the
Seed-plot of Mutiners, to (...) both Church and Commonwealth with. But my
comfort is, that the way of their own Choosing, the way of Appeal, (which it
may be at first they did not think of) must at last end before his Sacred
Majesty: For there is nothing left but the Voice of such a Power to allay this
Storm. The whole University, though with several affections, stands now at
Gaze: And the end of this Business must either prove an awful peace, or the
letting loose of all Confusion.

My Duty to my King, my Love to Peace, and my respect to your Lordship has
commanded this Letter from me; which if you please to pardon, you will tread in
the steps of your former goodness, and oblige me to the continuance of my
prayers for you, whom you shall ever find

Chapter Chapter Aug. 1. 1631. Your Lordships most humble and true servant Brian Duppa.


To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of WILLIAM SMITH, Dr. of Divinity, and Vicechancellor of
the University of OXFORD.
WHereas of late the Peace of your Majesty's University of Oxford has been
much disturbed through the Sedicious practices of Dr. Smith, Vicechancellor,
his Petition to the King against Ford's Sermon.
some distempered Spirits, who have not only in their Sermons presumed to
handle diverse points of Doctrine prohibited by your Majesty's strait Command;
but also by some not obscure passages have endeavored to fasten the imputation
of Apostasy and Backsliding upon some Persons of Eminent quality there and
elsewhere: And whereas one Thomas Foord, having in a late Sermon of his at S.
Mary's offended in that kind, was thereupon by your humble Petitioner
(according to the Statutes of the University) convented, and required to
exhibit a Copy of his Sermon: And upon his Refusal so to do, was therefore
commanded to Prison: He likewise contrary to his Oath disobeying that command
also: And Appealing from your Petitioner to the Congregation-house (which by
the Statutes of the University, in that case of breach of Peace, he might not
do): The Proctors notwithstanding (which should have assisted your Petitioner)
received the Appeal, and the major part of the Delegates entertained it (to the
wrong both of your humble Petitioner and the Government of the University) and
quitted the said Foord, as not guilty of the Perturbation of the Peace. And
whereas upon this Sentence of theirs, your humble Petitioner finding himself
aggrieved, appealed to the House of Convocation, through default of Appearance
of a major part of Delegates appointed thereunto, your humble Petitioners Cause
(being there deserted and let fall) is at lengh according to the Statutes of
the University, devolved into your sacred Majesty's hands: And whereas one
Giles Thorn, by a scandalous Sermon of his lately preached in the same Place,
has likewise farther disturbed the Peace of the University, and more are like
to follow (especially not wanting Abettors to give them encouragement) unless
some speedy course be taken for prevention.

The humble suit therefore of your Majesty's poor Petitioner is, that out of
your special Clemency always plentifully extended toward the Church, and her
Seminaries, your Majesty would be graciously pleased to take into your own
Royal Consideration, the preservation of the Peace and Tranquillity of your
University, and of the Authority of her Governors against the Practices of
such, as under the color of Religion or Liberty oppugn both Church and Civil
Government: That so these Troubles of the University may have a present end by
your Majesty's happy Coming so near it. And your humble Petitioner shall pray,
etc.


IN Dei nomine, Amen. Coram vobis Notario publico, publicaqu and authentica
persona, ac testibus fide dignis hic praesentibus, Ego The Viceehancellors
Appeal to his Majesty (...) Ford's Case.
Guilielmus Smith Sacrae Theologiae Professor, Vniversitatis Oxon.
Vicecancellarius ac Commissarius legitime constitutus, animo Appellandi, deque
nullitate and nullitatibus omnibus and singulis infra scriptis aeque
principaliter querelandi, omnibus melioribus via, modo, and juris forma, quibus
melius aut efficacius de jure debeo aut possum, nec non ad omnem and quemcunque
Juris and Facti effectum exinde quovismodo sequi valentem, dico, allego, and in
his scriptis in jure propono; Quod cum nos praefatus Vicecancellarius ex
Officio nostro rite and legitime procedentes contra quendam Thomam Forde de
Aula S. Mariae Magd. in Vniversitae Oxon. Clericum, Artium Magistrum, occasion
cujusdam Concionis in Ecclesia parochiali B. Mariae Virginis Oxon. per dictum
Thomam Ford die Dominico, viz. duodecimo die mensis Junii ultimo praeteriti,
palam in praesentia nostra in coetu. Academico habitae and factae, eundem
Thomam Forde personaliter requisitum and monitum per Nos ad Nobis exhibendam in
scriptis Concionem suam praedictam, seu veram copiam ejusdem, ut legitimo
examine insuper explorari posset, eo quod (ut ei per Nos objiciebatur)
continebat nonnulla, ad pacis and tranquillitatis dictae Vniversitatis and
Ecclesiae perturbationem tendentia contra Jura and Statuta Regni, and Statuta
Vniversitatis praedictae, ac contra Proclamationes and Declarationes Regiae
Majestatis antehac, public editas and promulgatas, eidemque legitimae nostrae
monitioni parere contumaciter renuentem and recusantem, sexto die Julii ultimo
praeteriti judicialiter procedentes, ob ejus in hac part contemptum and
contumaciam Carceri mandaverimus, juxta Leges ac Statuta Vniversitatis
praedictae, and laudabiles ejusdem Consuetudines in similibus usitatas: Cui
etiam Mandato nostro idem Thomas Ford obsequi express recusaverit, and
praetensam quandam Appellationem ad venerabilem Domum Congregationis
Magistrorum Regentium intra dictam Vniversitatem, a nostro mandato sive decreto
praedicto de facto utcunque interposuerit: Cujus praetensae Appellationis
praetextu, Magister Atherton Bruche and Magister Johannes Doughtye,
Procuratores Vniversitatis praedictae, quosdam Delegatos, authoritate ejusdem
Domus Congregationis nominarunt, ad audiendum and determinandum, utrum
praedictus Thomas Forde reus fuerit Perturbationis Pacis in causa habita coram
nobis praedicto sexto die Julii. Quibus Delegatis dictam Commissionem
acceptantibus, quidam eorundem Delegatorum, scilicet venerabiles Viri, Dr.
Prideaux, Dr. Wilkinson, Dr. Hoode, Magister Hill, Mr. Hyde, Mr. Gerrard, Mr.
Abbots, Mr. Howson, and Mr. Clay, se pro Judicibus Delegatis praedictis dictae
vener abilis Domus Congregationis utcunque gerentes, perperam nulliter, inique
and (...) (eorum Reverentiis semper salvis) per omnia procedentes, quandam
praetensam Sententiam, sive quoddam (...) Judicium pro part and in favorem
(...). Tho. Forde, de facto, cum de jure non potuerunt nec debuerunt, in
scriptis (ut asseritur) tulerunt and promulg averunt: Per quod eorum praetensum
Judicium antedictum Tho. Forde non fuisse reum perturbationis Pacis, in causa,
quae coram nobis habita erat in Camera nostra in Collegio Wadhami dicto sexto
die Julii ultimo praeteriti, absque Causae cognitione, Jurisque ac Judiciorum
and Statutorum Vniversitatis praedictae ordine minime observato, sed penitus
spreto and praetermisso, utcunque pronunciaverunt and declaraverunt. In omnibus
etiam injuste, perperam, nulliter de facto and inique (eorum Reverentiis semper
salvis) tam ex eorum praetenso officio, quam ad instantiam, petitionem,
procurationem, sollicitationem, and persuasionem dicti Thomae Forde subdo. las,
iniquas, and injustas, in mei (...) Vicecancellarii, dictique Officii mei, and
boni regiminis dictae Vniversitatis Oxon. grave damnum (...) non modicum and
gravamen. Vnde Ego praefatus Vicecancellarius sentiens me ex praemissis
gravaminibus, nullitatibus, iniquitatibus, injustitiis, and injuriis omnibus
and singulis, ex actis, factis, and gestis praetensis dictorum venerabilium
Virorum praetensorum Judicum Delegatorum colligibilibus, and praesertim ex
eorum praetensa Declaratione sive Pronunciatione praefati Thomae Forde non esse
reum perturbationis Pacis in dicta Causa per nos contra eum, ut praefertur,
mota sive habita, indebite praegravari, ab eisdem and eorum quolibet ad
venerabilem Domum Convocationis Doctorum and Magistrorum Regentium and
non-Regentium intra dictam Vniversitatem Oxon, debitis loco and tempore
Appellavi. In qua Domo, Authoritate ejusdem, per Procuratores praedictos
nominabantur and dabantur Delagati ad audiendum and determinandum dictam causam
sive gravamen meum. Quorum Delegatorum major pars primo die per Statuta dictae
Vniversitatis assignati loco solito convenerunt, dictamque Causam sive gravamen
meum audierunt, and pro ulteriori ejusdem causae expeditione continuarunt and
prorogarunt eorum jurisdictionem in proximum diem extunc sequentem. Quo die
adveniente, dicta major pars Delegatorum praedictorum eandem causam meam rursus
audierunt, and deinde prorogarunt and continuarunt eorum jurisdictionem, and
assignarunt ad audiendum eorum Sententiam sive finale Judicium in dicta Causa
in diem proximum extunc sequentem, Scil. in tertium sive ultimum diem juxta
formam Statutorum praedictae Vniversitatis pro eorum jurisdictione indultum. Et
dicto tertio die adveniente, major pars, prout requiritur, dictorum Delegatorum
non convenerunt, ita ut dicta Causa mea debitum finem sive effectum sortiri non
potuerit. Et sic Causam meam sive gravamen meum indeterminatum reliquerunt,
mihi ea ratione justitiam denegando; it ut praedicta mea Appellatio inanis
fieret periensque sine fructu ad instantiam, procurationem, sive
sollicitationem dicti Thomae Forde subdolas, iniquas, and injustas, in mei
grave damnum praejudiciumque non modicum and gravamen. Vnde Ego praefatus
Vicecancellarius, sentiens me ex praemissis gravaminibus mihi per dictos
Delegatos Domus Convocationis dicto tertio die eorum jurisdictionis, ut
praemittitur, non convenientes, and ex illorum mihi denegatione justitiae, ut
praefertur, illatis, multipliciter laesum and gravatum esse, ab eisdem and
eorum quolibet ad Serenissimum in Christo Principem and Dominum nostrum,
Carolum Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regem, Fidei
Defensorem, etc. (Cujus protectioni me and Causam meam humiliter submitto) rite
and legitime in his scriptis Appello and provoco, Apostolosque peto primo,
secundo, and tertio instanter instantius, and instantissime, mihi fieri, edi,
tradi, and deliberari cum effectu. Et protestor, quod non sunt december seu saltem
quindecim dies, adhuc plene elapsi, ex quo mihi de praemissis gravaminibus per
dictos Delegatos Domus Convocationis, ut praefertur, illatis, certitudinaliter
constabat and constat: Quodque in praesentia dictorum Judicum Delegatorum
praedictae Domus Convocationis Appellarem, si eorum praesentias commode habere
potuissem: Et protestor insuper, de corrigendo and reformando has meas
Appellationes and Querelas, and easdem in meliorem and competentiorem formam
redigendo, and de eisdem addendo, and ab eisdem detrahendo, and de intimando
easdem omnibus and singulis, quorum interest seu interesse poterit quovismado,
juxta Jurisperitorum consilium, pro loco and tempore congruis and opportunis,
prout moris est, juris, atque styli. Super quibas omnibus and singulis peto a
te Notario publico Instrumentum publicum sive Instrumenta publica, unum sive
plura, mihi confici, Testesque hic praesentes testimonium inde perhibere.

Lecta and interposita fuit haec Appellatio octavo die Augusti Anno 8. Aug.
Domini 1631. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defendoris, etc. Septimo, in Hospitio
Guardiani Collegii Wadhami in Vniversitate Oxon. intra Collegium praedictum
notorie situato, per venerabilem Virum Guillelmum Smith, Sacrae Theologiae
Professorem, Collegii Wadhami praedicti Guardianum, atque (...) Oxon.
Vicecancellarium, qui tunc and ibidem appellavit, Apostolos petiit, protestatus
and querelatus est, (...) caetera fecit and exercuit in omnibus and per omnia,
prout in hujusmodi Protocollo continetur, In praesentia mei Notarii Publici
subscripti, praesentibus etiam tunc and ibidem testibus subscriptis ad
praemissa testificanda specialiter rogatis, scil. Venerabilibus Viris Guilielmo
(...) Legum Doctore, Decano Ecclesiae Cathedralis Wigorn. and Richardo Zouch
Legum Doctore, nec non Richardo Matthew Literato.

Ita testor Guil. Juxon.
Rich. Zouch.
Ric. Matthew.
Humfridus Jones, Notarius Publicus.


Upon this Petition and Appeal, his Majesty coming that year in The great
Hearing at Woodstock.
progress to Woodstock, he resolved to hear the Cause Himself, and put an end
to those Factious and Disorderly courses, which were grown too heady for any
other Hand. And upon (...), Aug. 23. his Majesty, in the presence of all the
Lords of his Counsel, which were with him (diverse Heads of Colleges being also
present) heard at large all Complaints and Grievances on either side: And
concluded, That both the Proctours should in the next Convocation resign their
Offices, and Two other of the same Colleges be put in their Places: And that
Thomas Ford of Magdalen-hall, Giles Thorn of Baliol College, and John Hodges
of Exeter College, should be banished the University: And that Doctor Prideaux,
Rector of Exeter College, and Dr. Wilkinson, Principal of Magdalen, should then
and there receive, in the presence of the King and the Lords, a public and
sharp Reprehension for their misgovernment and countenancing the Factious
Parties. The Lord Viscount Dorchester, then Principal Secretary of State, was
commanded to deliver this Sentence from the King, which he did accordingly, and
gave the Reprehension as was enjoined: The King himself then publicly
Declaring, that Dr. Prideanx deserved to lose his Place more than any of the
rest, but was content to spare him, partly because he had been His ancient
Servant, and hoped he would look better to himself for the future, and partly
because I entreated Favor for him. As for Francis Hide, who had been Proctor
the former year, and was as mutinous as any of the rest, he was out of the
University when the Summons came for their Appearance before the King, and so
kept himself till the Hearing was past: Yet nevertheless so much appeared
against him, as that afterward he was glad to come in, and make his
submission, that he might escape so. Then his Majesty commanded Secretary
Dorchester to write a Letter for Him to Sign, and to be sent to the University,
and in Convocation to require the performance of this Sentence in every
particular. This Letter was written and sent accordingly; and the Tenor of it
follows in haec verba.

At WOODSTOCK, Aug. 23. 1631. CHARLES, R.
TRusty and wellbeloved, We greet you well. Having at full His Majesty's Letter
sent to the University after the great Hearing at Woodstock, Aug. 24. 1631.
length, and with good Deliberation, heard the Cause concerning the late great
Disorders and Disobedience to Government in That Our University of Oxford, and
being moved by the greatness of the offenses to Punish some persons according
to their several Demerits, and to Order some things for the more settled and
constant Government of That our University hereafter: Our Will and Pleasure is,
That you forthwith upon the receipt hereof, call a Convocation for performing
and registring these Our Sentences and Decrees, as follows.

And first, We pronounce your Appeal to be just, And return Tho. Forde, Thorn
and Hodges banished the (...).
Forde of Magdelane Hall, Giles Thorn of Baliol College, and William Hodges of
Exeter College (whose Causes were likewise submitted unto Us) unto your power,
And command you that forthwith they be all three Banished the University,
according as your Statutes in that behalf require.

Secondly, Because the Proctours, which should have been Assistants The
Proctours Bruche and Doughty to resign their Office.
to the Vicechancellour, and Helps for upholding of Authority and Government,
have most unworthily behaved themselves in countenancing all manner of
Disobedience, in receiving Appeals in case of manifest perturbation and breach
of Peace, and by their cunning practicing after these Appeals received,
especially Thorne's, whose Contumacy was notorious, and his Sermon base:
Therefore for them, Our Pleasure and Command is, as was yesterday delivered
unto themselves, that they shall presently resign their Office in Convocation
according to Course, as if their year had been fully expired, and the two
Colleges, of which they are, may name two others to succeed in their Office the
rest of the year, to be chosen and settled according to your late Statutes made
in that behalf. And for the Execution of this, you are (as we have before
ordered) presently to call a Convocation, and publish this Our Sentence, and
proceed accordingly.

Thirdly, For Francis Hyde of Christchureh, and Richard Hill of Brazen Nose, we
require, that so soon as they return to Our University, Hyde and Hill to be
warned at their Return to be in a readiness to answer to their several Charges
you warn them to be in a readiness, and give notice to your Chancellor, when
they are there, that they may be sent for to Answer such things as are laid
against them: And when they are heard, they shall receive such Sentence, as the
merits of their Cause deserve.

Now for the things which we think fit to settle presently in That Government,
they are these.

First, We Command, that if the Vicechancellour for the time being Every man
to give in a true Copy of his Sermon at the Demand of the Vicechancellor and
that upon Oath.
think fit to call for any Man's Sermon, which upon his own hearing, or
complaint made by any other, seems offensive in any kind, the Party of what
Degree soever he be, shall deliver a true and perfect Copy to the
Vicechancellour upon Oath, which when he has perused, he shall Convent him, if
he find cause, either by the Statute of Le cester, (as it is called) or by the
later Statute of the (...) Doctors, at the Vicechancellours choice, until at
this New settling of your Statutes one entire and absolute Statute be made of
Both.

Secondly, That if the Vicechancellour find cause to Command any man Any man
commanded to Prison by the Vicechancellour, to submit
to Prison, the Party so Commanded and sent by a Beadle, shall (for so the
Statutes require) presently submit, and go quietly to Prison: And if they do
not, That Refusal shall be as a Breach of the Peace, and not have any Appeal

Thirdly, We Command, that the Delegates, which at this present The Delegates
commanded to draw up the first two Statutes concerning Appeals before they
Proceed.
are in hand with the Statutes, make all the speed that possibly they can, for
the finishing of that Great and Excellent Work; yet so as that presently they
lay all other Statutes aside, till they have drawn up two Perfect and
sufficient Statutes for Causes of Appeal, the one in matters of Instance, and
those things, that belong to the Chancellour's Court There; the other for all
kind of Appeals in other Causes whatsoever; and that they keep as near to the
ancient Statutes of our University as possibly they can, so as they may also
meet with all the present Inconveniences. And likewise that they presently draw
up the form of A weekly Meeting every Monday of the Heads of Colleges and Halls.
another Statute for the weekly Meeting every Monday in Term and out of Term of
all the Heads of Colleges and Halls, that shall be in Town, to consider of the
Peace and Government of our University, as occasion, may arise: That so all
things may be deliberately put (when there is Cause) to the Convocation
according to such Directions, as we shall give to your Chancellor, from whom
you shall receive them. And these Our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant
on this behalf. Given under Our Signet, at Our Honor of Woodstock the 24th day
of August in the seventh year of Our Reign. 1631.

IN Convocatione habit a 26 die Augusti 1631. promulgata sunt Edicta Convocatio
habita circa Edicta Regis.
a Serenissima Regis Majestate ad Venerabilem Virum, Doctorem Smith, Sacrae
Theologiae Professorem, and Vice-Cancellarium Vniversitatis Oxon. missa, in
quibus Sententia Serenissimi Regis prius ore tenus lata de Thoma Forde, AEgidio
Thorn, and Johanne Hodges ex Academia exterminandis, tum de Athertono Bruch
and Johanne Doughtye Procuratoribus munere Procuratorioprivandis, nune scriptis
consignata, ac privato Sigillo munita; Ac insuper Edict a quaedam Regia circa
Concionum Censuram, and Appellandi potestatem, aliaque ad Regimen Academiae
spectantia, transmissa sunt ad Venerabilem Vice-Cancellarium.

Deinde perfectis hisce Regis Literis, Procuratores Regio mandato alacriter The
Proctours Obey, and lay down their Offices.
Morem gerentes Officii sui Insignia humillime deposuerunt. Et Venerabilis Vir,
Doctor Ratcliffe Principalis Collegii AEnei-Nasi, and Magister Turner Collegii
Merton. Vice-Custos, juxta factam sibi a Serenissima Re=gis Majestate
potestatem alios Procuratores ex iisdem Collegiis substituendi praesentarunt
egregios viros a se juxta novissima Statuta Regia nominatos: Procuratores. Mag.
Earls (...) Coll. Merton.
Ille scilicet Magistrum Laurentium Washington Collegio AEnei-Nasi; Hic vero
Magistrum Johannem Earls e Collegio Merton, ut pro eo quod superat istius unni
admitterentur ad munus Procuratorium obeundum. Deinde Mag. Washington Nas.
(...) Coll. AEn.
proestitis per praefatos Magistrum Earls and Washington respective juramentis
de suprema Regiae Majestatis authoritate agnoscenda, de Fidelitate sive
Allegiantia, nec non de officiis Procuratorum fideliter praestandis, juxta
Statuta and Decreta in eu part edita and provisa, admissi respective fuerunt
ad officia Procuratoria, and statim iisdem Dominus Vice-Cancellarius officiorum
Insignia in manus tradidit, viz. Claves and Libros. Deinde hujusmodi
Dispensatio petita erat.

Supplicant Venerabili Convocationi Doctorum, Magistrorum Regentium and
non-Regentium Procuratores partis hujus anni, ut differatur eorum Computus in
diem, quando reddendus sit Computus pro uno anno integro. Conceditur
simpliciter.

Cum nos Guilielmus Smith Sacrae Theologiae Professor, Honoratissimi
Cancellarii Bannitio Magistrorum praemissorum secundum Edicta Regis.
Vniversitatis Oxon. Commissarius sive Vice-Cancellarius, contra Thomam Forde
Clericum, Magistrum Artium, ex Aula St. Mariae Magd. in Vniversitate Oxon.
AEgidium Thorn Clericum, S. Theol. Bac. e Collegio Baliol. and Guilielmum
Hodges Clericum, Magistrum Artium, Collegii Exon. Socium, Vniversitatis
praedictae pro quibusdem pravis and offensivis assertionibus sive Materiis
contra Edicta Regia, and ad perturbationem pacis and tranquilitais
Vniversitatis Oxon. notorie tendentibus in quibusdam eorum respective
Concionibus in Ecclesiae Beatae Mariae Virginis Oxon. Anno instante, viz. 1631.
and Mensibus ejusdem traditis and promulgatis juxta Statuta Vniversitatis
praedictae, and Edicta Regia processimus; and deinde Causis eisdem ad Regiam
Majestatem devolutis iidem praedicti Thomas Forde, AEgidius Thorn, and
Guilielmus Hodges coram Serenissima Regia Majestate, Regiis suis Consiliariis
assidentibus legitime and judicialiter citati and comparentes de eisdem pravis
assertionibus sive materiis in eorum respective Concionibus praedictis aliisque
enormibus legitime etiam convicti fuerint: Vnde Serenissima Majestas Regia,
habito Honoratissimorum Consiliariorum suorum Consilio eosdem singulos ab
Vniversitate praedicta Banniendos and expellendos fore decreverit, and nobis
Banniendos and expellendos mandaverit, and remisserit; Idcirco Nos, Guilielmus
Smith, Vice-Cancellarius and Commissarius antedictus, praefatos Thomam Forde,
AEgidium Thorn, and Guilielmum Hodges juxta mandatum Regium and Statuta dict
ae Vniversitatis erga ejusmodi Delinquentes provisa, Privilegiis Vniversitatis
privandos and exaendos fore, and a finibus ej usdem expellendos, exterminandos,
and banniendos fore decernimus, prout eosdem Thomam, AEgidium, and Guilielmum
and ipsorum quemlibet sic privamus, exuimus, expellimus, exterminamus, and
bannimus, ipsorumque quemlibet pro sic privato, exuto, expulso, exterminato,
and bannito declaramus and publicamus: Intimantes etiam iisdem, and eorum
cuilibet quod intra quatuor dies proxime post publicationem praesentium ab
Vniversitate praedicta and finibus ejusdem recedant, and exeant, recedat and
exeat: Monentes and intimantes peremptory and per praesentes sic monemus, quod
nullus infra Praecinctum Vniversitatis praedictos Thomam, AEgidium, and
Guilielmum, aut eorum aliquem acceptet, foveat, aut defendat sub poena juris.
Dat. sub Sigillo Officii Cancelariatus Vniversitatis Oxon. vicesimo die mensis
Augusti, Anno Dom. 1631. The Chapel of Queen's-Coll. Wainscotted.


In this year was the Chapel at Queen's=College Wainscotted.


Right Reverend, my most Honored good Lord,
HOW much I am bound to thank my good God, who in the midst of Mr. Hill's
Letter to me, how he was mislead by Dr. Prideaux in this business.
trouble has so much blessed me with your Lordship's grace and favor to roll
my self upon. In confidence, that through these Clouds by your Lordship's
goodness and mediation the Royal favor of my most gracious and blessed
Sovereign will shine upon me. Nemo proficiens erubescit, says Tertul. No man
is ashamed to relate the story of his offense, when he is come to himself, and
begins to thrive in the way of a better opinion and judgment. It has been my
great grief and misery, but to be thought to be possessed with that damned
Spirit of opposition, which in Public exercise I have cried down and conjured,
or to give fire to any factious Spirit to rebel against Authority and the
breath of Heaven. Omnis sermo ad forensem famam a domesticis emanat authoribus,
says the Orator. I know no malice can truly prevent the Credit of my words. I
thank my God, I have been often an occasion of Peace, and quietness within my
College; Never was before engaged in any such mad affront, for which I shall
ever condemn my self upon the Theater of my own Conscience, and suspect my
Leaders. How easy a thing is it for some men in some eminent and leading places
to give occasion to quiet and temperate Spirits to Rebel against their own
Conscience and ingenuity! Therefore (says St. Austin) might the Example of
Cato have prevailed much, when he slew himself, Non quia solus id fecerat, not
because he alone had done so, Sed quia vir doctus and probus habebatur, but
because he was esteemed to be a learned and an honest Man. Two glorious Titles,
which touch and confine the hearts and affections of all good men, if they
sometimes prove not false fires, to delude the World and cheat the weaker in
their opinions. I must not much trespass upon your Lordship's many serious and
weighty affairs. How gladly would I enlarge and unbowel my self in any Style of
true and hearty submission! Mihi fama posthac vilius constabit. So beseeching
the continuance of your Lordship's favorable respect, and good opinion of me,
I shall be ever bound to pray for your Lordship's prosperity and happiness.

From Brazen-Nose Coll. in Oxon. October. 23. 1631. Your Lordship's most humble
and devoted Servant, Rich. Hill.


Right Reverend, and Right Honorable,
IT has added some degrees more to my Sorrows, that I have not Another Letter
of Mr. Hill's to me about Dr. Prideaux.
given your Lordship better satisfaction. As my Tongue has been the true and
even Pulse of my Heart, so my desire is my Pen should be the true and plain
expression.

True it is, that the Example of Dr. Prideaux, my Father (whom with Reverence I
am to name) too much ruled within my breast. For I could not in any Charity
believe, that he, who had been so often Vice Chancellor, would any way seem to
betray or minorate the Authority and Power of that place. Besides (that every
man may rather bear his own burden) I confess that my own fancy doted so much
upon that late 8th Edict, mistaking it both in its end and latitude. For it is
impossible that any one Decree can in it self be so round and full; as to meet
so closely with all manner of Offenders in all circumstances and several
Degrees of offenses: much less seem any way to confine and bind the hands of
authority from punishing according to discretion, even by virtue also of that
general statute of obedience, which sweetly runs through all, and indeed is the
golden Chain or main tie and link of all.

By this, may it please your good Lordship, there was no malice here, but
Error, and such an Error, that begot both in my self and others a strange mad
stupidity, that one among ten could not be able, or so happy upon the sudden
to look up to that power which is the rule and perfection, the life and Crown
of all. I beseech your Lordship to set a period to these (amidst many other)
the troubles of

From Brazen Nose Coll. Oxon. Nov. 7th. 1631. Your Lordship's ever truly
devoted Servant, Rich: Hill.


Right Worthy Sir,
YOU cannot but know, (though I think you have almost forgotten) Mr. Loyde's
Letter to the Vice-Chancel lour.
what high displeasure I am sallen into by my unfortunate attendance and
behavior in a Del gacy. Had my intentions been really, as foul, as information
has derived them to be, I should not now dare to entreat your pardon. I had
not lately durst so near to have approached unto so great Integrity, as to wait
upon your most Honorable Chancellor. His Lordship was pleased to vouchsafe me
access; was pleased to acquaint me with the charge of my guilt. To whom when my
eadeavoured excuses (for defense I thought not of) could not yield
satisfaction, His Lordship (as inclined to show me favor) commanded me to
signify thus much to you, as also to intimate, that he did expect to hear from
you, what satisfaction you should conceive fit to be given by me for so public
an Injury. Sir, you best know my offense, and so what punishment it merits, as
also (which is my comfort) what kind best sorts with ingenuity. In what
Condition I now stand, I am severely sensible; how to better it, I know not,
Unless you shall vouchsafe by remitting those errors, which weakness of
judgment (not strength of Faction or disaffection to Authority) engaged me in,
to make me capable of favor. I humbly crave your pardon for so long
interrupting your more serious employments, and shall wait for and submit unto
whatsoever you shall be pleased to determine of,

London, Nov. 13. 1631. Your Humble Servant, Francis Hyde,


COnvocatio habita erat die Mercurii, viz. 15 die Decembris Anno Convocatio
habita 15 December. 1631. circa Statuta quaedam de appellat. and convent.
praefectotum.
Dom. 1631. in qua venerabilis Vir Dr. Smith S. Theologiae Professor, and Almae
Vniversitatis Oxon. Vice-Cancellarius, significavit venerabili Caetui Doctorum,
Magistrorum regent. and non regent. Delegat. compilasse Statuta quaedam de
Appellationibus, nec non Statutum aliud de Conventu Praefectorum Collegiorum
and Aularum die Lunae cujuslibet septimanoe per totum annum, tam in Vacationum
quam Terminorum temporibus juxta Edicta Serenissimae Regiae Majestatis
Woodstochiae edita, and habita, and ad venerabilem domum Convocationis
transmissa. Quae Statuta in eadem Convocatione promulgabantur, and unanimi
assensu and consensu Doctorum, Magistrorum regent. and non regent.
comprobabantur, quorum Capita hic sequuntur.

1. Quorum Appellationes recipiendae non sint. De Appellationibus.
2. De causis, in quibus dubitatur, Vtrum Appellatio admittenda sit necne 3. De
Conventu Praefectorum Coll. and Aularum.
His Statutis praelectis and approbatis comparuit Mr. Hodges coram venerabili
Coetu Doctorum, Magistrorum Regent. and non Regent. per Edicta Serenissimae
Regiae Majestatis ab Academiae finibus nuper exterminatus propter sua demerita,
scilicet pro Concione in Ecclesia B. Mariae virginis infra Vniversitatem
praedictam in Regias Injunctiones and Academiae tranquilitatem seditiose
committendo and praedicando. Cui per Honoratissimum nostrum Cancellarium
Serenissimus Rex ex summasua Clementia Palinodiae, ac Recantationis favorem
indulsit, and in spem pristinae Conditionis and restaurationis ad gremium
Matris Academiae reduxit. Flexis itaque genibus, and animo officiose devoto
praedictus Mr. Hodges Sequentia legebat in scriptis manu sua propria
consignata. Quorum tenor sequitur, and est talis.

I William Hodges do freely and sincerely acknowledge before this Mr. Hodges
his submission December. 15. 1631. in Convocation.
venerable Assembly of Convocation, that in a Sermon by me preached in St
Mary's upon the 26th of June last past, I fell upon the delivery of those
points, which by his Majesty's Royal Injunctions were forbidden me to meddle
withal, and therein I confess with hearty sorrow my great disobedience against
his Sacred Majesty. Moreover I do likewise with hearty sorrow confess, that I
did let fall some passages, that might be taken to the disparagement of the
Government of the Church, in making erroneous and heretical opinions the way to
preferment. All which, with the main current of my discourse might sound to
sedition in the Ears of the present assembly: By this my great and inexcusable
offense, I do freely acknowledge, that I have deserved the sharpest of Censures
and severest of punishments; and therefore that his Royal Majesty has justly
rewarded me for the same, it being an offense of so high a nature. And I have
nothing at all to plead, but the Royal Mercy of my gracious Sovereign for my
restitution to this famous University. This my Confession and Submission I do
most humbly tender to the favorable acceptance of this Venerable House,
craving the Pardon of the University in general, so more especially, of our
most Honorable Chancellor, whom with all humility I beseech to present this my
acknowledgement to his Majesty's Sacred hand, as the pledge and engagement both
in present and for the future of my readiest obedience.

William Hodges.


I Thomas Hill, do freely and sincerely acknowledge before this Venerable Mr.
Hill's submission, December. 15. 1631. in Convocation.
Assembly of Convocation, that in a Sermon lately by me preached in St. Mary's,
I did let fall diverse scandalous Speeches, partly in opposition to His
Majesty's Injunctions, by odious Justling together the names of certain
Factions in the Church, and imputing Pelagianisme and Popery to the one side:
Partly in disparagement of the present Government of State and Church, by
making foul and erroneous Opinions the readiest steps nowadays to Preferment.
As also in disparaging the whole Order of Bishops in point of Learning and
Religion, making them favorers of unsound and erroneous Doctrine, and
disfavourers of sound Doctrine. As likewise in imputing to a great part of our
Clergy only Politic and Lunatic Religion: Besides private glances against
particular Persons concerning some Speeches delivered in their late Sermons, in
all which passages in my Sermon, I confess to have given just offense to the
University, and to deserve the sharpest of Censures. Wherefore with all humble
submission I beseech the whole University, represented in this Venerable House,
to pass-by this my willful error of undiscrect and misguided Zeal, and do
faithfully promise henceforward to abstain from all such scandalous aspersions
and intimations, as tending only to the disparagement of the Church, and the
Distraction and disquiet of the University. And this my Submission I humbly
crave may be accepted, which I do here make willingly, and from my heart, with
true sorrow for what is past.

Thomas Hill.


WHEREAS, Upon Information given to his Majesty concerning Mr. (...)
submission.
Misdemeanors of the Delegates in hearing and determining the Cause of Appeal,
set on foot by Mr. Forde against Mr. Vice Chancellor, his Majesty was pleased
to give Order, that as soon as I came unto the University, notice should be
given unto the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bp.
of London, our Chancellor, that upon Examination of the business I might
receive such Censure, as the merits of the Cause should deserve, and his
Lordship upon my voluntary appearance, acknowledgement of my Errors, and
humble submission to his Lordship, has been pleased to remit me back to the
University, and has ordered, that in the presence of Mr. Vice Chancellor, and
the Governors of Colleges and Halls, I should make the like Recognition of my
Errors and offensive Carriage in that business. I with all humility and
thankfulness acknowledge his Lordship's favor, and do freely and ingenuously
confess, that in the hearing of that Cause, I did declare my self in the
maintenance of Mr. Ford's appeal with more Vehemence, than did become an
indifferent man, not without disrespect to Mr Vice-Vhancellour, and some other
Misdemeanors. For which inconsiderate Carriage I am very heartily sorry, and
do humbly crave pardon of Mr. Vice Chancellor and the University, and do
seriously promise, that from henceforth I will avoid all partakings or factious
endeavors against the quiet and Government of the University, and as much as
shall be in my power, will be assisting to the orderly proceedings of those,
who are in authority, and set over me in this place,

Francis Hyde.


Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God,
With all Humility let me beseech your Lordship amongst other Mr. Hodges his
Letters os Thanks.
faults of mine, to pardon this one of Presumption. And having sealed me a
pardon for my boldness, I must again beseech your Honorable favor to
entertain this the necessary Testimony and tender of my heartiest thanks and
most humble Service. Let all the World forget me, when I forget to be grateful,
having been blessed with as great a favor from your fatherly hands, as I could
in reason or modestly sue for. The re enlivening of dying hopes, the seasonable
refreshing of a whithering branch, the happy recovery of a man as low in
present being of his decayed fortunes, as punishment and desert could set him;
the work your Lordships, mine the benefit; my expressions may come below the
greatness both of the Benefit I enjoy, and of the Favor I have received; but
my Prayers and continual Devotions shall not. I shall make up in these the
defects of the former, and in these I shall pray God to bless me so through the
course of my Studies and Endcavours, as that I may be able to approve my self,

From Exon. Coll. in Oxon. Febr. 22. (...) Your Lordships in all thankfulness
and faithful Service to be commanded, William Hodges.


S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. I am very sorry, that I have My Letters to
the Convocation about the disorders in the Schools the last Lent.
this Occasion to write to the University, which I love so well, that it cannot
but trouble me to hear of any thing ill done in it. I have diverse ways heard,
what disorders and tumults have accompanied the public Disputations toward the
end of the last Lent, to the great scandal of the University, and tending to
the breach of all Government there. The noise of these great Disorders was like
enough of it self to be heard far, and to add to this Unhappiness, these
Misdemeanors were then committed, when they might be seen by some, which meant
not to conceal them. Insomuch that the report of them is come to his Majesty's
Ears, who is highly displeased with this ill carriage, and the more, because he
thought the care and the pains, which he lately took to settle some breaches of
Government there, would not so soon have been forgotten, as it seems to him
they are. Upon this his Majesty has directed his Princely Letters to me, and
by them required me to look both to the punishment of these Distempers and the
preventing of the like hereafter. According to these his Majesty's Royal
Commands I do pray and require you, Mr. Vice Chancellor, and the rest of the
Governors to look carefully to your several Charges, both public and private,
not only for the Honor of the University, (which it seems by some is too much
neglected) but also because I find his Majesty so resolved, that he will have a
severe Course held against any Governors, as well as others, that shall be
proved faulty. And that this may appear, I have sent you here his Majesty's
Letters to me, which are to be read in open Convocation, that the whole
University may know, how distasteful these Courses are to his Majesty, and how
prejudicial they may be to your selves. And I do heartily pray you all, that
hereafter, not only in Disputations, but upon all other Occurrences whatsoever,
you uphold the Honor and Government of that Place, and spare no man, that
shall be proved an Offender against either. And for my part, if nothing else
will serve, I shall take the best course I can to see Justice done, and Example
made, where there is cause; Neither can I go off from this opinion, That the
younger sort would easily be reduced into better order, if all the Governors
did that, which in Conscience and Duty they are bound unto. And I will hope,
that all, whom this may any ways concern, will hereafter be careful of the good
of the University, the honor of themselves, and their Credit with his Majesty,
which certainly can neither be gained nor held by such breaches upon
Government. So praying you to take care of these things, I leave you to Gods
gracious protection, and shall ever rest,

To my very Loving Friends, the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctours,
and the rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

London-House April 13. 1632. Your very loving Friend Procuratores Mr. Chaworth
ex AEn. Christ. Mr. Meridith e Coll. Omni. Anim.
and Chancellor, GVIL. London.


The Tenor of the King's Letters to me here Fallows,
CHARLES R.
RIght trusty and well beloved Counselor, and Right Reverend His Majesty's
Letters to me about the Tumults in Lent Disputations.
Father in God, We greet you well. We had reason to expect, that our own
Princely care and former admonitions had sufficiently regulated that our
University of Oxford, whereof you, as Our Chancellor, have the Charge.
Nevertheless We understand, that the late Lent Exercises in their Schools have
been carried in such disorder, that if at the instance of the Dean of
Christ-Church, the Vice Chancellor had not excused the Bachellours of that
House from answering in their turn, there had followed much mischief, which
Discretion of theirs we well approve. For though a Virtuous Emulation to whet the
Industry of Scholars be not to be discouraged, yet it must always be governed,
so as it may not proceed to Animosities and factious Contestat ions of young
and hot heads, which will breed Combustion and public disturbance in the end,
if due prevention be not used. We therefore require you, not only to give
present Order for suppression of these or the like Tumults; but also to see,
that the Authors be punished according to their deserts. And if upon due
examination you find, that any Master of a College, or other Superior, has
been Actor or Encourager herein, or has not done his Duty in containing the
Scholars from these Distempers. Let him know, that We shall hold him unworthy
of that Trust, and will not spare to punish him as We shall see cause. Given at
Our Palace at Westminster this 12. day of April 1632. in the eighth year of
Our Reign.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved
Counselor William Lord Bishop of London, Chancellor of Our University of
OXFORD.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
INverecundis aliquorum turbis invita hoc bonum debemus, quod ex ausa insuavi
accepimus pulchrum Divinissimi Regis and Cordatissimi Cancellarii Monumentum,
Illius ad Te literas mox ad nos tuas, utrasque tam Gratiae quam Providentiae
plenas, E quibus intelligimus, quanti sit vobis innocentia nostra, quam ideo
and nos religiosius culturi sumus sub nomine Obsequii. Has etiam utrasque
duplici Registro recondemus in perpetuorum Archivorum simul and Cordium. Cum
auris Regia per longinquam audiendi seriem pertingi soleat Suprema, Mirum est,
quomodo Rex ipse res nostras inviseret; nisi and summi Moderatoris intenta
sagacitas, and barbari hujus tumultus clamosa magnitudo aeque innotesceret,
nisi Princeps tam sapere posset, quam Populus insipere, nisi and Carolinum
esset in scintilla has flammas restinguere, quas norunt Pueri excitare. Cum
vero incolumitas nostra vobis tantum pariat solicitudinem and molestiam, Mirum
vos ingrato hoc opere non lassar i, isi pluris esset beneficium serere, quam ex
eo demetere. Cum denique Area haec nostra Ventilabro Regali, ac tuo sit nuper
penitus expurgata, Mirum, unde hae paleae, Mirum nisi indies afflueret
temerariae, indoctaeque Juventutis nova successio, quae dum calido Sanguine,
and rerum inscitia vexatur, parum valet aut priorum exempla adse trahere, aup
cognata pacis violamina comparare, aut eventus futuros prospicere, sed effera
libertatis opinioni decepta quicquid non licet generosum aestimat. Quid ergo?
Nunc excusanius crimen patratum? Imo potius patrandi pervicaciam deploramus.
Dum in vos modo; and modo in nosmetipsos dividimus oculos, pudore nostri
confundimur, Vestrique laboramus merito. Pudet aliquorum nos omnes, Tyronum
veteranos, Subditorum Dominos; pudet conturbantium and hos qui patiuntur,
quibus acerbius fuit, alii quod ferirent, quam quod ipsi ferrent; pudet bonos
malorum insultantium, sicut pars ulcerosa totius Corporis gravamen simulque
pudor est. Puderet minus, si aut ipse minus sollicitus, aut Rex minus esset
benignus. Reorum facinus supra modum exaggerat laesae potestatis excellentia,
cujus tam Curae oppugnatur quam Praecepto, Bonitati quam Justitiae. Tu vero,
qui in re nostra Fulmen Regale sustines, clientes tuos quo velis, sub clypeo
tutelari deduces. Scrutamur enim, (and quod jubes, and quod ultro egressi
sumus) deli nquentes quoscunque cos castigamus inventos; castigando inventos
monemus insuper universos, ut flexile collum praebeant, alios, ut pressius
utantur locis: idque non tantum nostri causa, quorum maxim interest in tuto
conquiescere, sed and Serenissimi Regis, ne frustra turbines tam caute
prohibeat, unaque Tui, ne frustra tam pattern corripias.

E domo nostrae Congregationis April 23. 1632. Honori vestro devinctissima
Oxoniens. Academia.


Mr. James Masters of Alban Hall was banished the University for abusing
Bannitio Mr. Masters 1632. see p. 156.
diverse Heads of Houses openly in St. Maryes in his Speech, as being then
Terrae Filius 1631. and was banished for it 1632.

AFter my hearty Commendations etc. The time is now come Dr. Duppa Dean of
Christ-Church chosen Vice Chancellor.
for the choice of a new Vice Chancellor, for I have been bold to lay the
pains of that place upon Dr. Smith these two years together. In the whole
course of that his Government, he has carried himself with a great deal of
fidelity to the University, and a great deal of care and moderation in the
managing of so many troublesome businesses, as have fallen in his time; yet
notwithstanding these and his other abilities for the discharge of that place,
I am resolved to name another to you: both because among so many worthy and
able men, as are with you, I would not pass by all the rest continually to
overload any one. And because I am very desirous to divide the Experience, as
well as the pains of that service among the Heads of Colleges, to the end there
may still be some, that may be acquainted with the Burden and weight of that
Office, and able the better to assist such, as must newly enter upon it. At
this time upon very due Consideration I have thought fit to name Dr. Duppa,
Dean of Christ-Church, to be Vice Chancellor for this year ensuing, whom I
know to be a discreet, able, and worthy man for that place, and one, that will
satisfy my Expectation and yours. These are therefore to pray and require you
to allow of this my Nomination and Choice of Dr. Duppa, and to give him your
best advice and assistance in all such Businesses, as may concern the good
Government, and consequently the Honor of the University. So I bid you all
heartily farewell, and rest,

To my very loving Friends, the Doctors, the Proctours, and the rest of the
Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

Fulham-House July 11.1632. Your very Loving Friend, and Chancellor, GVIL.
London.


QVum Serenissimae Regiae Majestati visum fuerit publico Edicto An Order
conceived in Oxford touching the Kings Declaration about the five Articles Feb.
9. 1631/2.
cavere, ne quis in religionis materia quicquam contra literalem Articulorum
sensum pro Concione and public definire audeat, Existant tamen nonnulli, qui,
usque quo hoc Edictum extendi debeat, aut pro incomperto habeant, aut se ita
habere simulent: Idcirco nos (quibus obedientiae praestandae publicaeque pacis
conservandae and demandatur Munus, and incumbit cura, quorum etiam plenisque
Serenissimae Regiae Majestatis tum actis tum de hac re consiliis Woodstochiae
interesse concessum est) tam crassae and supinae ignorantiae ansam praescindere
volentes, sic pronunciamus: Quod, ut dissidiorum flammam (circa quinque
Articulos, quos vocant, inter Remonstrantes and contra Remonstrantes
contraversos) in exteris Regionibus accensam, and vicinit ate quadam mali
nostros etiam Penates jamjam corripientem, huic Edicto sanciendo occasionem
praebuisse optime perspectum habemus, ita tanquam praesentissimum Remedium huic
incendio restringuendo, and ad contraversias praecipue circa hos Articulos
exortas, hoc Edictum extendendum esse judicamus: Quicunque igitur in his
controversiis pro sententia sua tuenda public de industria tractet, temere
affirmet, aut pertinaciter definiat; Quicunque etiam public and pro Concione
adversam opinioni suae sententiam Argumentis, and Consequentiis odiose
proscindat, aut in adversas sententias tuentium Nomina, aut famam convitiis,
calumniis, aut aliis quovismodo grassetur, eundem illum, tanquam violati Regii
Edicti, Pacisque Publicae turbatae reum postulandum censemus. Talemque esse de
hac re sententiam nostram solemni hac nominum nostrorum subscriptione public
testatum volumus; tum ut post haec (quod optandum est) potiore habeatur loco
charitas, quoe oedificat, quam scientia, quae inslat, tum etiam, nequis in
posterum majorem Curiositatis suoe, quam tranquillitatis publicoe rationem
habendam fore, aut mercedis loco ducat pacata turbare.

SIR
YOU have done very well in Hobbes's Business; and the motion A passage of my
Letters touching the Order the Heads had conceived about the Five Articles.
made by Dr. Pink to prevent pleading of ignorance, etc. was in it self very
good and seasonable; and you did as fitly lay hold of it, and draw up the Order
about it, as I see by the enclosed; yet nevertheless there is somewhat very
considerable before you publish that Order: As first, that there are certain
Incidents to some of those Five Articles, which all Men upon the hearing
presume forbidden; Whereas by this Order they will take themselves confined to
the five express Articles only: And secondly it must be very well weighed, what
power You or I have to interpret or make an Order upon a Declaration, set forth
by the Authority of the King with the consent of his Bishops; and I much doubt,
it will not be warrantable. In the mean time it will be enough against the Plea
of ignorance to declare upon all occasions the Five Articles controverted by
the Remonstrants, are the Doctrines, for a time not to be meddled with, that
the Factions, unhappily spread amongst our Neighbors may not infect this our
Church, or break the Peace of it. There is somewhat else considerable also,
which I think not very fit to write. But to this, if you have any exception,
you may return me what Answer you please.

Feb. 15. (...) GVIL. London.


S. in Christo.
AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. Upon occasion of difference My Letters to
the Convocation about the Patent for Printing.
between Lichfeild and Turner about their Printing, there was cause given me to
look into your Charters, what power the University had for Printing, and how
many Printers were allowed unto you. Upon search I cannot find any Grant at
all, so that Custom is the best Warrant you have for that Privilege. Your great
Charter of Hen. VIII. has no mention at all of it: But Cambridge, which had
the like Charter, found that defect in it, and repaired to the King again, and
obtained another particular Charter for Printing only; which is very large, and
of great honor and benefit to that University. Where by the way give me leave
to tell you, that they of Cambridge have been far more vigilant both to get and
keep their Privileges, than you at Oxford have been, for they have gotten this
and other of their Privileges confirmed by succeeding Princes, and I think some
of them by Act of Parliament, which for Oxford has not been done. Upon
consideration of this I thought it very just and equal, that the two
Universities should enjoy the same Privileges, especially for Printing. And
when I had weighed all Circumstances, I adventured to move his Majesty on your
behalf, who, according to his great and princely favor to the University, did
most graciously grant it: The motives, which Iused were principally two, the
one that you might enjoy this privilege for Learning equally with Cambridge;
and the other, that having many excellent Manuscripts in your Library, you
might in time hereby be encouraged to publish some of them in Print, to the
great honor of that Place, this Church and Kingdom. And now upon the Grant of
the like Patent, I doubt not, but you will enter into some provident
Consideration among your selves, how you may set the Press going, and do
something worthy of this his Majesty's Favor, and that the World may see it is
not granted unto you for nothing. This Patent I delivered according to
appointment to Mr. Philip King who paid the Fees, and took order for the safe
carrying of it down.

But at that time there proved a happy Error in it, which occasioned the
sending of it back to have it amended. That Slip was but in the miswriting of
one word, which escaped them, whom (for want of Leisure my self) I set to
compare it. The necessity to have this word mended, begat a desire to have a
whole Clause added, containing a privilege of sole Printing such M. S. as you
should set forth for a certain number of years. The more I thought of this
Clause, the more I found it necessary, and therefore moved his Majesty again
for this But when it was granted, Mr. Attorney (to whose care and love not only
in this, but in diverse other things the University is very much beholden) did
not think it fit to have the former Patent recalled, that this might be added;
for that would have been the same in charge with a new Patent, being again to
pass the King's hand, and all the Seals, but not in profit to you. Therefore
after a great deal of debate, I resolved by advice to move his Majesty for a
second Patent, which may recite the former, and be in the nature of a
Confirmation of it, and then add all those many Clauses, which concern the sole
Printing not only of M. SS. but of any other Books made, and Printed there, and
against the importation of all such, as shall be reprinted beyond the Seas, as
you will see more perfectly by the ampleness of the Patent it self.

This being now finished, I here send you down both the Patents A second Patent
procured,
together, but with this proviso, of which you must be very careful. The
Privilege is given to you to name your three Printers; but after they are
named and settled by Convocation, they may perchance forget themselves and you,
and do some things prejudicial to the Honor or Profit of the University, the
Right being then as in themselves, tho from you. For prevention of which
Inconveniences, and diverse others yet unseen, and that both for the present and
for the time to come, I think it will be very requisite,

First, that you confirm not either of the two Printers which you The Printer;
not to be confirmed in their places till (...) some orders concerning them be
(...) led.
now have, in any of the Rights of these Patents till all Orders concerning
them be settled. Secondly, that you name as yet no third Printer, but keep the
place empty, that you may get an able man, if it be possible for the Printing
of Greek, when you shall be ready for it. Thirdly, that you settle some Orders
of Agreement beforehand between your Printers, and your other Stationers there,
which print not. Fourthly, that though your Patents be large, yet coming over
the Heads of the King's Printers and other Stationers here in London, I shall
advise you not to suffer any of your Printers as yet to print Bibles,
Service-Books, Grammars, Primers, etc. (which caused the late and chargable
Controversy betwixt Cambridge and them;) but let your Privilege settle a while,
and gather strength quietly. Lastly, such Orders, as shall be thought fit to be
made for the limiting of your Printers, and keeping them in due obedience to
the University upon all occasions (which may be (...) advised on by you, that
are upon the place) I think, may now very fitly be inserted into a Chapter by
themselves among the Statutes, that so they may have the more binding Authority
over them. And what else you may fittingly think of I leave to your selves. Mr.
Mottershed, according to your direction, has paid the Fees of this second
Patent, as Mr. Philip King did of the first; but being a far larger Patent the
Charge must needs rise higher. Yet I have gone the nearest way I could. As for
the Bill of Charges, Mr. Mottershed will send it you down. I hope I shall not
need to put you in mind of writing a very good Letter of Thanks to his Majesty,
and I leave it to your Consideration, whether you will not think it fit to
write to Mr. Attorney, who for the first Patent would take no Fees, and to Mr.
Secretary Windebank, who put them to the King's hand, and ordered them to the
Seals, and would take no Fee for either, which has not a little lessened your
Charges. So wishing, that these Patents may turn to the Honor and Happiness of
that place, I leave you to the Grace of God, and rest,

To my very loving Friends, the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctours,
and the rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

March 22 (...). Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, GVIL. London.


Reverende in Christo Pater, and Academiae nostrae Antistes Honoratissime.
GRatulamur Providentiae vestrae, quae tota invigilat Athenis suis, quod
Letters of Thanks from the University for getting their Patents of Printing.
siquid illustrius, siquid gloriosius excogitetur, (licet tanti Viri
patrocinium in minoribus etiam rebus conscqui pulchrum est) vester tam
perspicax sit oculus, ut illud exquirat, and tam agilis benevolentia, ut nobis
incautis, imo uti novum aliquod and inexpectatum stupentibus, ultro obtrudat.
Omnia Privilegia nostra delectant sane, sed hoc Praeli maxim: quod prius
Cantabrigiae fuerit. Loetamur enim, quod honoribus ejus tandem pares (...) mus,
cui Antiquitate, (ne dicam Eruditione) praeluximus. Fatemur ingenue, nobis
antea non defuit Praelum, defuit tamen Autoritas; quam vos pie quidem
impetrastis, ut libri legitimi and innocents exeant, absque erratis suis.
Etenim credidistis Lectores parum candidos, si Codices violatae legis conscii
lucem erubescerent. Credidistis etiam hoc incitamentum fore Bodleiana
Manuscripta imprimendi, quae diutius neglect a'jacuerunt, imo excepto uno vel
altero saltem Critico, and illo forsan invido, omnibus sepulta. Invida animalia
Criticos dicimus, qui e pulvere and cineribus suis, nescio quot sopita ingenia
erui malunt (quamvis quid divinius cogitare possumus, quam mortuos
resuscitari?) nolunt tamen hoc solum magni oestimantes, quod aliis non prodest.
In hoc sane Te egregium Benefactorem agnoscimus, quod Bodeleianos libros
volueris iterum publicos; parum curans, quam multi invideant, modo plures
erudiantur. Has tibi pro temporis ratione praecipites, and minus eruditas
mittimus Gratias, digniores expectes, quando Praelum Te loquetur. Procuratores
Mr. White, (...) C. C. C. Mr. Page, (...) Coll. Exon


Dat. in Domo Congregationis Apr. 8. 1633. Academia tua Oxon. vestrae
Amplitudini devinctissima.


THis ensuing passage of my Letters I desire may be read to the A passage of my
Letters to the Vice Chancellor (...), etc.
Heads at the next meeting, the rather because I know, and am sorry for it,
that diverse things concerning Form, especially in the younger sort are not in
so good order, as some men would make me believe they are; and though you
complain not much your self, yet I can hear by strangers, how the Market goes.
For I am told by diverse, that though the Masters come very duly in Caps, which I
am right glad to hear of; yet the younger sort, which should be most in awe,
are least in order, and came not (diverse of them) to St. Mary's in that Form,
which they ought to do. Which Disorder of theirs cannot possibly be remedied,
by the Care of the Vice Chancellor only, be it never so great. But it must be
done by the Heads in their several Colleges, who must either punish such, as
they find faulty, or put up their Names to the Vice Chancellor, that he may. I
thought fit therefore now before my entrance upon this my long and tedious
Journey, to desire you for the public, and every Head of College and Hall in
their several Houses respectively, to see that the Youth conform themselves to
the public Discipline of the University, that his Majesty, who is graciously
sensible of all the defects of that Place, may at his return hear a good and
true Report of things amended there; which, as it will much advantage the place
it self, so will it also much advance the Reputation of the several Governors
in his Majesty's good Opinion. And particularly I pray see, that none, Youth or
other be suffered to go in Boots and Spurrs, or to wear their Hair undecently
long, or with a Lock in the present fashion, or with flasht Dublets, or in any
light or garish Colors. And if Noblemen will have their Sons court Concerning
Noble Men's (...), their conforming themselves to the Discipline of the
University.
it too soon, and be more in, that is, out of fashion than the rest, the fault
shall be their own, not mine: But under that Degree, I will have no
Dispensation for any thing in this kind. And it were very well, if they to
whose Trust they are committed, would fairly and seasonably take some occasion
(especially hereafter at their first coming) to acquaint the Lords, their
Fathers, with the course of Discipline in the University, that their Sons may
conform in every thing, as others do, during the time of their abode there,
which will teach them to know differences of places and orders betimes; and
when they grow up to be Men it will make them look back upon that place with
Honor to it, and Reputation to you. And of this and all other Particulars of
like nature, I shall look for an Account from you, if God bless me with a safe
Return. In the mean time I commend my Love heartily both to your self, and to
all the Heads, and desire mutual Return of your Prayers, as you have mine daily.

May 10. 1633. GVIL. London.


In this first year of Dr. Duppa's Vice-Chancellourship, the Delegates An Order
about hastening the New Statutes.
were often called upon, both my self and him, to hasten the Statutes. But that
Business went on very slowly. Hereupon I writ very often down to quicken them,
and laid before them the necessity of that work, But little would be done, till
I entreated two or three of the Delegates, of whom Mr. Peter Turner of
Merton-Coll. was one, to set themselves more closely to the work.

In this year the Wall about the Physic Garden, which was diverse Physic
Garden.
years in doing, was completely finished.

In this year the upper end of the Queens-College Chapel was floored
Queen's-College Chapel.
with Marble.

AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. I have put my Vice Chancellor Dr. Duppa
continued Vice Chancellor. a second year.
to a great deal of Care and pains in this year of his Government, which is now
drawing to a happy end. And the more I consider, how discreetly and worthily he
has carried himself both toward me and toward the whole Body of the
University, the more I am made doubtful whether I or you be most beholden to
him. For my part, as I give him thanks for his pains past, and his vigilance in
that laborious Office: So at this time, being my self absent in remoter parts
to do his Majesty such service, as I am commanded, I must needs think it very
fit to leave the Government in his hands for the year ensuing, who has managed
it so exceeding well in the year, that is past. And I doubt not, but herein I
give both the Heads of Houses, and that whole Body, very great satisfaction:
Because I assure my self, the experience which he has had will make him the
better able for the year to come. And upon this Ground I do make choice of him
to be my Vice Chancellor for this year following. These are therefore to pray
and require you to allow of this my Choice of Dr. Duppa, and to give him your
best Counsel and assistance in all Business, which may any way concern the
Government and the Honor of that famous University. And so I bid you very
heartily Farewell, and rest,

To my very loving Friends, the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctours,
and the rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

July 2. 1633. Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, GVIL. London.


AFter our hearty Commendations to your Lordship. There being A Letter to me
from the Lords Commissioners for the Navy about the University Privileges for
Carriages.
a great quantity of Timber to be carried out of his Majesty's Forests of
Shotover and Stowood, for the use of his Majesty's Navy, It pleased the Lords
of his Majesty's Privy Counsel to appoint the Counties of Berks, Buckingham,
and Oxon. to join in performance of those Carriages for the better ease of that
service, being more, than hitherto has been known. And understanding, that it
will be a great Delay and prejudice to this so important a service, if any
persons shall be exempted, and yet being unwilling to press any thing, that may
be misinterpreted, or trench on the Privileges of the University of Oxon. which
diverse (otherwise liable to this work) resort unto, to avoid this his Majesty's
service. We pray your Lordship to take some course by such way, as you shall
think fairest, and without prejudice to the Privileges of that University, that
a Business of so much consequence, tending only to the public and general
good, and strengthening of the whole Kingdom, may (for the encouraging of other
places neighboring) be cheerfully performed by those, who live within the
parts claiming to be exempt from any such Carriages. And we shall have a care,
that they shall not henceforth be troubled on any particular or less important
occasion, as tendering the good and advancement of the University and the
Privileges thereof above any particular or private Respects. And so we bid your
Lordship heartily farewell. From White Hall this 15 day of August 1633.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London

Your Lordship's very loving Friends, Portland.
Lindsey.
Fran. Cottington.
Fran. Windebank.


At the Vespers upon the 6 of July Dr. Heylin, (...) of the Proceders, had
these Questions following out of the 20th Article of the Certain passages
utterd by Dr. (...) upon Dr. Heylins Questions at the Vespers, on July 6. 1633.
Church of England.

Ecclesia authoritatem habet in fidei controversiis deter minandis.

Ecclesia authoritatem habet interpretandi Sacras Scripturas.

Ecclesia potestatem habet decernendi Ritus and Ceremonias.

Upon these Questions Dr. Prideaux then Professor had these passages
following, and were then offered to be avowed against him upon Oath, if need
were; and it happened that the Queens-Almoner was present. The passages were
these:

Ecclesia est mera Chimaera.

Ecclesia nihil docet nec determinat.

Controversiae omnes melius ad Academiam referri possunt, quam ad Ecclesiam.

Docti homines in Academiis possunt determinare omnes Controversias, etiam
sepositis Episcopis.

Upon an occasion of mentioning the absolute Decree, he brake into a great and
long Discourse, that his Mouth was shut by Authority, else he would maintain
that Truth contra omnes qui sunt in Vivis, which fetched a great Hum from the
Country Ministers, that were there, etc.

These particulars by the Command of his Majesty I sent to Dr. Dr. Prideaun's
answer to these particulars received August 22 Ex. Act. 20.
Prideaux, and received from him this answer following, and his Protestation
under his hand.

Ecclesia authoritatem habet in fidei Controversiis determinandis.

Ecclesia authoritatem habet interpretandi Sacras Scripturas.

Ecclesia potestatem habet decernendi Ritus and Ceremonias.

These Questions I approved, when they were brought unto me, and wished the
Beadle, that brought them, to convey them to the Congregation to be allowed
according to Custom; conceiving them to be especially bent (according to the
meaning of the Article cited) against Papal Usurpations and Puritancial
Innovations, which I detest, as much as any man, Whereby it appears, what I
positively hold concerning the authority of the Church in all the proposed
Particulars, namely that which that 20th Article prescribes, and not otherwise.

Certain passages that came from Dr. Prideaux in the discussing of the
Questions at Oxford.

Ecclesia est mera Chimaera.

Ecclesia nihil docet nec determinat.

Controversiae omnes melius ad Academiam referri possunt, quam ad Ecclesiam.

Docti homines in Academiis possunt determinare omnes Controversias, etiam
sepositis Episcopis.

The passages therefore imperfectly catched at by the Informer were no
Positions of mine. For I detest them, as they are laid, for impious and
ridiculous. But Oppositions according to my place, proposed for the further
clearing of the truth, to which the Respondent was to give satisfaction; And
the General Protestation I hope, takes off all, that can be laid against me in
the particulars.

Notwithstanding to touch on each of them, as they are laid.

To the First, I never said the Church was Mera Chimaera, as it is, or has a
Being, and ought to be believed. But as the Respondent by his Answer made it.
In which I conceived him to swerve from the Article, whence his Questions were
taken.

To the Second, my Argument was to this purpose; Omnis actio est Suppositorum
vel Singularium; Ergo (...) in abstracto nil docet aut determinat, sed per hos
aut illos Episcopos, Pastores, Doctores: As, Homo non disputat, sed Petrus and
Johannes, etc.

The third, and fourth may be well put together. My Prosecution was, That the
Universities are eminent Parts and Seminaries of the Church, and had sitter
opportunity to discuss Controversies, than diverse other Assemblies. Not by any
means to determine them, but to prepare them for the determination of
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, of Synods, Councils, Bishops, that have Superior
Authority, wherein they might do Service to the Church and those Superiors;
not prescribing any thing unto them. As the debating of a thing by a learned
Counselor makes the easier Passage for the Benches Sentence. And this was
urged only as Commodum, not as Necessarium.

The QUEEN's ALMONER present.

I am told no. For he departed, as they say, that were in the Seat with him,
being tired as it should seem by the tedious Preface of the Respondent before
the Disputations began: But be it so or otherwise, to what purpose this is
interposed, I know not.

Upon an occasion of mentioning the absolute Decree, he brake into a great and
long Discourse, that his Mouth was shut by Authority; else he would maintain
the truth contra omnes, qui sunt in vivis, which fetched a great Hum from the
Country Ministers that were there, etc.

This Argument was unexpectly cast in by Mr. Smith of St. John's; but bent, as
I took it, against somewhat I have written in that behalf; which the Respondent
not endeavoring to clear, I was put upon it to show, in what sense I took
absolutum Decretum: Which indeed I said I was ready to maintain against any, as
my Predecessors in that place had done. This was not in a long Discourse, as it
is suggested, but in as short a Solution, as is usually brought in Schools to a
Doubt on the bye. And from this I took off the Opponents farther proceeding in
Obedience to Authority. Whereupon if a Hum succeeded, it was more than I used
to take notice of. It might be as well of dislike as approbation, and of other
Auditors, as soon as Country Ministers: A Hiss I am sure was given before, when
the Respondent excluded the King and Parliament from being parts of the Church.
But I remember whose practice it is to be (...). I had rather bear and forbear,
and end with this.

PROTESTATION.
THAT as I believe the Catholic Church in my Creed, so I Dr. (...). his
Protestation.
Reverence this Church of England wherein I have had my Baptism and whole
Breeding, as a most eminent Member of it. To the Doctrine and Discipline of
this Church have I hitherto often subscribed, and by God's Grace constantly
adhered; and resolve by the same assistance, according to my ability, (under
his Majesty's Protection) faithfully to maintain against Papists, Puritans, or
any other, that shall oppose it. The Prelacy of our Reverend Bishops in it I
have ever defended in my Place to be jure Divino, which I dare say has been
more often, and with greater pains taking, than most of those have done, who
have received greater Encouragement from their Lordships. I desire nothing but
the continuance of my vocation in a peaceable Course, that after all my pains
in the place of his Majesty's Professor almost for these 18 years together, my
Sons especially be not countenanced in my declining Age to vilify and vex me.
So shall I spend the remainder of my time in hearty Prayer for his Majesty, my
only Master and Patron, for the Reverend Bishops, the State, and all his
Majesty's Subjects, and Affairs, and continue my utmost Endeavors to do all
faithful Service to the Church, wherein I live. To whose Authority I ever have,
and do hereby submit my self and Studies to be according to Gods word directed
or corrected.

J. Prideaux.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
INdefesso Prudentiae oculo, quo nos gubernas, Parendi has leges explora, The
University submit their Statutes to me and my ordering of them.
quas tandem Detersas pulvere, simplicitate verborum Rescriptas, a Clausularum
antithesi Purgatas, biennique opere recusas coarctavimus in sanam Epitomen, ut
imperandi (...) negotium Tibi molliamus, obtemperandi Methodus patescat nobis,
and peccandi venia tollatur. Latuerunt diu Statuta ex Vetustatis situ plus
satis veneranda; non memoriae, sed Scriniorum Sarcina; in quorum fragmenta
dubia, texturam inaequalem, toto Codice dissita capita, and sensus dissoni
(...) jurati omnes, tantum ut Perjuri evaderent. (...) pacis licentiam quis non
arripiat, quando inter se pugnant Decreta, quae prohibent? At Praesidem te
nacti, Mores integerrimo cultu refingere ardemus, Leges ipsas sanare, limam
expolire, qud sumus formandi, omnia denique conari, ut prudentissimae vestrae
Praefecturae obsequium geramus excultissimum. Hortatu molli nos adhuc duxit
Clementia vestra, parituro simillimus imperasti; Lora jam accipe, quibus
impellas. Vltro compegimus jugum, quod pronis Cervicibus annectas, vestrisque
manibus recepta jura obsequendi praestituent affectum, and libertatem ex onere
ferent. Vestrum itaque Patrocinium implorant una nobiscum Statuta, quae, olim
congesta intra manus Cancellarii Pole, tantum consenuerunt, suisque funeribus
jam revirescentia Praesulatum vestrum (...) sunt visa, ut Gratiam and pondus
authenticum a Te accipiant, and vestrum annexum Diploma Statutis ipsis
valentius nos componant. Quibus ad umbilicum perductis, si manum ultimam
adjicias obsignando, non Chartis (...) Sigillum, quam Animo nostro insiges
Beneficium.

Dat. in Domo Congregationis 12 Call. Sept. Amplitudini vestrae supplex Acad.
Oxon.


Honoratissime (...),
LIteras adhuc (quod recordari non parum juvat) rogante Calamo conscriptas
Letters of Thanks concerning their Privileges.
misimus nullas; adeo praepropera, and votis obvia semper fuit Humanitas
vestra, ut Academia Clientis negotio defuncta, solo beneficiorum argumento
laboraverit. Ex omni part Teipsum (...) magnificum Antistitem attestatus es,
in omni genere vestra erga nos claruit indulgentia; indigenti Academiae te
Benefactorem experti sumus, periclitanti Advocatum, utpote qui meritissimum
vestrum Vicecancellarium in jus and discrimen vocatum non modo incolumem and
securum praestitisti, sed etiam potiorem, Chartaeque victrici interpretatione
illustrem; Cui quidem pro Humanitate sua, candidiori fortasse, quam oportebat,
Chartae interpreti venia habenda fuit maxima. Quid enim verisimilius fuit, quam
quod illic delitescerit hujusmodi Privieglium? Caelestium tranquillitas orbium,
non statim in ventos and tempestates desinit; quae adjacet regio, aliquomodo
caelestis est, pluviasque and tonitrua, ruptisque nubibus emicantem fulguris
stricturam ex intervallo despicit; ita profecto aequissimum fuit, ut Academia
nostra illud Coeli emblema, sua privilegia and immunitates ad finitimos
transmitteret, and tam sacra (...), ut otium suum, and libertatem etiam
jumentis impertiret. Quod quidem privilegium utcunque antehac in gratiam and
honestatem Academiae minime sancitum fuit, nihilominus nunc demum summa vestra
prudentia and authoritate confirmatum accepimus. Tuum est mehercle, quod Domini
commune cum Bobus suis jugum non subeunt, quod adobeunda Reipublicae munia non
stimulis urgentur, and eadem necessitate agitantur aurigae qua jumenta. Itaque
non est, ut fugendis Reipub. negotiis ingemiscant Operarii, quod eorum
Sarracae, ut Bootae plaustrum, pigro and nolenti gradu procedant, sed laeto and
alacri. Quippe quod solet esse maximo vehiculis gravamini, Tuo Patrocinio
sublevatur, convectandi necessitas. Adeo hoc insigne Privilegium consecuti
sumus, ut emancipato vehiculi usu Principi nostro Reique publicae non morigeri
sed benefici habeamur, and in gloria (...) cedat parere. Has Gratias solenni
formula and charactere Amplitudini Tuae consecravimus; hoc exploratum habentes,
fore, ut expeditius, ita sincerius, (...); magnificentia dignius Gratiarum
genus agnoscere, quam rependere Beneficium.

Dat. in Domo Congregationis 12. Call. September. 1633. Amplitudini vestrae
devinctissima Acad. Oxon.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
ACcepimus Membranam, vestra Prudentia cogitatam, gratia imimpetratam, nobis
autem vix desideratam quidem. Itaque rursus agnoscimus affectus viri, plusque
Sympathiam. Quis enim non suspiceret alternis malo vehementius laborantem? quis
non miraretur Medicum Thanks from Oxon. for their Mortmain, and the Letters
from the Counsel about Cottages.
magis affectum morbi aestimatione, quam aegrotantem dolor? Hujusmodi tamen
experimentum in Te, Reverendissime Praesul, comptum habemus: Fateri cogimur
vestram erga nos solicitudinem and curam nostro sensu acriorem esse, and
Academiae inopiam Tibi clarius and certius innotescere, quam patientibus. Ante
Chartam a Te impetratam Pecunia, aliis Regina, nostris ne Ancillae quidem,
officia praestitit; Aurum abiit in contemptum stercoris, jacuitque magis
sepultum in Academico AErario, quam in Fodina: Passi sumus prodigium Midae
contrarium, Aurum inter manus adulterium evasit, and quod defoecatissimum fuit,
tactu nostro pulchritudinem suam, and naturae precium amisit. Hoe nobis quidem
ingens and magnificum, indulgentissimo autem vestrae Prudentiae oculo parum
videbatur. Quemadmodum enim rei, ita and dignitatis nostrae Curam egisti. Non
satis esse Academiae existimabas praediis annuisque Redditibus for as ditescere,
nisi habita etiam pulchritudinis, and honestatis ratione domi floreret. Magalia
Collegiis admota aegre tuleris; iniquissimum enim videbatur, ut mendicantium
querelis adderetur Societatis fastidium, iisque qui tantum auribus debent nec
oculis parcerent, ulterius progrederis: Nostrum adeo Studiosus es, ut dignatus
sis obicibus quoque and viarum moris prospexisse, omnem angulum velis vere
Academicum and ipsas Plateas Scholarum elegantiam induere. Quod solum restat,
candidissimo vestro imperio cerie morem, and quas possumus gratias,
praestabimus. Angiportus dilatabimus, transeuntes praeclusura impedimenta
amovebimas, viasque (quantum in nobis est) sternemus decoras, latas, and quo
nihil majus polliceri audemus, vestrae quoque amplitudinis capaces.

Dat in Domo Con. Procuratores Mr. Pellam e Coll. Magd. Mr. Warren e Coll, Wadh.
gregationis 14. Call. April. Gratiae and Amplitudini vestrae devinctissima
Academia Oxon.


TO all Christian People, to whom these presents shall come, William, by God's
Providence Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and Metropolitan,
Chancellor of the University of Oxon. sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas by the Customs, Liberties and Privileges of this
University of Oxon. by Kings and Queens of this Realm of England granted, My
Proclamation for a Tollgatherer in Oxford, etc. May 2. 1634.
and by Acts of Parliament confirmed unto the said University, amongst other
noble Privileges and Favors, the Clerkship of the Market within the said
University, and the allowing, approving, and correcting of Weights and
Measures, and the well ordering and governing the sd. Market for the benefit of
the sd. University and the Buyers and Sellers therein, is granted and confirmed
to the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the said University of Oxon. and
the Execution thereof to the Chancellor or his Deputy, the Vice Chancellor of
of the said University for the time being: And whereas we find, that heretosore
in our Predecessors times, there has been a public Officer by them assigned
and appointed to look to the cleansing and keeping sweet the Market Place, and
to take the just and due Toll for the Measuring of Corn and Grain, and to keep
true and equal Bushels, Pecks, and Half-Pecks, that there be no fraud committed
between the Buyer and the Seller; which said Office has of late times been
discontinued; By reason whereof, as we are certainly informed, diverse Citizens
of the City of Oxon. inhabiting in or near the said Corn-Market, have (of their
own will without any approbation of us or our Vice Chancellor) taken upon them
to keep and set forth on Market days public Bushels and Measures for the
measuring of Corn and Grain, and take Toll for the same without stint or
Limitation, sometimes a Pint, sometimes a Pint and an half, and sometimes a
Quart for the measuring of a Bushel, whereas the ancient and laudable due is
but half a Wine Pint at the most for such measure. And also that diverse
Maltsters, Bakers, and Brewers do keep in their Private Houses two Bushels, a
bigger wherewith to buy, and a lesser to sell, whereby the Country, that bring
in their Corn and Grain to the said University, are deterred to furnish the
said Market, in regard the measure of Grain will not hold out fully with the
said great Bushels. We therefore for the future prevention of the said
Inconveniences, and for the better Government of the said Market, that there be
no fraud used, Have given, granted, and confirmed, and do by these presents
give, grant, and confirm, unto Christopher (...) val, Inhabitant within the
said University of Oxon. License, power, and authority to keep and set forth
every Market Day in the place of the Corn-Market so many lawful Bushels and
Measures by us, or our Christopher Dival chosen Tol-gatherer.
Deputies to be allowed and sealed, as shall be sufficient for the Measuring of
the said Corn or Grain, so brought to be sold in the said University, and to
take the due and lawful Toll for the same, ( viz.) the Quantity of half a Wine
Pint at the most in every Bushel, and not above: To have and to hold the said
Office of keeping the said Buthels and Measures, and receiving the Toll as
aforesaid to him the said Christopher Dival (during his natural life) without
the let, trouble, hindrance, or denial of any the Inhabitants of the City and
University of Oxon keeping Bushels as aforesaid or any other Person whatsoever.
And we do also by these presents straightly prohibit and discharge all the
Inhabitants of the University or City of Oxon. from keeping and setting forth
any public Bushel or other measure, and to receive any Toll or profit for the
same: And also all Malsters, Bakers, and Brewers for keeping in their Houses
any more than a lawful and sealed Bushel, by which they shall sell, as well as
buy, Provided always, that the said Christopher Dival demean himself honestly,
uprightly, and indifferently in the Execution of the said Office or place as
aforesaid, and that he take a Corporal Oath yearly before us, or our Deputy the
Vice Chancellor, to that effect and purpose, according to the Law, and the
Use, Custom, and Privilege of the said University: And provided also, that the
said Christopher Dival in Consideration of the Premises, do take diligent care
to view the Pitching, Paving, and Cleansing of the Streets within the said
University, and to make known unto us or our Deputy, by whose fault and
negligence the same is left undone, and also that twice every Week after the
end of the said Market he cleanse and keep sweet, or cause to be cleansed and
kept sweet the said Corn-Market Place, the Inhabitants there paying to the
Scavinger as now they do for the same. In witness whereof We have to these
Presents put our Hand and Seal, Dated the 2d. day of May, Anno Dom. 1634. And
in the Tenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

WHereas John Oxenbridge, Master of Arts, and Commoner of Magdalen Hall in
Oxford, both by the Testimony of Witnesses upon Oath examined, and by his own
Confession has been found guilty of a The Sentence for distutoring of Mr.
Oxenbridge of Magd. Hall. May 27.
strange, singular, and superstitious way of Dealing with his Scholars by
persuading and causing some of them to subscribe as Votaries to several
Articles framed by himself (as he pretends) for their better Government, as if
the Statutes of the Place he livesin, and the Authority of the present
Governors were not sufficient, These are to signify that I Bryan Duppa
Vicechancellor of the University for the time being, duly weighing the Quality
of the fact and the ill consequences which might follow upon the insnaring of
young and tender Consciences with the Religion of a Vow, do Order and Decree
that the said John Oxenbridge shall no longer be trusted with the tuition of
any Scholars, or suffered to read to them publicly or privately, or to receive
any Stipend or Sallary in that behalf. And to this end I require you, that are
the Principal of the said Hall, to dispose of those Scholars, that are now
under his Tuition to such other Tutors, who by their discreet and peaceable
Carriage show themselves freest from Faction; and not to suffer the same or any
other to live under his Charge, or him to receive any Salary or Stipend from
them. And this Censure you are presently to put in execution, by taking away
his Scholars, and to take care, that no part of it hereafter be eluded. Of the
performance of which, you are to stand accomptable to the Chancellor or his
Vicechancellor whenever you shall be called.

After I had received Letters from the University of the 12. of Sept. An Order
about the settling of the Statutes, 12. Sep. 1633.
1633. which gave me the whole power to order and settle the Statutes, which
had now hung long in the hands of the Delegates, though before they had put me
to much pains, and the writing of many Letters both to call upon and direct the
Delegates yet; now I set my self to it with so much the greater alacrity,
because the University having in Convocation put the whole business into my
Hands, I thought my self sure against all practice by faction or otherwise. To
the end therefore, that I might have no more Jealousy nor Crossing in the
Business, I put the Review of all that had been done formerly by the Delegates,
into the Hands of Mr. Peter Turner of Merton College, reserving to my self the
last Consideration of all: By this means and God's Blessing upon my endeavors,
I did at last not without a great deal of pains, get through this work, and
settled the Statutes, as will after appear in its proper time and place.

In this Year the West Side of University College was new built University
College.
from the Ground.

John Dunn of C. C. Mr. of Arts, for the supposed killing of a Boy, called
Humphry Dunt; And John Goffe of Magd. Coll. for the supposed killing of one
Boys, Mr. of Arts; These two were legally tried before the under-Steward of the
University, Mr. Vnton Crook, the 26. of August 1634. and acquitted.

AFter my very hearty Commendations, etc. I have laid the Dr. Pink appointed
Vicechancellor.
pains of tho Vicechancellorship now two years together upon Dr. Duppa, who
has discharged that place with extraordinary Care, as well for the good, as
the honor of the University; and God has blessed his Endeavors with very
great success in those things which have fallen under his Charge both at home
and abroad. And I dare be bold to affirm it to you in his behalf (and yet give
him but the Testimony which he deserves) that he has merited exceeding much
both from my self and from you. Nevertheless I am not willing either to
overload him, (...) to pass by so many able and worthy Men as that University
(God be thanked) now has for the supply of that place, and who I doubt not
will in their several turns follow the good example of those who have gone
worthily before them. At this time I have thought fit to name Dr. Pink, Warden
of New Coll. to be Vicechancellor for this year ensuing, of whose Wisdom,
Judgment, and Integrity, and all other Abilities, fit to fill that place, I
have particular knowledge; and assurance for these diverse years, and am very
desirous to make him as well known to you as he is to my self: These are
therefore to pray and require you to allow of this my nomination and choice of
Dr. Pink to the Vicechancellorship, and to give him your best advice and
assistance in all such things as may any ways concern the Honor and good
Government of the University. So I bid you all heartily farewell, and rest your
loving Friend and Chancellor

To my loving Friends the Vicechancellor, the Doctors, the Proctors, and the
rest of the Convocation of the University of Oxford.

W. CANT.
Lambeth July 12. 1634.

AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. The Statutes of the University, My Letters
to the Convocation about publishing (...) Statutes, etc.
so often and by so many undertaken and left again, are now by God's blessing,
and the great pains of them, to whom that Care was committed, brought to
perfection. This work, I hope, God will so bless, as that it may much improve
the Honor and good Government of that Place; a thing very necessary in this
Age both for Church and Common Wealth, since so many young Gentlemen and others
of all Ranks and Conditions have their first breeding for the public in that
Seminary. To save the Purse of the University, and to gain time, it was thought
fit rather to Print, than to transcribe so many Copies as might serve for the
present necessary use of the University and the several Colleges and Halls
respectively. And for my part I thought it expedient, that in every House they
might have the Rule of the public Government by them, and so see the way to
their Duty: which being as much for their particular good, as the advance of
the public service, every man, I hope, will be most willing and ready to
conform himself to that, which is required The Statutes to be published for a
years probation.
of him. There is to be a great Ledger Book written out fair, which is to be
the Authentic Copy under Seal, and to rest in Archivis, to be the future
Judge of all Statutes, which may hereafter be corruptly either printed or
transcribed. But before this be written, I hold it very expedient to put these
Statutes (as they are now corrected and set in order) into practice and
execution for the space of one whole year, to the end it may better appear, if
any necessary thing have slipped the Care of my self, and those, whom the
University trusted with me. For then if any such thing be discovered, it may
easily be amended in the Margent, or otherwise of these printed Books. And
after this experience made, the Authentic Copy may be written fair, without
any Interlining or other Blemish, and so be a Rule to Posterity of greater
Credit. These are therefore according to the power given unto me by an Act,
with full Consent in Convocation, bearing Date in August, 1633. to declare and
publish to the University and every Member thereof, that the Statutes now
printed are and shall be the Statutes, by which that University shall be
governed for this year ensuing, that is, until the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1635. reserving to my
self Power, according to the Decree before mentioned, to add or alter that,
which shall be fit, and take away from these Statutes or any of them that,
which shall be found by this intervening Practice to be either unnecessary or
incommodious for that Government. And then, (God willing) at or before that
time I will discharge the Trust, which the University has commended to me, and
absolutely make a settlement of the Statutes for future times, even as long as
it shall please God to bless them with use and continuance. And I account it
not the least of God's Blessings upon my self, that he has given me strength
and ability to do this Service for my ancient Mother, the University, whom I
have ever so much Honored, and am still ready to serve. And thus much Comfort
I can already give you, that his Majesty being made acquainted by me, that the
work was finished, expressed extraordinary contentment in it, and commanded me to
let you know so much, and withal that he doubts not of your ready Obedience to
them: Than which nothing can from (...) be more acceptable to him. Thus
assuring my self, that you will all strive to yield full Obedience to these
your Statutes, which will be your own Honor as well as the Universities, I
leave you to God's blessed Protection, and rest,

To my very Loving Friends, the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctors,
and the rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

July 18. 1634. Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, W. CANT.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
NOstri Juris Corpusculum exhibitum pervolvisti, expectatum reddidisti, Thanks
from the University about their Statutes then sent down, and published in Print
for a years probation.
nec raptim quidem, ut Prudentiam and Consilium agnoscamus, nec tamen tarde, ut
vigilantiae and studio gratulemur. Quid proposuimus, quod non effecit industria
vestra? Quid desideravimus, quod non concessit liberalitas? Quid ambivimus,
quod non impetravit gratia? Quemadmodum prius immunitates comparasti, ut
libere, ut ingenue, ita nunc Statuta, ut pie and composite vivamus. In utroque
genere honestati Academiae adeo praeclare consuluisti, ut neque hinc Servilis
audiat, nec illint Barbara. Statuta quidem dudum habuimus, sedqualia crederes a
Sphinge condita; adeo perplexa, ambigua, sibique (...) ut gravius supplicium
lueret legis Interpres, quam Violator. Jam vero emersit nova rerum facies.
Succurrunt Nobis Statuta, alia dirigentia, ali a punientia, alia, quae
stringunt, alia quae cohibent ensem, eaque omnia adeo perspicua, clara, (and
quod est optimum integritatis Argumentum) prioribus adeo dissimilia, ut neque
prudenti relinquatur imperitiae praetextus, nec parenti contumaciae
patrocinium; adeo ut non dubitemus plane asserere, Nos vestrae Amplitudini
magis obstrictos ob hanc Epitomen, quam Bodeleio ob tot Volumina. Illa enim
Arts and Scientias suggerunt, haec aliquod divinius, ordinem and been
institutae politiae salutem: Illa Bibliothecam, haec Academiam constitutit.
Hactenus Cura and Consilium, cui addidisti egregium humanitatis Specimen;
praesentes Canones tantum anno tenus Authenticos voluisti, ut si quid laxius,
deprehendatur, constringatur, si quid arctius remittatur. Singularis quidem
Clementia, and antehac in mandita! Leges and praescripta ad tempus posuisti, ut
nostro demum (...) and arbitrio confirmentur, and siqua occurrerent errata, non
statuentis authoritate, sed patientis experientia corrigantur. Quod superest,
providentiam and amorem, qua sola possumus, fide and observantia pensabimus,
and obsequium, quod juxta mandati candorem Statutis ad annum tantum vestrae
benignitati perpetuum spondemus.

Dat. in Domo Congregationis Call. Aug. 9. 1634. Vestrae Amplitudinis
Observantissima Acad. Oxon.


S. in Christo.
AFter my very hearty Commendations, etc. I have a good while since My Letters
to the Convocati on concerning the Book of the Statutes delivered to the King
and Sir Kenelm Digby's Manuscrspts, etc.
delivered the Book of your Statutes together with your Letters to his Sacred
Majesty who was marvellously well pleased with both and commanded me at some
convenient Leisure to let you know, how well he takes both the one and the
other. And because the Letter you sent was very well written, after his Majesty
had read it, I caused it to be fairly written in the spare Vellum at the
beginning of the Book.

Thus much I had signified to your self, and the whole Body of the Convocation
about a Month since, had I not been hindered by two things, the one as
troublesome to my self as the other will appear beneficial to you. That which
was troublesome to my self was the great Business of the Term, which lay very
heavy upon me, especially toward the end of it, and at the same time the Care
which I took to derive the benefit upon you. That which I know will be very
beneficial Manuscripts given by Sir (...) Digby to the University
to you is a parcel of Manuscripts which I have obtained for your Library from
a very Learned and Noble Gentleman, Sir Kenelm Digby. These Manuscripts (many
of them being very good) he has been at the Charge to Bind up, and put his
Arms fair upon them, and I think there are very few but so bound. With these he
has sent a Catalogue, but that (as himself tells me) is somewhat imperfect,
his Man being indisposed for health, at the time when he made it. And whether
the method of it will like you or fit the University I know not. But after the
Books are compared with this, it will be very easy to make a perfect one by it.
For my self I did not think it fit any way to meddle with them, but have left
them in their several Trunks, as they were packed up by himself, and so sent
them to you. Their number is 235. or thereabouts.

Concerning the Manuscripts I am to give two Advertisements of Two
Advertisements of Sir Ken. Digby concerning his Manuscripts to be observed.
the Donors Will and Pleasure, which I must and do pray you to settle in this
present Convocation: The one is, that he will not subject these Manuscripts to
the strictness of Sir Thomas Bodley's Statute, but will have Liberty given for
any man of worth, that will be at the Pains and Charge to Print any of these
Books, to have them out of the Library upon good Caution given, and to that
purpose and no other. The Second is, that he will reserve Liberty to himself,
during his natural Life, to borrow any of these Books out of the Library for
his own private use, whenever he shall ask them. And both of us desire the
Books may be put into the Library with these two Cautions expressly mentioned,
as the Act of Convocation was for the Books which my Lord Steward gave.

This is all which I have for the present to trouble you with, for I presume I
shall not need to put you in mind of writing a Letter of Thanks to Sir Kenelm
Digby whose love thus and diverse other ways expressed deserves it abundantly;
so with my Prayers to Almighty God to bless you to the honor of his Sacred
Name, and the good of his Church, I leave you to his gracious Protection.

To my very loving Friends, the Vicechancellor, the Doctors, the Proctours, and
the rest of the Convocation of the University of Oxford.

December. 19. 1634. Your very loving Friend and Chancellor W. CANT.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
Iteranda narras, imo iteranda. Codex Statutorum (ais) una cum Literis Thanks
from the University for the Delivery of their Statutes to the King, and for Sir
(...) Digby's Manuscripts procured by me.
opus absolutum sacrantibus, (...) simul and Regiae Majestatis frontem serena
Compldcentia explicuit. Curae, gaudioque vobis, Diis deputatis, populi salus
non ultio, abunde. est, exultamus hinc omnes, non ut legibus adstricti, sed
soluti vinculis. Hoc, ut reliqua, soli tribuendum est vestri favoris (...), and
affectui plusquam paterno. Cui parum est nos been moratos vivere, nisi etiam
faelices, and gratia suprema irradiatos. At leges compositas composite
observare, Praelisque viventibus denuo exprimere, erit hoc tandem Obedientiae
nostrae, nec solum obedientiae, erit gratitudinis; plus enim obligati sumus
beneficiis tuis, quam legibus. Pro uno, quem misimus impresso Codice, accepimus
Manuscripta decies repititis numerosiora characteribus, eaque (ut decet munus
tam exquisitum) bis data. Quod prius rogando impetratum est, non semel (...),
sed manu aliena and Tua. Care quidem erit vir Princeps, cum rogat. At quantae
liberalitatis est rogare, ut donet, seipsum oppignerare, ut donet aliena. Tu
vero eo conniteris, eo pergis Mun isic entiae, ut tuis aliena conjungas, and
una cum benesiciis ipsos etiam Benefactorcs cumulatissime largiaris: conciliato
hinc nobis Rege, lucraris illinc subditos, haec opera, haec tua vis. O! orbium
nobis influentium utrinque circumagens Motor! Nimio nos (...) studio inopem te
facis, procum humilem ac similem Nobis, ut reddas Nos quodammodo Amplitudini
Tuae similes. Sic proprii splendoris periculo vapores aliunde exhalat sol, ut
eisdem instillet arvis: Sic font longinquo aquam deducit hortulanus, ut riget
seminarium: Sic marmor fodinis eruit Tuus (...), ut augustioribus columnis
basilicam suffulciat; Dum tu succos gemmaque Musarum undequaque and Nobis
attrahis; Tu sol es, Tu Cultor, extructor Academiae. Siste liberalitalem hanc
tuam, siste, acquiescamus, Te uno contenti; Quid novos tantopere accersis
patronos? Pluris est nimio acclinare Te otio, quam nos erlgi quam maximis
Literarum auxiliis. Siste, ne simus nimiae faelicitate miseri, and infra
gratitudini positi; nos enim nil ultra possumus, quam quod volumus dona
Nobilissimi Digbeii, Tua mirari, colere, Thesaurare loculis, in Registro
nominatim conscribere Conditiones impositas, quas etiam Convocationis Decretum
sancivit Catalogo praefigere, grates illi pro Libris, pro illo Tibi
conceptissimas refer, Mandatis tuis religiose obsequi, ex Nutu praecurrere,
and animitus perstare.

E domo nostrae Congregationis December. 24. 1634. Sanctitati vestrae Devotissima
Acad. Oxon.


At this time there was a Proposition made for setting the Poor on A Project to
set the Poor of Oxford on work December. 28. 1634.
work at Oxford, by making New Stuffs and Drapery Ware, much after the fashion
that the Dutch and Walloons use at Canterbury, Norwich, and other places.
Diverse Letters passed between me and the Vicechancellor and some other
interessed men about it: But in Conclusion such difficulties appeared in the
Business, that the whole project suddenly vanished, and came to nothing. And
yet Mr. Escott of Wadham College, who very carefully, and certainly with a very
good intention labored in the Business, gave me this Answer following to such
Doubts as I had made. And set down some other things very considerable in the
business; And yet for all this that good intention fell to nothing.

THE Doubts that you have made to me, I think in part be thus Mr. Escots answer
to certain of mine concerning the Poor of Oxford. Recep. March the 10. 1635.
answered.

To the First. The Man John Roberts of Yarmouth, and born there, is a man as I
suppose, conformable; for I have heard him speak with dislike of some sactious
Brethren of the Town of Yarmouth, and of some of this Town of Oxford. And he
commends Mr. Brook the Minister of Yarmouth, and particularly for a Suit that
he lately commenced in the High Commission against a factious Lecturer for
preaching scandalously of the Blessed Virgin, etc. by reason of which Suit I
suppose the said Minister and his Conformity is known to my Lord's Grace of
Canterbury.

To the Second. If this Man die, another may be had upon the same Terms: But if
he live any time, he will make his own Sons, and others perfect in the Trade,
that may supply the place after him.

To the Third. I hope we shall not need to fear the making us a number of Poor
by them, that shall be trained up in this Trade, because this Course increases
not the number of Poor, but only teaches them, whom it finds idle, and enables
them to maintain themselves and their Families, if they have any; for it
employs both Men, Women and Children; and where there be no Idlers, it is like
there will not be many Beggars.

To the Fourth. I find not indeed that we have power to impose a Tax upon
Alehouses.

To the Fifth. The Taxes and Levies now made by the Town for the Poor, (are by
the Statute) to be employed and disposed of by the Overseers of the Poor, with
the consent of two Justices of Peace, for the providing of Materials to set
them to Work, and for the placing out of poor Children to honest Trades. Now if
the Overseers of this Work be made Justices of Peace, I see not but they may
have a hand in disposing of those Taxes, and convert as much of them as shall
be fit to this use. However the University may by its own power tax all
privileged men.

There is a man of good Place in the Town (who is like to be a Benefactor to
this Work) that thinks the Town, if the University go through with it, will
willingly Bind themselves to a yearly Contribution toward it, or else will
undertake to maintain constantly a certain number of Children, which shall work
there. But if none of these things be, I think there may be shown a way, how
the University of its self, without the assistance of the Town, may be able to
go on with this charitable Work, and provide for the maintaining and teaching
Sixty poor Children the first year, and add to them 20 or 30 more every year
perpetually; and yet so, that whatsoever any man shall contribute toward it,
shall return to him within the compass of the year with advantage. Which way
may be this.

There must be raised a Sum of Money, that shall issue out yearly for the
maintaining of a certain number at work; suppose sixty or an hundred.

This yearly Charge shall never increase, and yet the number to be maintained
shall increase every year, thus;

Suppose there be eighty to be maintained as Apprentices for seven years, at
five pounds charge for every Child per annum.

The first year, their Earnings will but answer their Spoilings.

The second year, this Eighty will earn 120 l. which will take in twenty four
Children more.

The third year, the first eighty will earn 200 l. and the 24 taken in the 2d
year will earn 36 l. in all 236 l. Out of which deduct to maintain the 24 taken
in the second year 120 l. and there will remain 116 l. which will take in 23
more.

The fourth year the first Eighty will earn 280 l. and the rest will earn so as
to take in 30 more. The fifth year will take in 40 more, the sixth year 50. The
seventh 40.

The Eighth year, The first Eighty shall be manumitted, and yet there will be
left at work 204. and there may be taken in 30 more.

The ninth year will manumit the 24, that were taken in the Second year, and
there will be left at work 210. And so always a certain number will go off
yearly, as they come in, and others will be taken in their room.

If there be taken in but 60 the first year, there will be added the second
year 20. the third year 16. the fourth year 20. the fifth 30. the sixth 40. and
so onward as it is showed before.

If the Town contribute toward it, there may be taken in the first year 100.
If the University go on alone, they may (besides the allowance of the Master
and Overseers) take in 60, by raising through the University by the Pole 1 d. a
Week upon every man, except poor Scholars; or by setting a certain Sum upon
every College, to be raised, as it shall seem meet to the Governors. Now if
any man think this 1 d. a Week to be a Burden, I answer him thus:

First, that upon the matter he does not give any thing, but only lays out by
the Week what within the Year will come in to him again, in the Buying of his
Gowns, Suits, Stockings, etc. Neither is this a thing only in imagination, but
it may easily be made to appear, that if things be well ordered, there shall be
saved in some Stuffs 4 d. in some 6 d. in some 8 d. a Yard, in some more, in
some less, as it is of higher or lower price, and in Stockings after the same
proportion.

Secondly, I think I may say, there is well nigh as much as this given every
Week at Buttery-Hatches, and to Beggars in the Town, which by this means might
be saved; for if a right course be taken there should not be seen a Beggar or
an idle Person within the Precincts of the University.

Thirdly, I believe, that my Lord Keeper, (...) Petitioned by the University,
will easily be induced (in regard of the undertaking of this work,) to keep
this University out of all Breves, which now come very frequently upon us, and
that we shall be burdened with no Collections, save only some extraordinary
ones, that shall first pass the Consent and approbation of my Lord our
Chancellor.

If this may persuade, that the Enterprise is feasible, it were good, that all
the Dispatch were made in it, that may be, that the Work may begin with the
Year, now at our Lady Day.

If the Overseers were made, they might travel in the perfecting of it, and
enquire, what were the Causes of their first failings in Cambridge, and how
they do now go through with it, as likewise what Course they take at Norwich,
where this Trade has a good while flourished, and so, that it leaves not (as I
am informed) a Beggar in the whole Country thereabouts.

S. in Christo.
SAlus vestra mihi in primis votis, and (ut ita dicam) Suprema semper My
Letters to the University, wherein I then gave them certain Manuscripts.
Lex fuit; post salutem Honos. Hinc a Cancellariatu meo dicam, an vestro (nam
non petenti, imo contra nitenti, summa and singulari vestra benevolentia
collatus est) omnem navavi operam, ut vestra sive Statuta, sive Privilegia,
sive alia (...); generis negotia, quae, meam manum exposcerent, ad optatum
finem facilo and plenis velis perducerentur. Siquae restant adhuc non indulta,
aut non satis confirmata, potestis (nil dubito) a Rege Serenissimo, Ecclesiae
and Academiis addictissimo, non frustra expectare. Vos saltem prudenter
Circumspicite, quid ulterius in vestram gratiam possim, antequam fato fungi and
ad Deum meum redire detur.

Et quia annis jam ingravescentibus, melius videtur sarcinam deponere, quam
mole ejus opprimi, exuvias quasdam meas Vobis praemisi; Ipse, quum Deus
vocaverit, sequuturus. Exuere autem primo placuit Libros manuscriptos. Quid
enim mihi cum illis, cui nec otium datur vel inspicere? Et si daretur, nec
oculi ad perlegendum satis firmi, nec memoria ad retinendum satis fida
reperitur. (...) enim inter exteriores sensus oculos, and inter interiores
facultates memoriam primo senectutem and prodere and fallere. Libros igitur
hosce malui vivus dare vobis clarissimis filiis, quam Testamento legare
mortuus, tum ob alias Causas, tum etiam ob hanc, ne manus aliqua media furtiva
forte selectiores praeriperet.

Mitto autem nec tot, nec tales, ut vestris studiis dignos existimem, sed
quales amor meus, and erga Communem Matrem pietas parare potuerunt; Mitto tamen
(ut per Catalogum, quem una misi, constabit) Hebraica volumina Manuscripta
quatuordecim, Arabica Quinquaginta quinque, Persica septendecim, Turcica
quatuor, Russica sex, Armenica duo, Chinensia duodecim, Graeca quadraginta
quatuor, Italica tria, Gallica totidem, Anglicana Quadraginta sex, Latina supra
bis centum, praeter alia Quadraginta sex, sed recentiora, and e Collegio
Herbipolensi in Germania tempore Belli suecici desumpta.

Hos Libros, Amoris mei Testes, vestrae sidei committo, in Bibliotheca A
Condition to be kept concerning the Manuscripts.
reponendos, hac Condition, ut nunquam inde extrahantur, vel mutuo cuipiam
dentur sub quocunque praetextu, nisi solum, ut Typis mandentur, and sic publici
and Juris, and utilitatis siant, nec tamen illum in finem, nisi data prius
cautione a Vice-Cancellario, and Procuratoribus approbanda, and ut statim a
Praelo locis suis in Bibliotheca praedicta restituantur, ut Cautio istaec
Libros hosce a furibus, and Conditio ista eosdem a Blattis Tineisque tutos
conservare possit; quibus aliter praeda futuri sunt, dum suo pulvere situque
sepulti jaceant. Siqui alii Libri similes, aut meliores ad meas forte manus
pervenerint, eos etiam ad vos mittendos curabo, sub (...) Condition, and eodem
loco sigendos.

Nolo alia negotia Libris immiscere; sed omnia ncbis prospera cord, quo decet,
pio exoptans, Academiam illam and Vosmetipsos omnes and singulos, speciali Dei
gratiae commendo.

Vestris mihi amicissimis Dr. Pinck, Vicecancellario, aliisque Doctoribus,
Procuratoribus, nec non singulis in Domo Convocationis intra Alman
Universitatem OXON. congregatis.

Datum ex aedibus meis Lambethanis Maii 22. 1635. Cancellarius vester and
Amicus W. CANT.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
DVM verbis Te fragilem fateris, and factis immortalem Te comprobas, Thanks
from the University for my Manuscripts I gave them.
de facilitate nostra dolemus, qui fruituri sumus aeterna quidem beneficiorum,
sed benefactoris temporali proesentia dum nobis intersis, and minus beneficus,
dum tamen diutius. Ne unquam in fato tuo fungi videamur, quomodocunque victuri
nostro. Cum Tibi satis vixeris, vive alteram Ecclesioe, alteram Reipublicae,
tertiam oetatem nobis; vives and ultra secula in (...) Authoribus, quos in
mutuum aeternitatis cambium a Tineis vindicasti. Quorum fidissima exemplaria
natalitio atramento, and manu obstetrice confignata, fidissimis Archivorum
simul, and memorioe nostroe loculis reposuisti. Sunt illi numero quadringenti
quinquaginta duo ac plures, pondere inaestimabiles, linguarum varietate
omnigeni. Pentecosten emisti alteram sub tempore Pentecostes, cum sis ipse
Divini Spiritus effusissime plenus. O! nobis perpetuo memorande tot Libris, and
tam vivacibus, tot Linguis and tam disertis, quot ipse detulisti. Ne queraris
amplius lucere tibi non^ satis firmos ad legendum oculos, cum nostro emolumento
sic aciem intendas. Ne queraris minus (...) perstare ad retinendum memoriam,
cum nostri sis (...) memor inter (...) negotiorum Turbas: Deficient fortasse
and nobis oculi (si tui unquam defecerint) proe nimio fluctus esfluvio: Sed tua
languescente (quod obsit) memoria, nunquam elanguescet memoria Tui. Hoec, nobis
etiam extinctis quibus jam tenax instdet, nunquam e tabulis nascendae
posteritatis deteretur and excidet. Circumspicere nos jubes, si quid effectum
velimus ab optimis, maximisque in terra, Rege ac Te inter accipiendum carere
non vacat. At quamvis. Tibi obtemperare sit commodi satis, fruique Te nimium;
si tamen Membris quid insit oculi nondum a Capite exercitum, si munificentioe
tuoe tanta poterit superesse inopia, vel inopioe nostroe, audacia, ut indigia
vel petere possimus, (...), egebimus, rogabimus, ut in hac etiam molestia tuo
obsequantur imperio. O qui nobis Regis animum concilias Mediator politicus,
intercede (Sanctissime) summo Intercessori Christo. Nos itidem, quamvis long
distantes, longinqua pietate devocabimus occumulandam in te gratiam. Nos haec
Manuscripta, quibus tuam ditasti Academiam, inscribemus Registro, recondemus
animo, volvemus manu, enunciabimus lingua and (...), recudemus. Nos pari
Conditionum observantia munus vestrum custodiemus, ac pia gratitudinis
religione accepimus. Nos Codices tuos vel tanquam gemmas sinu privato
amplexabimur, vel tanquam stellas aprico immittemus Orbi; omnino consulturi,
aut Gratiae tuae aut Gloriae: Nisi omnibus, certe impertiemur nullis: Qui (...)
meruisti, nihil invenies in Officio nostro mediocre. Finge animos manuscriptos,
ac illos accipe. Sic vovet se, and praestabit

E. Domo nostrae Convocationis Maii 28. 1635. Sanctitati vestrae Sacratissima
OXON. Acad.


The Repair and Beautisying of the Chapel of Saint Mary Magdalane, Magdalane
College.
which began the Year before I was Chancellor, was completely finished; as also
another new Building of theirs toward the Waterside in this Year.

In this Year Smith-gate was made passable for Coaches. Smith-gate.


In this Year the Thames was brought up to Oxford, and made Navigable Thames
brought up to Oxford.
for Barges.

Henry Birkhead of Trinity College in Oxford was seduced by a Jesuit, Henry
Birkhead of Trinity Col. seduced by (...) Jesuit.
and in May 1635. carried to St. Omers by one, who called himself by the name
of Kemp, a Priest of that College of St. Omers: They took shipping at Dover,
and there they were not so much as asked their Names by any Officer, nor ever
tendered the Oath of Allegiance: But I found means to get him back and settled
him.

AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. The time of the Year Dr. Pink continued
(...) another year.
puts me in mind that the Vicechancellor has gone through a years Pains in
that Government, and the place being so full of trouble, a Year may be thought
a great space of time for any man to be exercised in it: Yet considering what
experience is requisite for a Governor there, and in hope that the first
Year's pains will make the labor of the second more easy, and especially
weighing with my self, with what great sufficiency both for Integrity and
Judgment the present Vicechancellor, Dr. Pink, has carried himself in all the
Businesses, which concerned the Honor of that University, both at Home and
abroad; I have thought fit to continue him another Year in the
Vicechancellorship; assuring my self that he will constantly go on, as he has
begun, which cannot but tend to his own Credit and Reputation, as well as to
the good Government of the University, and all those other happy Effects which
attend upon a well settled Government, which is so necessary every where, but
more especially in that Body. These are therefore not only to let you know that
I do hereby nominate and choose Dr. Pink to be my Vicechancellor for this Year
following, but also to pray and require you to allow of this my Choice, and to
give him all the Respects due to his Place, and all other help and assistance
which shall be in your Power to give, and may be necessary for him to receive
for his better Ease and Comfort in the Government. Thus not doubting of your
Readiness, and willing Obedience herein, I leave both him and you all to the
Grace of God, and rest

July 10. 1635. Your very loving Friend and Chancellor W. CANT.


ANother Business there is, which I think may be very well worthy your
Consideration; and if you do not give it remedy (as I think A Branch of my
Letters to my Lord of Winchester, concerning New Coll. in Oxon. Feb. 2. 1635.
it abundantly deserves) I do not know who either can or will. I have often
wondered, why so many good Scholars came from Winchester to New College, and yet
so few of them afterward prove eminent Men: And while I lived in Oxford I
thought upon diverse things, that might be causes of it, and I believe true
ones; but I have lately heard of another, which I think has done and does the
College a great deal of harm, in the Breeding of their Young men. When they
come from Winchester they are to be Probationers two Years, and then Fellows. A
man would think those two Years, and some Years after should be allowed to
Logic, Philosophy, Mathematics, and the like Grounds of Learning, the better
to enable them to study Divinity with Judgment: But I am of late accidentally
come to know, that when the Probationers stand for their Fellowships, and are
to be examined how they have profited; One chief thing in which they are
examined is, how diligently they have read Calvin's Institutions; Concerning
the Probationers of New Coll. their reading of Calvin's Institutions too soon.
and are more strictly held to it, how they have profited in that, than almost
in any kind of Learning besides. I do not deny but that Calvin's Institutions
may profitably be read, and as one of their first Books for Divinity, when they
are well grounded in other Learning; but to begin with it so soon, I am afraid
does not only hinder them from all grounds of Judicious Learning, but also too
much possess their Judgments before they are able to judge, and makes many of
them humerous in, if not against the Church. For so many of them have proved in
this latter Age, since my own memory in that University. Your Lordship is
Visitor there, and I think you cannot do a better Deed, than to advise on a
way, how to break this Business with the Warden who is a learned and discreet
Man, and then think upon some (...) for it. For I am verily persuaded, it does
that College a great deal of harm. I do not hold it fit that your Lordship
should fall upon this Business too suddenly. When the Warden comes next to the
Election may be a sit time; nor would I have You let it be known, that you have
received this Information from me; but sure I am it is true, and needs a Remedy.

February 2. 1635. W. CANT.


S. in Christo,
QVod ad honorem Dei, and Academiae Vtilitatem cedat, (...) vobis My Letters to
the University concerning their large Patent procured from his Majesty.
a Rege pientissimo, and Literarum Patrono Munificentissimo Literas Patentes.
In eis facile est legere, quali gratia and quanto favore Vos, and studia vestra
amplectitur Regum optimus: Privilegia enim hoe Literae continent, non solum
vetera confirmata, sed etiam illa ampliata, and ubi obscura vel dubia fuerunt,
explicata; ac etiam multa nova, de quibus antehac ne cogitavit quidem Academia.

Ad firmitatem harum libertatum quod attinet, summa (uti spero) fide and
Jurisperitorum Scientia (quorum Consilio in hoc negotio usi sumus) eas septas
and munitas satis esse confidimus. Nec defuit illis frequentior monitio, ut
caute and circumspecte describerentur omnia, ne oppidani aliive, si qui
Privilegiis vestris inimiciores sint, facile possint arripere informandi ansam.
Majorem a me Curam expectare non potuit Academia, nisi talium legum
Municipalium peritia imbutus fuissem, ut ipse manu mea Patentes hasce
delineare, and delineatas examinare, and de earum Perfectione judicare propria
Minerva potuissem.

Sumptus vestros expensasque circa hanc rem majores esse quam spectavi, audio;
spero tamen non cum Privilegiis hisce comparandas. Sed meae nec potestatis, nec
Officii est, vel Salaria, seu Feoda Jarisperitorum, vel Sigillationis summam
juribus aut consuetudini affixam moderari.

Hoc unum adjiciam pro amore, quo vos vestraque amplector, ipse (and non ficta
scribo) sumptum horum onera in me jampridem suscepissem, nisi alia vobis ibidem
satis nota tenuiores proventus meos plus satis exhausissent. Superest ut Regi
serenissimo, ac de vobis optime merito, pro Patentibus Letters of Thanks to be
sent to his Majesty for their large Patent.
clausas sigillatasque mittatis Literas, pro Privilegiis amplissimis gratias
(si possitis) pares expendatis. Ante omnia vero pro singulari ejus favore
obedientiam and fidem, quibus omni officii genere tenemini, alacriter
exhibeatis. Quae omnia nomine vestro, meoque Regiclementissimo spospondi. Vobis
incumbit, ne fatis reus sit.

Datum ex AEdibus meis Lambethanis 10 Martii, (...) Cancellarilus and Amicus
vester W. CANT.


UNA cum Literis Patentibus mitto vobis Decretum Dominorum, qui The Decree of
the Lords sent.
a Regis sunt Secretioribus Sanctioribusque Consiliis, de usu earum Literarum,
prout in Causa inter Cantabrigienses and Londinenses definitum suit, ut nec
vobis penitus otiosoe, nec aliis, qui Proelo hic inserviunt, onerosoe nimis
esse possunt,

Reverendissime Cancellarie,
ACademiam tuam solicit and ex consuetudine curas, ut solo nobiscum Thanks
from the University for their large Patent procnted by (...).
agas Beneficiorum (...); nec aliud sere occurrat Comitiis nostris tractandum
quam Munificentiae vestrae Negotium. Olim sapienter meribus nostris and
politioe, nunc magnifice libertati, and honori (...); par Statutis donum,
chartam accepimns auctiorem, and magnoe illius oemulam, qua and proesentem
Academiam ditas, and obligas futuram. In grandi hoc opere Concessiones
accepimus amplissimas, quasdam veteres, sed confirmando, augendo, explicando,
peuitus novatas; quosdam ex integro novas, sed eas provide muniendo factas
authoritate vetustas. Aliena dedisti oeque ac tua, qui (...) concessis primus
dedisti, fruique absque dissidiis. Tua vero tam (...) and plena largitus es, ut
manum alienam expectare non possint. Dum tu Sanctissimus Arbiter oppido (...)
and (...) just (...) statuis Pomaria, dum insestos ita circumscribis, ac
subjicis, ut locum non (...) malevolentioe, and Bello, dum proecatum habes, ne
sit actio in soro, lis in lege, sed pace vigeat Dominium; donas hoec omnia non
(...), sed indies, oeternumque and quoties sine tali Providentia convelli
potuerant. Quamvis vestri Beneficia tam ardua sint ista, ut captum superent
Academioe, tamque numerosa, ut difficile sit recensere, quoe tu largiendo non
gravatus es, (...) and molem and numerum vineit conferendi Modus. Sub tanto
rerum pondere alternatim (...) animo volvens Britanniae curas and Academioe,
eousque descendisti, ad studium artemque nostri Emolumenti, ut in recudendis
Privilegiis, ipse Nodos, Argutiasque juris perquirere, ipse momenta verborum
trutinare, and supra juris prudentum aciem, vel saltem industriam, plurima
perficere tentares. Nemo unquam tam solers avidusque fuit nocendi, (...) tu
omnimodo sublevandi. At uni Tibi non sufficit ista, quoe nos satiat,
Liberalitas; dicis voluisse te suscipere etiam Feodorum onera, hoc est, escam,
quam parasti etiam nobis in os ponere; non sic Deus; dedisti tamen, ut ille,
manum, accipiendi facultatem, Statutum Sanxisti, cuique vi and sructu stips
annua viritim colligitur, ad sustinendas hujusmodi impensas. Praeli exercendi
copiam ex Decreto Dominorum huc transmisisti, ut simus Cantabrigiae Pares in
omnibus, sicut ex Gratia vestra superiores in plurimis: totum illud Proelum, si
gratitudine contendendum esset, tuis non (...) Encomiis. Hujus Privilegii usum
modestum ex eodem doces (...); Adeo tibi Curoe est non solum opulentia, sed
virtus nostra. Postremo nos mones gratiarum, sed adversus alios, (...) ne
gratias quidem vendicans: Sic unico debemus Tibi, velut Animae Politicoe per
omnia moventi, and moderanti, Beneficia, Benefactores, ipsam tum recipiendi,
tum gratias agendi rationem. Curoe quid nostroe relinquet Providentioe vestroe
sedulitas? Nobis nihil negotii superest proeter gratias, and obedientiam. Deus
etiam supra Nos te amet, qui in (...) Beneficiis Dei es tam similis. Tu nobis
illa, non solum per teipsum, sed per maximorum optimum, Serenissimum Carolum,
per potestates, per juris consultos, per omnes, quorum aures manusque nobis
erant in auxilium vocandae. Nos itidem gratias, non solum immediate, sed per
plurimas interpositorum Vmbras; quae (...) ubique disseminatae, in Te uno
terminantur. Comes erit Gratitudini par obedientiae; hae duoe, velut oculi
nostri, uno ferentur motu; grati esse non possumus nisi etiam morigeri, nec diu
morigeri nisi animitus grati. Proinde placito serenissimi Regis (...) simul
obtemperare, Nobis erit Ratio, Conscientia, Religio; non solum nostri causa,
quibus id utile, tutum ac decorum est, sed maxim Tui, qui accessisti redivivoe
Academioe Fundator, morum Sponsor, negotiorum Intercessor, in Consiliis
Angelus, in Angustiis Deputatum Dei brachium. Tot beneficiis conducti sumus,
tot affectibus vincti, ut teneat nos vi aeque inevitabili haec virtus, ac
natura vel fatum; prius esse desinet, quam esse talis.

E. Domo nostrae Congregationis Mart. 20. 1635/6. Sanctitatis vestrae
Colenissima vestra Oxon. Academia.


Reverendissime Cancellarie.
TAM grandia tamque numerosa profudisti nobis beneficia, and vel oblito, Thanks
for a Prebend procured for the University Orator and his Successors.
vel des picienti similis, unum taceas, unum quod alii maxim loquentur, cum
sit praemium and hortamen loquendi. Non satis duxisti Academiae tuae Corpus
priviligiis ditare, nisi peculari munisicentioe stumine auream redderes and
linguam: Canonicatus proximi accessione nostrum augendo Oratorem, and Juggestum
Rhetoricum Theologiae maritando, effecisti, ut in illo non minus pro Te quam
teipsum oremus. Post cumulum beneficiorum, hoc novissimum a Regum optimo ac
munificentissimo impetrasti, ut simul prospiceres facundoe gratitudini. O
triumphans Largitor! Quid unquam retribuemus nisi inopu mThesaurum, Gratias? Tu
vero etiam Gratiarum Author, qui sic foves nostrae mentis interpretem, and
gratoe harmoniae plectrum. AEgre sustinet is ipse Gratias nostras epistolari
brevitate succingere: Cupit etiam in Orationem prorumpere, nervisque omnibus
mentem expandere. Scribit unus, quod sentiunt, quod fateri gestiunt universi te
Patrem esse tuae Matris Academiae, Eaque nunc linguam (...) novo eloquentiae
salario. Si Lingua publica, quoe pro nobis omnibus vocem ornat, calamumque
stringit nunc demum in re sua desiceret, essemus nos omnes illius loco viritim
Oratores. Sic enim in Causa vehementi singulae parts Corporis (...) migrant in
linguas, and signis plusquam sonoris pleni pectoris exundantiam articulant. At
quoniam vel verba, nec signa, nec vires omnium Oratorum in stylo unius
conspirantes enunciando sufficient unius affectui, Tu sponte intellige, cui
men's profundissimae capacitatis, quam simus animitus devoti

E. Domo nostra Congregationis Mart. 20. 1635/6. Sanctitatis vestrae
Colentissima Oxon. Acad.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
CVM in corpore Academiae sim ipse Lingua, and in Oratorum serie membrum illud,
quod primum degustaverit vestroe munificientioe fructum, liceat mihi oceano
rivum; and immensurabili gratiarum acervo peculiarem sementem vestra cum venia
subministrare. Dum totum se exerit Gladiator, vim ponit in lacerto. Qui totus
venerationem exhibet, genu tantum oslendit Ne succenseat paternitas vestra, si
Academiae Lingua praesertim in re sua vehementius assici gestiat. Ideoque
infinito gratiarum ponderi aliquid amplius addere, and plus toto afferre
conetur. Simulachri part interiore nomen suum inscripsit Phidias: Mihi non
arrogantiae, ut illi, vertatur, sed gratitudini, si in maternoe Epistolae
visceribus privati Officii tesseram concludam vestrae memor memoriae, Curaeque
tam long infra vestram Celsitudinem, non possum non esse gratus, tametsi
gratitudini peccavero.

Martii 20. (...). Sanctitati vestrae humillime devotissimus Guilielm. Strode,
Academiae tuae Orator publicus.


In this year, the Northside of University College was finished. University Coll.


Upon a Difference betwixt the University and Town of Oxford, The Agreement
between the University and town of Oxford to stand to a final Order upon the
hearing of the difference about Felons Goods, etc. vid. page 199.
touching Felons Goods, Court-Leets and taking Toll, a Hearing was appointed by
consent of the most Reverend Father in God William Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Chancellor of the University, and of the Right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Berks, Steward of the Town aforesaid; as likewise by
the mutual consent of both Parties, diverse of the University and Town aforesaid
being then present, who assumed in the name of the rest, that whatsoever should
be ordered. or directed upon this hearing, should be final and binding, and
that either Party would for ever observe hereafter, and stand to it. In Witness
whereof the Lords above mentioned, and others then present have hereunto set
their Hands. Dated at Lambeth this 28th day of April in the Year of our Lord,
1636.

W. CANT. John Oxon Bryan Duppa. William Smith. Bryon Twyne. Barkshire. John
Whistler. Oliver Smith. Procuratores Mr. Brown ex AEd. Chri. Mr. Good e Coll.
Novo.
John Sare. Tmothy Carter.


S. in Christo.
NON diu abhinc est, quo Literas Patentes Libertates avitas confirmantes My
Letters to the Convocation, when the new Statutes were to be published.
and conferentes Novas accepistis. Munus Regium erat; Cura autem mea. Nunc
Statuta mitto. Illa vincula secum ducunt, sed accommoda, ne Libertates
licentiam induerent, sed vobis grata. Non vellet enim Academia esse sine
Fraeno, sed in ordinem redacta, ne amplius confusione and contradictionibus
subditos oneraret; sed and antiquis valde consona, (nisi ubi temporum ratio
aliud exigit) ne quid novi videretur pati celeberrima simul and vetustissima
Academia.

Saepius tentatum hoc opus, and a Viris saeculis suis celeberrimis; frustra
tamen. Nec enim quidquam in hac re ad optatum sinem perduxerunt. Sed utrum
Operis ipsius difficultas, an aliqua alia interventens remora obstiterit, plane
nescio. Quo magis gratulor Academiae, and (...), quibus Miseratione Divina
datum est opus hoc ad talem saltem perfectionem, redactum videre, qualem far
solent Leges and Statuta, quae de quovis particulari cavere nequeunt.

Nec Academioe tantum and vobis, sed and mihimetipsi gratulor, quod Statuta
situ and pulvere tantum non sepulta, in lucem redacta, and suis numeris
titulisque distincta video. Multo magis tamen, quod placuit Academiae in
frequenti Convocatione (ne uno refragrante) rem totam ad me, Curamque meam
refer, ut sub Incude med Statuta haec limarentur, and a me Confirmationem
acciperent. Summa haec vestra Confidentia fuit, and certe gratias omnibus,
singulis, ago summas, ob fidem mihi in re tanta, ac tali jam liberaliter
praestitam.

Qua in re certe non fidem, (...) nec spem vestram fefelli. Verum enim est, and
ausim dicere, me summa cum aequitate, cum aequalitate pari omnia transegisses.
Et potestatem a venerabili Domo mihi commissam it a moderatum, ut nihil prae
oculis habuerim, nisi quod plane in publicum Ecclesiae and Academiae bonum
cederet. Et hoc (Deum Testor) omnt affectione, partialitate, privato respectu
praesentium temporum, personarum, locorum, officiorum qualiumcunque sepositis.

Vnum superest non tacendum. Transmisi vobis Statuta, quae annum probationis
suae apud vos complevere, jam ex usu illo in nonnullis, emendata, and pro
potestate a vobis concessa, misi sub sigillis meo vestroque in debita Juris
forma confirmata. Quum ecce placuit Regi Serenissimo, Musisque vestris
addictissimo, suam etiam superadjicere confirmationem manu Commissioners sent
by his Majesty about the publishing of the Statutes.
propria and sigillo magno munitam: Quod Academiae honorem, moribus
Disciplinam, Statutis reverentiam and firmitatem nequit non confer. Ob quam
Regiae Majestatis gratiam insignem, gratias refer pares nec ipse, nec vos
potestis. Quin and Commissionarios misit suos, qui ob majorem negotii
dignitatem, and Statuta haec exhiberent, and Collegiorum and Aularum Praefectos
Statutis sic exhibitis and confirmatis subscribere curarent.

Reliquum postea erit, ut Statutis sic confirmatis Obedientia praestetur, qud
nihil magis poterit augere Academiae splendorem. Et licet primo loco authoritas
vestra Legis hasce condendas curavit, ea tamen natura legis est, ut semel
condita, and promulgata, non alios tantum, sed and condentes liget. Huic
Obedientiae, Reliquisque virtutibus quibus polletis, vos semper affines futuros
spero, and ut tales sitis, supplicibus precibus se a summo Numine impetratum
non dubitat.

Vestris mihi amicissimis, Doctori Pink Vice-Cancel. lario, reliquisque
Doctoribus, Procuratoribus, nec non singulis in Domo Convocationis intra Almam
Universitatem Oxon. Congregatis.

Datum ex AEdibus nostris Lambethanis Junii 15. 1636. Amicus vester and
Cancellarius W. CANT.


These Letters were read in Convocation upon the 22 of June 1636. A Convocation
on the 22 of June for the publishing of the new Statutes.
wherein Mr. Secretary Cook made a weighty Speech fitting the occasion; and so
likewise did the Vice Chancellor. Mr. Secretary's Speech fallows in haec
verba.

Reverend Vice Chancellor, Doctors and Masters.
YOU have heard with due respect and attention the Letters Mr. Secretary (...)
Speech in Convocation at the Publication of the new Statutes.
brought by us to his Sacred Majesty; you have also heard in Conformity
thereunto other Letters, sent from your most Reverend Chancellor, signifying
his Majesty's Grace and Goodness in recommending unto you this Volume of
Statutes, which we now deliver, and you are to receive, as the Rules, by which
you must be governed hereafter. You have also seen and heard the Confirmation
and Establishment of these Statutes. First by his Majesty's Royal Signature,
and under the great Seal of his Kingdom: And respectively under the Hand and
Seal of the Lord Archbishop, both as Primate and Metropolitan of England, and
as most worthy Chancellor of this University, whereby it is manifest, that
these Laws and Ordinances are so established and ratified both by Sovereign and
Subalternal Authority, Temporal and Spiritual, that nothing further can be
required, but your ready acceptance and obedience, whereof I make no doubt. For
(to do you right) you have already showed so effectual Conformity; and at this
present express such alacrity and forwardness, that I rather see cause to
commend and encourage you, than to exhort and stir you up, or any way to
importune you by any further Speech; yet because there is generally in Man's
nature a secret, curiosity and prejudice against all things, that appear
extraodinary and new, especially when they impose any Duty, and require
obedience at their hands; I must crave leave in discharge of my own Duty to
satisfy those, which hereafter may be inquisitive into these Proceedings, to
insist a little upon those principal Respects which demonstrate the full
Authorization and absolute necessity of submission to these Laws.

That which Commands in chief, and which no reason can withstand, is his
Majesty's Sovereign Power, by which these Statutes (as you see) are both
enacted and confirmed. Him we all acknowledge to be our supreme Governor both
of Church and Commonwealth, over all Causes and Persons; and to his Supremacy
and Allegiance, we are all obliged by Oath. This then we must build upon, as an
Axiom and fundamental Rule of Government, That all our Laws and Statutes are
the King's Laws, and that none can be enacted, changed, or abrogated without
him; so all Courts of Law or Equity are properly the King's Courts; all Justice
therein administered, be it Civil or Martial, is the King's Justice; and no
Pardon or Grace proceeds from any, but from the King: And as of Justice, so is
he the Source of Honor; all Dignities, all Degrees, all Titles, Arms, and
Orders come orignally from the King, as Branches from the Root. And not only
particular Men and Families, but all Corporations, Societies, nay Counties,
Provinces, and depending Kingdoms, have all Corporations, Societies, nay
Counties, Provinces, and depending Kingdoms have all their Jurisdictions and
Governments established by him; and by him (for public good) to be changed or
dissolved. So his Power reaches to Foreign Plantations, where he may erect
Principalities, and make Laws for their good Government, which no man may
disobey. And as in the temporal, so in the State Ecclesiastical, his Regal
Power by ancient Right extends to the erection of Bishoprics, Deanries, and
Cathedral Churches, and to settle Orders for Government in all Churches, by the
advice of his own (...), without any Concurrence of Foreign Usurping Power.

But for Universities and Colleges, they are the Rights of Kings in a most
peculiar manner. For all their Establishments, Endowments, Privileges and
Orders by which they subsist and are maintained, are derived from Regal Power.
And as it is your greatest Honor, so it is your greatest Safety, That now this
Body of your Laws, as well as your Privileges and Immunities, are established,
ratified and confirmed by the King. And more I shall not need to say in this
Point.

In the next place you may consider for your encouragement to receive this
great Favor and Benefit from his Majesty with ready and thankful Minds, that
your Chancellor's worthy Care had a chief operation in advancing this great
work; whose nearness to his Majesty in a place of that Eminency and sincere
Conformity to his Orders and Commands, and most watchful Care over that part of
the Government which is committed to his Trust, inableth him to support, and
may give you confidence to obey that which his Majesty recommendeth by so good
a Hand, specially in Matters concerning the good Government of the Church or of
the Schools.

In the Church (whereof he is Primate and Metropolitan) his Power is very
large, and his extraordinary endeavors in it deserve at least to be well
understood. In former times, when Churchmen (...) Rule, the greatest Prelates
gave the first way to alienate Church Livings: Whereas this worthy Prelate
makes it his chief work to recover to the Church for the furtherance of God's
Service what may be now restored. And what therein he has effected under his
Majesty's gracious and powerful Order, not England alone, but Scotland and
Ireland can abundantly witness. Again, what help and relief he procures daily
for Ministers oppressed by rich incroaching Neighbors or Patrons; what
Collections and Contributions he obtains to re-edify, to repair and adorn
Churches; and what great Structures are now in Hand, and much advanced by his
Judgment, Care and Zeal in our most famous Monuments dedicated to God's
service, we may behold with Joy, and future Ages will (...) to his Majesty's
eternal Glory, by whose Power and Order all is performed, and to the Honor of
our Country, and for encouragement and example of those that shall succeed; who
will acknowledge with us, that this Man is indeed, as he is by his just style,
a most Reverend and Beneficial Father of the Church: And for this University
what better Evidence can be desired of his singular Love and Beneficence, than
first that stately Building, whereby he has made himself another Founder of
that College, which bred him to this height of worth? And secondly, those many
rare and exquisite Manuscripts and Authors, wherewith he has replenished your
renowned public Library? And if you add hereunto his constant Care to maintain
you in all your Rights and Privileges, and to assist you in your Preferments;
And finally in collecting this great Volume of Ordinances for the present and
further Government of this famous University. You have Monuments sufficient to
eternize among you and all men his memory and desert. And this work is that,
which now remains in the third place to be further stood upon. For it is not
(as some may think) either a Rhapsody of overworn and unuseful Ordinances, nor
yet an imposition of Novel Constitutions to serve the present Times; But our
Royal Justinian by the Labor and Direction of this prudent person has
collected into a Pandect or Corpus juris Academici all the ancient approved
Statutes, which in former times were scattered and so neglected. And tho many
great Prelates have heretofore undertaken this Work, yet it ever miscarried,
till the piercing Judgment and undefatigible Industry of this man took it in
hand, and happily, as now you see, has put you into possession of it, whereof
the use can hardly be valued. For by these Rules, You, that are Governors, may
know, what to command, and those, that are under you may know how to obey, and
all may understand how to order their Behavior, and their Studies, whereby
they may become most profitable Members in the Church and Commonwealth, which
is the main cause, why his Majesty requires them so strictly to be obeyed. For
let me speak freely out of that true affection which I bear to you all: Deceive
not your selves with a vain opinion, that Kings and Princes give great
Donations, Privileges and Honors to their Schools and Universities for a
popular Applause, or out of mere Bounty, or for honor, or for opinion of
merit, by which the Art of Clergymen transported them heretofore: But the very
truth is, that all wise Princes respect the welfare of their Estates, and
consider, that Schools and Universities are (as in the Body) the noble and
vital parts, which being vigorous and sound, send good Blood and active Spirits
into the Veins and Arteries, which cause health and strength: Or if feeble or
ill affected, corrupt all the Vital Powers; whereupon grow Diseases, and in the
end death it self. What inconveniences have grown in all Ages by the ill
Government and Disorders of Schools, your Books can inform you. And to come
home to your selves, have not our late Parliaments complained? Nay has not the
Land exclaimed, that our great Schools of Virtue were become Schools of Vice?
This I mention unwillingly, but withal do most willingly tell you to your
eternal praise, That fince it pleased his Majesty to take to heart a
Reformation, and by advice of your never too often named Chancellor, sent you
down some temporary Orders, whereby to reduce you to some reasonable
moderation, thereupon by the Wisdom and Resolution of you the worthy
Governors, and by the inclinable conformity of all the Students in general, it
is now come to pass, that Scholars are no more found in Taverns or Houses of
Disorder, nor seen loytering in the Streets, or other places of Idleness or ill
Example, but all contain themselves within the Walls of their Colleges, and in
the Schools or public Libraries: Wherein, I must confess, you have at length
gotten the start, and by your Virtue and Merit have made this University, which
before had no Paragon in any foreign Country, now to go beyond it self, and
give a glorious Example to others not to stay behind.

And if those temporary and unperfect Orders produced so good effect, what may
now be expected from this Body of Laws and Statutes, so complete and so
digested, that no former Age did ever enjoy the like?

Thus you have understood how the Goodness of our great King, how the Care and
respect of your Chancellor, and how the worth and substance of the work it self
may forcibly induce you to congratulate your own Happiness. And therefore I
might here forbear to trouble you any longer with a harsh interrupted Speech:
but that I cannot omit to put you in mind of one thing, which I know you will
hear with willingness and attention, because it tends chiefly to the honor
of our God, and then by his power to the honor of our King; and thence to the
comfort of every true hearted Subject who will readily acknowledge with
Reverence and thankfulness the great blessings we now enjoy above all other
Nations; I will tell you, but what I know: (for I speak within my Element) I
have seen our neighboring Countries in great Prosperity and Renown, their
Cities stately built and strongly fortified, with Walls raised up to Heaven,
full of People, full of Trade, so full of peace and plenty, that they surfeited
in all excess; but from hence they are since fallen, partly by the boundless
Ambition of great Princes, partly by the Factions and Divisions in Religion;
and generally by their Disorders, into such condition, that men of great Honor
sent in remote Employment, found whole Provinces so sacked and depopulated,
that in diverse Journeys they incountred scarce a Man, and of those they found
dead, some had Grass in their Mouths and Stomachs, and some were torn in pieces
by Beasts and ravenous Fowls; and those that were alive had no other Care or
Study than how to save themselves from Fire and Sword. In general there is such
Desolation, that without a kind of Horror, the Horror thereof cannot be
expressed.

Now we by God's Blessing are in a better Case; we sit here in God's House
thankful in true Devotion for this wonderful Favor toward us: We enjoy Peace
and Plenty; we are like to those who resting in a Calm Haven behold the
Shipwreck of others, wherein we have no part, save only in compassion to help
them with our Prayers; which we all ought to do as interested in their
sufferings, lest the like may fall on us. What then remains, but seriously to
consider, how all these great Blessings are conferred upon us, not for our
Merits, or for our more virtuous and Holy Lives, but only by God's favor to
his true Religion: and under him by the happy Government of our Gracious King;
which should confirm us all to a Constancy in our Obedience, and to a ready
subjection to all those Rules and Orders, which his Majesty shall prescribe for
the Public good. Wherein this general Admonition may fruitfully be applied to
the Business now in hand, whereof I make no doubt. So I crave your pardon and
your good acceptance of that, which I have rudely spoken, but with, a true
affection to this whole Body, whereof (though I had my Education from
another-Nurse) yet I had the Honor to be an Adopted Son, and (as I suppose)
one of the ancientest that lives amongst you at this day.

It remains, that Mr Vice Chancellor perform his part; and proceed to the
Subscriptions and Depositions of you the Heads.

John Coke.


DIE Mercurii inter horas secundam and tertiam post Meridem (viz.) vicessimo A
Meeting at Dr. Pink's Lodgings about the Protestation of the Provost and
Fellows of Queen's. Coll. June 22. 1636.
secundo die Junii Anno Dom. 1636. una fuerunt in Hospitio venerabilis Viri
Doctoris Pink, S. Theologiae Professoris, and Vicecancellarii Vniversitatis
Oxon. notorie sito, and situato in Collegio Sanctae Mariae Winton. in Oxon.
vulgo voca't Collegio Novo, Reverendus in Christo Pater Dominus Johannes
Episcopus Oxon. honoratissimi, dignissimi, and venerabiles Viri, Dominus
Johannes Cook Eques auratus and Serenissimae Regis Majestati Secretarius
Principalis, Dominus Henricus Martyn, Eques auratus, Judex Admiralitatis and
Curiae Praerogativae, Thomas Rives Legum Doctor, and Regis Advocatus,
Commissionarii Domini Regis specialiter missi ad exhibendum Librum Statutorum
Vniversitatis and eorum confirmationem sub magno Sigillo Angliae. Coram quibus
comparuerunt venerabilis Vir Christopherus Potter, Collegiae Reginae
Praepositus, Mr. Loughe and Mr. Stannix, Socii Collegii praedicti, qui ante
Convocationem eodem die habendam pro Statutorum Confirmatione, Protestationem
suam in scriptis Communi Sigillo Collegii sui munitam exhibuerunt, eamque in
Persona sua legit Mr. Stannix coram Commissionariis praedictis, and Doctore
Pink Vice-Cancellario tum praesente, sub hac verborum formula.

Protestatio and Declaratio Praepositi and Scholarium Collegii Reginae in A
Protestation of the Provost and Fellows of Queen's-Col. about their right of
the choice of the Principal of St. Edmund's Hall.
Vniversitate Oxon. de Jure, Titulo, and Interesse suis in Electione and
Nominatione Principalis Aulae Sancti Edmundi in Vniversitate Oxon. per quam
palam and public in quocunque celebri dictae Vniversitatis Coetu, vel alibi,
intimari and notum fieri in perpetuam rei memoriam obnixe rogant se solos, and
in solidum habuisse, and habere debere in hujuswodi Electione and Nominatione,
quotiescunque and quomodocunque Officium dicti Principalis vacare seu vacuum
esse, seu fieri futuris temporibus contigerit, Jus, Titulum, and Interesse
praedicta.

Nos Christopherus Potter, Sacrae Theologiae Professor, Praepositus, and
Scholares Collegii Reginae in Vniversitate Oxon. unanimitor allegamus,
affirmamus, and protestamur pro nobis and Successoribus nostris, Nos solum and
in solidum habuisse and habere, and Successores nostros habere debere Jus,
Titulum, and Interesse in Electione, Nominatione Principalis Aulae Sancti
Edmundi in and de Vniversitate praedicta, quotiescunque seu quomodocunque
Officium (...) Principalis vacare, seu vacuum fieri contigerit, intimantes, and
cum (...) qua decet reverentia per praesentes intimantes, Jus, Titulum, and
Interesse nostra in ejusmodi Electione and Nominatione Principalis antedicti,
non solum Chartd Publica sub Sigillo Vniversitatis praedictae Anno primo
Elizabethae hujus Regni Angliae Reginae piae Memoriae Data, sed etiam
praescriptione pene centum annorum Nobis acquisita, and obtenta fuisse, and
esse, eoque intuitu ut Jus, Titulus, and Interesse nostra in praemissis salva
and illaesa futuris temporibus maneant, and in perpetuum Nobis and
Successoribus nostris conserventur hac Protestatione and Declaratione nostra,
quantum de (...) possumus, vindicamus, and condicimus, quacunque Declaratione,
Decreto, seu Statuto edito vel edendo in contrarium non obstante. Quas nostras
Protestationes, Declerationem, allegationem, and vindicationem penes Registra
Vniversitatis Oxon. inactitanda ex consensu Honoratissimi ac Reverendissimi
Cancellarii, ut in memoriam perpetuam custodiantur, a vobis venerabili
Procancellario humiliter petimus, and insuper per vos Registrarium Notarium
publicum hic praesentem instrumentum publicum fieri, nobisque dari, ut si opus
fuerit in futurum proferatur in publicum instanter rogamus per Procuratores
five Syndicos nostros in scripto Procuratorio praesentibus annexo nominatos.

Hac Protestatione recitata and audita die, horis, and loco praedictis dicti
Domini Commissionarii affirmabant sibi a Serenissimo Rege vices solum commissas
esse ad exhibendum Librum Statutorum Vniversitatis Oxon. eorumque
Confirmationem sub magno Sigillo Angliae, and Sigillo Reverendissimi in Christo
Patris and Domini Domini Guilielmi Providentia Divina totius Angliae Primatis
and Metropolitani Cancellarii nostri Honoratissimi respective munitis, and sua
non refer, aut ad se aliquo modo pertinere, aliqualem assensum in istiusmodi
Negotio praebere aut determinare. Actum vero Protestationis dictorum Praepositi
and Sociorum Collegii Reginae intra Vniversitatem Oxon. se non posse non
agnoscere affirmabant, Meque Johannem French, Notarium Publicum, and
Registrarium Vniversitatis Oxon. praemissa, prout acta fuerunt, inactitare
mandabant.

Acta fuerunt haec omnia and singula, prout supra scribuntur and recitantur,
sub Anno Domini, die. horis, and loco supradictis, praesentibus Roberto Pink,
S. Theologiae Professore. and Vice Cancellario Vniversitatis Oxon. and Petro
Turner, in Artibus Magistro, Coll. Mertonensis Socio.

Et ego Johannes French, Dioceseos Oxon. authoritate (...) Notarius Publicus
and Registrarius Vniversitatis Oxon. praemissis omnibus and fingulis, dum
(...), ut praemittitur, sub anno Dom. mense, die, horis and loco, agebantur,
and fiebant, una cum praenominatis viris praesens personaliter interfui: Eaq,
omnia and fingula sic fieri vidi, audivi, scivi, and intellexi, and in notam
protocollarem sumpsi. Ideo hoc (...) publicum Instrumentum fideliter
conscriptum exinde fieri curavi, subscripsi, and publicavi, atque in hanc
publicam formam redegi.

Testimonium perhibeo veritati Johannes French, Notarius Publicus, and
Registrarius Universitatis Oxon.

Die Saturni, viz. Nono die Julii Anno Dom. 1636. Convocatio erat, A
Convocation on the 9th of July 1636. wherein my Letters sent to the University
were read.
ut Literae ab Honoratissimo nostro Cancellario ad Academiam missae
Publicarentur, and inter acta Convocationis redigerentur. Quorum tenor sequitur.

S. in Christo,
SVperiori anno (quod scio meministis) Libros quosdam manuscriptos ad vos My
Letters to the University when I sent them my second Manuscripts and Coyns.
transmisi: sub qua Lege in prioribus Libris, satis constat. Illos mist, quia
publicis negotiis detento ad studia illa, quae otium petunt, divertere non
dabatur. Hos vero mitto prioribus similes, ne si forte (quod absit) Pestis
ingravescens familiam satis amplam una cum Domino opprimeret, aut distraheret,
Hi tamen salvo opportunitate conductu praeveniente, in manus vestras tuti
pervenirent. Mitto autem libros non unico Idiomate descriptos, quos (spero
sacrabit Deus.) Sunt autem, ni fallor, Hebraici octodecim, Perfici
quatuordecim, Arabici quinquaginta, Armenicus unus, AEthiopici duo, Chinensis
unus, Graeci duodecim, Latini sexaginta quinque, Anglicani duodecim, Gallici
quatuor, Hibernici duo. Quosomnes non sine sumptu intra anni proxime elapsi
spatium congessi, and nunc in Bibliothecam Bodeleianam reponendos mitto.
Socios, non diffiteor agnoscent suos.

Cum his mitto Astrolabium Arabicum are puriori descriptum, quo me ditavit Vir
omni eruditionis genere instructissimus. Et olim Academiae nostrae Alumnus,
nunc decus, Johannes Seldenus.

Mitto etiam effigiem Serenissimi Regis Caroli, nefama ejus are perennior The
Effigles of King Charles sent to the University.
suo aere destitueretur. Nullibi autem melius locari potest Rex, Musarum
Patronus, quam apud vos and inter Musas; volo autem, ut in Claustris illis, ubi
Libri mei Manuscripti siti sunt, collocetur Caput hoc nunquam satis venerandum,
ut in memoriam vestram revocet, cujus dignatione (sub Deo) factum est, ut illa,
qualia qualia sunt, quae in vestram gratiam facta sunt, praestare possem; and
ut veluti Inspector ibi stet, nequis Libros, quasi sub intuitu Regis positos
ullo modo violare ausit.

Nummi mihi novi sunt. Ea in re Sancto Petro fere aequalis sum: Coyns sent.
Numismata tamen quaedam diuturna sollicitudine conquisivi. Acervum nolui vobis
mittere, sic enim usui nulli sunt, nisi videre, and numerare ad studiosos
pertineat. Redegt itaque (...), quae paravi in (...), eamque doctrinalem, ut
per eandem ordinem Saeculorum, and temporum possitis uno quasi intuitu aspicere
and per Reversa, ut vocantur, maximas quasque summorum Imperatorum actiones,
and temporum vices, and accidentia rerum publicarum planius videre, and per ea
difficiliora quaedam Historicorum loca melius intelligere, and quandoque de
Historiarum Veritate etiam in rebus cognitu necessariis judicare possitis.

Numismata haec in quincque Arculas distribui; in qualibet Arcula sunt multae
pixides, quae particularium Numismatum cum Reversis Cellulae quasi and seeds
sunt. Has, ubi Numismata non occurrunt, reperietis (...), sed ordine suo ita
signatas, ut statim possitis invenire, and in iis Numismata reponere, si forte
vobis contingat illa acquirere, quae ipse non potui. Vbi autem Cellulae hae sua
habent Numismata, locus tamen adhuc superest, ut alia ejusdem Imperatoris, sed
aliis cum reversis possitis ibidem recondere, si quando talia vobis obtinere
dabitur.

Arculas has quinque ita disposui. In prima sunt Numismata Hebraica and Graeca,
non omnino seriatim, sed secundum ordinem, quem Imperatores and Respublicae in
antiqua Graecid libere far possent. In secunda sunt Familiae Romanorum, e
quibus summi illi viri, qui Rempublicam illam evexerunt in Imperium, prodiere.
Et hae ordine alphabetico ponuntur, ut citius omnibus occurrant, cum ordo vel
dignitatis, vel antiquitatis, and difficilior sit, and paucis cognitus, and
forte incertior. In tertia, and quarta sunt Numismata Imperatorum a Julio
Caesare ad modernum Imperatorem, and seriatim secundum vices and successiones
suas. Sed tertia continet Romam Ethnicam a Julio Caesare ad Constantinum, una
cum Interfectoribus Julii, and aliis, qui licet legitime Imperatores non
fuerint, Nummos tamen cuderunt. Quarta vero pari methodo Romam Christianam a
Constantino Magno, ad Ferdinandum Romano-Germanicum Imperatorem nunc rerum
potitum. In quinta demum sunt Numismata Britannorum per omnes, quas subiere,
temporum and fortunarum vices, sub Romany, Saxonibus, Danis, Normannis, sub
Heptarchia and Monarchia a Julio Caesare Insulam hanc invadente, ad
Pientissimum and Justissimum Principem, Carolum ejus nominis primum, nunc Regum
pacatissime moderantem: Qui diu floreat and serus in Coelum rediens, Sceptra
tuta and faelicia suis relinquat.

Quo melius haec omnia and vobis innotescant, and posteris, Librum paravi, in
quo singulo ordine describerentur, quae in quinque praedictis Arculis contenta
sunt; cum Notulis and Characteribus quibusdam, quibus scire potestis, quae
Numismata in Arculis hisce reposita sunt, and quae adhuc desunt, quo
diligentius ea indagare satagatis. Librum hunc prae aliis negotiis adhuc
perficere non potui, saltem non limatius describere, qui una cum aliis
Manuscriptis in Bibliotheca collocetur; ubi etiam Arculas sitas volo. Sed
quamprimum supremam manum apposuero, eum vobis mittam omni Cura servandum. Et
hoc a Vice-Cancellario obnixius peto, ne extrahantur Numismata, vel sedibus
suis moveantur, donec Librum hunc directorium acceperitis.

Arculis hisce quinque unica Clavis inservit. Duas tamen misi; harum altera
penes Vice-Cancellarium pro tempore existentem servetur; alterd penes
Bibliothecarium, sed eum Primarium dutaxat, (non inferiorem vel Deputatum) quos
juratos velim de tuta Custodia, de non trahenda, Clavi alteri cuicunque sub
quocunque praetextu, de non aperiendis Arculis vel earum aliqua, and de non
extrahendis Numismatibus, vel ad usum Studentium, vel ad aspectum Peregrinorum,
(si forte desiderent) nisi prout eorum alter tam diu and continuo praesens
fuerit, quam Arculae apertae sunt. Nec volumus plures una Arculas simul apertas
esse; Nec alterutrum praedictorum Numismatum extrahere, nisi ex und Pixide, vel
Cellula simul, ne occasio detur, aut male reponendi, aut forte surripiendi. Et
quo melius and tuto, and in ordine suo serventur omnia, volumus, ut bis ad
minimum in quolibet Anno (tempore a Vice-Cancellario assignando) comparentur
singula Numismata cum Libro, and si jactura aliqua fiat, quamprimum resciri
possit, and aut resarciri, aut cautius de reliquis in posterum curari.

Insuper, etiamsi ab Idololatria abhorret animus, tamen quo vobis contemptui
Two Idols (...).
sit magis Gentium vecordia, duo accipietis superstitionis Ludibria; Idola duo,
Vnum AEgyptiorum vetus, alterum Hesternum Indorum occidentalium Ridete caecam
insaniam, and una mecum gratias agite Beatissimae Trinitati praecipue autem
Domino Jesu Christo, qui semetipsum veritatem nobis revelavit. Non fecit
taliter omni genti. Deus Optimus Maximus vos vestraque custodiat, sospitetque,
ut adventum Regium, cum gaudio expectare possitis, and praesentia frui, sicut
vovet.

Viris mihi amicissimis, Doctori Pink Vice-Cancellario, reliquisque Doctoribus,
Procuratoribus, nec non singulis in Domo Convocationis infra Alma Universitate
Oxon. Congregatis.

Datum ex aedibus meis Lambethanis, Junii 16. 1636. Amicus vester and
Cancellarius W. CANT.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
AFfectus nostros Te manu tenere, eosque efficacius regere, quam vel Thanks
from the University for perfecting and confirming the Statutes.
potest illucens Ratio, vel Angelus assistens, quid mirum? Immisisti enim
conjuncta Stimulis Lora, Libertatibus Leges, and utrasque tam suavi internexas
moderamine, ut fiant Privilegia pretium Obedientiae, and Statuta Licentiae
fraenum. Gravari nos posse, existimas necessario hoc vinculo, quod soli nos
alligat faelicitati? Gravemur itaque irradiato intellectu, integritate morum,
illabi conscientia, pace, favore, and gratia, his omnibus gravemur. Imo potius
confundimur gloriandi ardore, and studio gratitudinis. Gloriari possumus non
opera, sed Fautoribus nostris; quorum auspiciis id expedite, and inopinato
effectum est, quod Saecula anteriora saepe and frustra cogitarunt; quod fracto
conatu velut insuperabile destituit arduus ille Wolseius. Indigesta veterum
Statutorum congeries, cujus (...) cura molimen ridiculum videbatur. Aastantibus
in serenam emicuit compagem; Ideoque pari ferit stupore nos etiam fruentes, and
fruitionis incredulos, ac si Chaos alterum coram oculis nostris in Mundum
harmonice concinnatum assurgeret. Resurrectionem quandam Pandectae hujus
agnoscimus, in ea Faeces tam pure exustas, additamenta tam gloriose induta,
simulque ordinem tam distinct lucideque dispositum, ut, quamvis sit eadem,
multo tamen sanctior, multo splendidior emergat. Quibus it aque gratiarum
Cumulis compensabimus indefessam vestrae bonitatis pertinaciam, quae nec tuo,
nec alieno perpercit sudori, quae nec pacem regiis auribus, manibusque
permisit, donec desperatum hoc opus, ultimo examine, supremo sigillo, and
imperiali authoritate perfectum, exiret? Tacere non possumus incredibilem
vestram in tanta sedulitate Prudentiam, quae experiendo aptavit Jugum,
priusquam affixit, and accuratissime recognitionis ergo annum integrum operi
consummato indulsit, quoniam in annum Platonicum duraturo. Implicuisti nunc
demum nexu indissolubili Regem and ipsius Alumnos: Illum, ut propugnet, quae
nos condidimus, Statuta, quia (...); Nos vero, ut iis lubentissime obsequamur,
quae manus Regia obsignavit, quoniam and nostris. Tantae firmitudini accedit
Honor and Reverentia, eaque Oxoniensi long protentior Pomerio. Dum enim
Constitutiones nostras claudit Sanctio Regalis, siunt illae ex Academicis plane
Epidemicae, foroque externo venerabiles ac Nostro. Si Carolus Regum optimus
Justinianum se nobis praestiterit, certe Triboniani locum subiisti and Tu; si
Regi augustissimo confirmata debeamus Statuta, Regem debemus Paternitati
vestrae haec nobis confirmantem. Number vice gratitudinis fidem in obedientiam
expectas? Legibus tam salutaribus Collum subdere, and earum in verba jurare
(quod sine perjurio antea vix potuimus) alterum est beneficium. Vsque adeo
mersi sumus Beneficiorum tuorum Abysso; Sin obsequi sit mergi, mergemur.

E domo nostra Convocationis, Junii 23, 1636. Sanctitati vestrae
obsequentissime devoti Oxon. Acad.


Ex Decreto Convocationis in Assimulatione parva secundo die Julii, 1636. Three
Fellowships in Oxford given by King Charles to Scholars of the Isles Jarsey and
Garnsey.
Alterapars sive una pars Indenturae quadripartitae de eligendis, stabiliendis,
and confirmandis tribus Sociis ex Insulis Jersey, and Garnsey, public Sigil.
lo Vniversitatis munitaerat; and altera pars Indenturae sigillanda fuit Communi
Sigillo Collegii Exon. Collegii Jesu, and Collegii Pembrochiensis; in quae
Collegia Socii proedicti ex fundatione Serenissimi Regis nostri Caroli,
eligendi sunt imperpetuum, and admittendi juxta tenorem Indenturarum hinc
sigillatarum.

Reverendissime Cancellarie,
VOcitemus Te licet Academiae Patrem, Ductorem, Angelum, Arch-Angelum, Thanks
from the University for my second Manuscriprs, Coyns and the Effigies of King
Charles in Brass.
ecquid minus? Agnoscimus Te amplissimam divinae Munificentiae Cisternam, quam
innumerae quidem fistulae adimplent, duae vero exhauriunt, Ecclesia and
Academia. Adeo densa and plusquam quotidiana huc defluunt ex te Beneficia, ut
iis apt memorandis aegre sufficiat Calendarius, tametsi rasus, and nominum
vacuus. Quin and eadem quotannis crescunt, and redeunt solennem in morem Veris
ac Messis. Anno superiore Libros accepimus Manuscriptos numeri multitudine,
rerum pondere, Linguarum varietate, O quantum (...) mirabiles! Transmisisti hoc
Anno Centum and octoginta ejusdem Opulentiae! Hi pari legum religione loco
contiguo reponendi, Socios eo facilius agnoscent quod compellare possunt Nativo
Idiomate. Vnde Acervus iste Literarii Thesauri? unde his aestus Linguarum, ac
Donum Apostolico proximum? Number devastata Germaniae Gazaterram appulit
pacificam, and ad manus vestras, hoc est, nostras quam citissime deveniret?
Nunquid venti in mandatis acceperunt, omnes Mundi cultiores plagas diverrere,
ut mitidissimas Europae, Asiae, Africaeque Gemmas in alterum hunc orbis
Britannici oculum press contraherent? Quam gratum hoc erit exteris Nationibus
in Orb penitus diviso, domi vivere, suasque Dialectos, si non audire, saltem
videre ac legere! Enitabimur ipsi posse Nos itidem in Bodeleiano Tuoque
Sacrario Solis vestigia prosequi, and utrumque ipsius terminum perlustrare.
Libris hisce conjunctam dedisti, aeream Serenissimi Regis Effigiem, eamque non
minus Emblemate, quam loco conterminam. Is enim dignior Vniversis Dominari
Populis, quam nos Linguis. AEs illudexterius interiori figet memoriae alteram
and aeque perennem Regis (...) Effigiem. Dum Carolus desuper imminebit
inspector, and stabit pro Ferula Sceptrum, (...) erit studiis non incumbere
verecunde and serio: tanti Magistri Contemptores, certe graviori nomine
desidiam luemus; nec tantum audiemus ignavi, sed in illum aeque rebels, ac in
Te ingrati. Postquam Libris ditasti Academiam, invenisti etiam, quomodo
eruditam faceres divitiis. Quinque misisti Arcas, easque (ex frustra querulas
largitor) non Nummis refertas, sed tamen Numismatis, sed plusquam Margaritis.
Illic ediscere licet Historiam ex Auro, illic Imperatorum gesta, and series
temporum in Pecunia speculari, easque non pigro serutinio disquirere, sed uno
intuitu percipere. O nos foelices, and miris modis studiosi, qui ne tempus
inutiliter absumamus, secula tenemus, and opes avari, Arcis in (...). Nonne
satis fuit (O Beneficentiae avidissime!) simulachrum posuisse unius, unius
instar omnium Caroli, nisi in typis transmitteres tot Sceptrigeros, a Monarchia
secunda ad diem usque hodiernum deductos. Quid manu oculisque versamus Graeciae
liberae Dynastas, Romae crescentis Patricios, Adulta, Imperatores? Quid Reges
denique Britannos a Caesare ad Carolum? Vno hoc ultimo contenti acquescimus. Si
de vestra Celsitudine habenda sit Panegyris, non est, cur sanus Orator,
artificialis memoriae auxilia aliunde appetat, quam ex vestro Numismatum
Thesauro. Illic in quinque Cistis complures Pixides, in Pixidum loculis
foecundiores locillos, in (...) infinita reperiet signa and imagines, quarum
fidei encomiorum tuorum Classes partiri possit ac tuto concedere. Ex abundantia
vestra cumulatim accepimus adhuc plura, duo Idola, miseranda superstitionis
spectacula, eademque very Cultus solamina; e quibus etiam non ingrati
agnoscimus, quantum superet vir bonus Ethnicorum Deos. Astrolabium insuper
Arabicum misisti, a Seldeno lauda tissimo, quia meritissimo, acceptum; sublimi
hec instrumento, capiemus fortassis aliqui altitudinem stellarum, ut vix, aut
ne vix unus alitudinem Angeli dona tam numerosa coelitus deferentis Vicisti
sane, vicisti spem omnem aequae gratitudinis: Enitemur tamen (quod solum
possumus) tot Regum antiquorum imaginibus unam adjicere, unam optimi Praesulis,
nempe tuam. Enitemur pro tot libris, legentium animas, pro tot exterorum
Linguis tuorum Corda, pro Effigy Regali sequacitatem umbrae parem, pro
Astrolabio Arabico, Radiationis vestroe meditamen, pro Idolorum Ethnicorum
Ludibriis conceptissimas ad Deum inconceptibilem preces, summa qua possumus,
fide and constantia rependere.

E Domo nostrae Convocationis, Julii 9. 1636. Sanctitatis Vestrae Devotissima
Cultrix Oxon. Acad.


This year the Buildings which I began in St. John Baptist's College St. John's
Buildings finishit.
Anno 1631. were fully finished. These Buildings cost me the full, Sum of --

The new Convocation House at the West end of the great Library, with an
addition over it to the said Library, was begun to The new ConvocationHouse.
be built in May 1634. and all the Stone Building was finished in July 1636.

In this year were the Windows of Queen's-College Chapel glazed The Windows of
Queen's Col. Chapel.
with colored Glass, completely finished, which were begun in the year 1633.

AFter my hearty Commendations etc. The Time will put both Dr. Baylie President
of St. John's chosen Vice-Chancel lour.
my self and you in mind, that I have troubled Dr. Pink with the
Vice-Chancellourship now two Years together; and I must give him this
Testimony, that his Care and Pains together with his Judgment, in managing all
business incident to that troublesome Office, has not only been very great in
it self, but has equalled the best and most careful Endeavors of any his
Predecessors. And as I give him hearty thanks for it, so is he much bound to
God and my self with him, for the great Blessing with which he has guided and
supported all his Actions. And I cannot but profess unto you, that he has
deserved exceeding well, not of my self only, but of the whole University, and
of every Man in particular, whose Sons have been bred there, during the time of
this his Government. But for this Vigilance and pains of his I must not
overload him, but think upon some other worthy and able Man to succeed, that
may, and will not take upon him the Office only, but go in the same way, into
which he has led him. And after some deliberation I have fixed my resolution
upon Dr. Bailye, President of St. John's-Coll. and Dean of Sarum, upon whom I
shall be for'cd to lay the greater burden, if his Majesty hold his Gracious
pur pose of Honoring the University with his Presence this present Year: And
he will therefore need all the assistance, that either his Predecessors, and
the rest of the Heads can give him. These are therefore to pray and require you
to allow of this my Nomination and Choice of Dr. Baylie to the
Vice-Chancellourship; and I will not doubt but that you will all afford him
your best Advice, Counsel and help, to the performance of all such things, as
may any way concern the Honor and good Government of the University. So I bid
you all heartily Farewell, and rest,

To my very loving Friends, the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctors,
and the rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.

Lambeth, July 12. 1636. Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, W. CANT.


S. in Christo.
Sir,
SInce I writ last to you, the Dean of Christ-Church came to me, My Letters to
the Vice Chancellor about the settlement of the Plays in Oxford against his
Majesty's coming.
and acquainted me with two things, which are very necessary you should both
know and remedy.

The one is, that the University seems to be unwilling to contribute to the
Charge of the Plays, which are to be at Christ-Church. Now this charge, as by
reason of their Building, they are not able to bear alone; So I must needs
acknowledge, there is no reason, that they should, whatever their ability be:
For the King is to be entertained by Oxford, not by Christ-Church. And that he
lies there, is but for the Convenience of the place, where there are so many
fairLodgings for the great Men to be about him. Indeed if Christ-Church men
will say, they will have no Actors, but of their own House, let them bear the
charge of their own Plays on God's name: But if they will take any good Actors
from any other College or Hall, upon trial of their sufficiency to be as good,
or better than their own; then I see no reason in the World, but that the whole
University should contribute to the Charge. And I pray see it ordered, and let
your Successor follow you accordingly.

The other is, that since the University must contribute to this The University
to contribute to the Plays at Christ-Church.
Charge, (for so it was done when King James came, and at the last coming of
Queen Elizabeth, both within my own memory) I hold it very sit, that all the
Materials of that Stage, which are now to be made new, and the Proscenium and
such Apparel whatever it be, as is wholly made new, shall be laid up in some
place fit for it; to which the Vice Chancellor for the time being shall have
one Key, and the The materials of the Plays to be safely laid up and kept.
Dean of Christ-Church the other, that it may not be lost, as things of like
nature and use have formerly been. And if any College or Hall shall at any time
for any Play or Show that they are willing to set forth, need the use of any,
or all of these things, it shall be as lawful, and free for them to have and to
use them, as for Christ-Church; Provided that after the use, they do carefully
restore them to the place whence they were taken. And to the end these things
may be kept with the more safety and indifferency to the University, I think it
very fit that an Inventory be made of them, and that one Copy thereof remain
with them, at Christ-Church, and the other in such fit and convenient place, as
the Vice Chancellor and the Heads shall agree on. For my part I think it
fittest, that an Inventory should be kept in the University Registry, that so
you may not only have access to it, so My Letters concerning the business of
the Plays to be registered.
often as you shall have cause, but also leave it ready for direction in future
times in like Cases of expense. And I think it not amiss, that these my Letters
which concern the ordering of these Businesses, should be Registered also.

And further, that the University may see, how the Money, which Four
experienced men to be appointed to look to the rates of the Materia's for the
Plays.
they allow toward these Charges is expended, I think it very requisite, that
your self and the Heads should name three or four Men of good experience in
those things, that may see at what Rates all things are bought and paid for:
And an Account delivered in to the Vice Chancellor and the Heads, at such
time, as the Vice Chancellor, shall call for them. And also that, their Hands
be set to both Copies of the above named Inventories. I have thought upon Dr.
Fell, Dr. Sanders, and the Warden of Wadham, as very fit Men for this purpose;
And if you and the Heads shall think it requisite to join any more to them, you
may name whom you please.

For the Play, which I intend shall be at St. John's, I will neither put the
University nor the College to any Charge, but take it wholly upon my self. And
in regard of the great trouble and Inconvenience, I shall thereby put upon that
House, as also in regard it shall set out one of the Plays by it self, I think
there is great reason in it, and do therefore expect it, that no Contribution
should be required from St. John's toward the Plays at Christ-Church. And I
pray let me have an Account from you of the settlement of these things. So I
leave you to the Grace of God, and rest,

Croydon, July 15. 1636. Your loving Friend W. CANT,


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
TEnsis ad Coelum Palmis, contemplamur attoniti inexplebilem vestrum largiendi
Thanks from the University for setting up the Arabic Lecture. which I founded
for my own time, (having not means to make it perpetual) in hope, that by
Charity it may grow into perpetuity. I appointed Mr Edw. (...). of C. C. C. my
Reader, and the Supend I allow is (...) Per Annum.
Ardorem, Benficia omnino aedificas, and superstruere festinas donis praemissis
facultatem utendi. Cum enim Academiam stupefeceris Arabico Librorum Thesauro,
mox eos intelligendi causa Praelectorem Arcani Sermonis impense fundasti: per
oculos, per aures immanat eadem perpetua (...). Praelectorem istum non solo
fundasti hortamine, verum Te tua; Tua quamdiu vita and res supererit; hoc est,
(si votis annuerit Deus) ultra soeculum in oeternum. Vim omnem effundis in Te
positam, and aliorum legare pergis voluktatem; una cum beneficiis, Exempla
largiris; and velut proprium (...), non ultra satis foelicem reddidisses
Academiam, nisi prorsus Arabicam; utrumque Polum, utrumque Solemn, imo and
Globum utrumque revolvis animo, and sumptu studioso disquiras novo tuae
Academiae Ornamenta. Praeonerosa benefaciendi Consuetudine diductus es, and
tantum non egenus, ut emineas in mediocritate rerum, sed virtutum Apice
habentium, ac non habentium long munificentissimus. Siste manum, siste, ne
premat Te virtus nimia; totum enim Te figis, atque insumis emolumento nostro.
Nullus (...) Filius sic Matrem sugendo exhausit, ac Te Patrem filia Academia:
(...) nunc dicas, quae suit Matter; cum eam ex ruinis regenitam lautiori Front
perpoliveris, and Ore novo mox loqui docueris. Nos itaque licet nondum Sermon
Arabico (Donum enim hoc vestrum est) certe gentium omni genere pectore gratias
conceptissime recumulamus; semperque retinebimus sub linguis omnibus unam animi
devotissimi Effigiem.

E Dome nostrae Congregat ionis Aug. 10, 1636. Sanctitatis vestrae humillima
Cultrix, Oxon. Acad.


THis year his Majesty and the Queen invited themselves to me Concerning my
Entertainment of the King at Oxford.
to Oxford, and brought with them Charles, Prince Elector Palatine, and his
Brother Prince Rupert, being both then in England. They came into Oxford at the
end of this Summer's Progress on Monday August 29. The Vice Chancellor made a
very good Speech unto them, where my self and the University met them, which
was a mile, before they entered the Town. That Speech ended, they passed along I
came into Oxford to make things ready for this entertainment upon Thursday
August 25. I came in privately at Dinner hour, having sent most of my Servants
thither the night before, and my self lay that night at my Ld. of Oxford's.
by St. John's, where Mr. Tho. Atkinson made another Speech unto them very
brief, and very much approved of by his Majesty afterward to me. Within
Christ-Church Gate, Mr. William Strode the University Orator entertained them
with another Speech, which was well approved. Thence the King accompanied his
Queen to her Lodging, and instantly returned, and went with all the Lords to
the Cathedral. There after his Private Devotions ended, at the West Door Dr.
Morris, one of the Prebendaries entertained him with another short Speech,
which was well liked. And thence hisMajesty proceeded into the Quire, and heard
Service. After Supper they were entertained with a Play at Christ-Church, which
was very well penned, but yet did not take the Court so well. The next day
being Tuesday, the King came to Service August (...).
soon after 8 in the Morning. It was at Christ-Church, and Mr. Thomas Brown
being then Proctor, made an excellent Sermon, which gave great Content. The
Sermon ended, The Prince Elector, and his Brother Prince Rupert, attended by
many of the Lords, came to the Convocation-House, where the Place was full of
University-Men, all in their Forms and Habits very orderly. And the two Princes
with diverse Lords, were pleased to be made Masters of Art; and the The two
Princes names entered in St. John's College.
two Princes Names were by his Majesty's leave entered in St. John's College to
do that House that Honor for my sake. In Convocation the Vice Chancellor
having first placed the Princes, and briefly expressed the cause of that
Convocation, I made a short Speech, which here follows in haec verba.

Florentes Academici, and hoc tempore florentissimi quibus Caroli Regis and
Pientissimi and Prudentissimi: simulque Mariae (...) Heroinae, Consortis suae
charissimae, praesentia frui datur Nec ea solum, sed and praesentia eximiae
spei Principum, Nepotum M. Jacobi Sacratissimoe Memoriae Monarchae, and de
Academia Literatisque omnibus optime meriti; Principes hi sunt, and hoc Titulo,
and suo, omni honoris genere dignissimi. Vos eos omni, quo (...), prosequimini.

Quid expectatis ultra, Academici? An ut ego Oraetorio in hoc Senatu fungar
munere? At illud and memoria, curis simul and annis fracta, and lingua per se
inculta, and desuetudine loquendi (...); and praesens (...), quod ad alia
festinat, omnino Prohibent. Nec Principes hi Preceresve illud a me expectant,
Cui aliud satis jam incumbit negotium: and qui illis (...) in omnibus sum
pollicitus.

Breviter itaq: quod ad vos attinet, Principes, non Ortu magis quam Virtutibus
illustres. Non expectat a vobis Academia, ut possitis totam Entis prosunditatem
exhaurire, ut sic sitis Artium Magistri, sed liceat dicere: Freta aetatis
vestrae nondum transiistis. AEstus jam urgent juveniles. Hos discite superare
fluctus, procellas has in auras redigere, and omnium insimul Artium
Magistrieritis, and quid ni fortunoe? Atque utinam nostrae potestatis esset,
coecoe illi Deoe oculos dare, quibus virtutes vestras cerneret, and agnosceret
jura.

Et vos etiam Proceres, Principum horum Cultores, convocata hac Academia
exultat videre, and non solum confer gradus suos in vos gestit, quos omni
honoris cultu veneratur: sed potius eos conferendo, honorem summum gradibus
suis quaerit; quod placeat Principibus hisce vobisq, Pannis suis (nam and (...)
in purpura est) inaugurari. Floreat sic soepius Academia, and Nativis simul and
Adoptivis Filiis gaudeat. Egregie Vice Cancellarie, ad Creationem and
Admissionem simul pro Officio tuo descend.

AFter this the Vice Chancellor proceeded, made another short The 2 Princes
and other Honorable Persons made Masters of Art.
Speech, and after Creation and Admission of the Princes and and other
Honorable Persons, ended the Convocation. That finished, they all returned to
Christ-Church to attend upon the King, (the Princes having formerly in the
Morning seen some of the fair Colleges.) Then the Queen being not ready, the
King with the Princes and the Nobles, my self also waiting upon him, went to
the Library, where the King viewed the New Buildings and the Books, and was
entertained with a very neat Speech made by the Son of the Earl of Pembrook and
Montgomery, then Lord Chamberlain.

Then word was brought up, that the Queen was come. So the King went into the
(...) to her, and they went away to St. John's to dinner, the Princes and
Nobles attending them.

When they were come to St. John's, they first viewed the New-Building, and
that done, I attended them up the Library Stairs; where so soon as they began
to ascend, the Music began, and they had a fine short Song fitted for them, as
they ascended the Stairs. In the Library they were Welcomed to the College with
a short Speech made by -- -- one of the Fellows.

And Dinner being ready, they passed from the old into the new The King and
Queen; Prince Elector, and Prince Rupert with other Honorable Persons feasted
by me at (...). John's.
Library, built by my self, where the King, the Queen, and the Prince Elector
dined at one Table, which stood cross at the upper end. And Prince Rupert with
all the Lords and Ladies present, which were very many, dined at a long Table
in the same Room. All other several Tables, to the number of 13 besides these
two, were disposed in several Chambers of the College, and had several Men
appointed to attend them; and I thank God I had that happiness, that all things
were in very good order, and that no man went out at the Gates, Courtier or
other, but content; which was a Happiness quite beyond Expectation.

When Dinner was ended, I attended the King and the Queen together with the
Nobles into several withdrawing Chambers, where they entertained themselves for
the space of an hour. And in the mean time I caused the Windows of the Hall to
be shut, the Candles lighted, and all things made ready for the Play to begin.
When these things were fitted, I gave notice to the King, and the Queen, and
attended them into the Hall, whither I had the happiness to bring them by a Way
prepared from the President's Lodging to the Hall without any the least
disturbance; And had the Hall kept as fresh and cool, that there was not any
one person when the King and Queen came into it. The Princes, Nobles, and
Ladies entered the same way with the King, and then presently another Door was
opened below to fill the Hall with the better sort of Company, which being
done, the Play was begun and Acted. The Plot was very good, and the Action. It
was merry, and without offense, and so gave a great deal of content. In the
middle of the Play, I ordered a short Banquet for the King, the Queen, and the
Lords. And the College was at that time so well furnished, as that they did not
borrow any one Actor from any College in Town. The Play ended, the King and the
Queen went to Christ-Church, retired and supped privately, and about 8 a Clock,
went into the Hall to see another Play, which was upon a piece of a Persian
Story. It was very well penned and acted, and The latter Play at Christ Church
acted over again by the Queen's Players at Hampton Court.
the strangeness of the Persian Habits gave great Content; so that all Men came
forth from it very well satisfied. And the Queen liked it so well, that she
afterward sent to me to have the Apparel sent to Hampton Court, that she might
see her own Players act it over again, and see whether they could do it as
well, as it was done in the University. I caused the University to send both the
Clothes, and the Perspectives of the Stage; and the Play was acted at Hampton
Court in November following. And by all Men's confession the Players came short
of the University Actors. Then I humbly desired of the King and the Queen, that
neither the Play nor Clothes, nor Stage might come into the Hands and use of
the Common Players abroad, which was graciously granted.

But to return to Oxford. This Play being ended, all Men betook themselves to
their rest, and upon Wednesday Morning August 31. about Eight of the Clock, my
self with the Vice Chancellor and the Doctors attended the coming forth of the
King and Queen; and when they came, did our Duties to them. They were
graciously pleased to give the University a great deal of thanks; and I for my
self, and in the Name of the University, gave their Majesty's all possible
thanks for their great and gracious Patience and Acceptance of our Poor and
mean Entertainment: So the King and the Queen went away very well pleased
together.

That Wednesday Night I entertained at St. John's, in the same Room where the
King Dined the Day before, at the long Table, which was for the Lords, all the
Heads of Colleges and Halls in the Town; and all the other Doctors, both the
Proctors and some few Friends more, which I had employed in this time of
Service; which gave the University a great deal of Content, being that which
had never been done by any Chancellor before. I sat with them at Table, we were
merry, and very glad that all things had so passed to the great satisfaction of
the King, and the honor of that place.

Upon Thursday, September, 1. I Dined privately with some few of my Friends:
And after Dinner went to Cuddesden to my ancient Friend, my Lord the Bishop of
Oxford's House, there I left my Steward, and some few of my Servants with him
at Oxford to look to my. Plate, Linen and other things, and to pay all
Reckonings, that no Man might ask a Penny after we had left the Town; which was
carefully done accordingly. Upon Friday, September 2. I lay at a house of Mr.
Justice Jones's of Henley upon Thames, upon his earnest Invitation. And upon
Saturday, September 3. (God be thanked) I returned sase home to my House at
Croyden. The week after, my Steward and other Servants, which staid with him,
came from Oxford to me; where the Care of my Servants, with God's Blessing upon
it, was such, as that having borrowed all the King's Plate, which was in the
Progress, and all my Lord Chamberlain's, and made use of all mine own, and
hired some of my Goldsmiths, I lost none, but only two Spoons which were of
mine own Plate, and but little of my Linen.

My Retinue (being all of my own, when I went to this Entertainment) were
between 40 and 50 Horse; though I came privately into Oxford, in regard of the
nearness of the King and Queen, then at Woodstock. There was great store of
Provision in all kinds sent me in toward this Entertainment; and yet (for I
bare all the Charge of that Play, which was at St. John's, and suffered not
that poor College to be at a penny Loss or Charge in any thing) besides all
these sendings in, the Entertainment cost me........

Salutem in Christo. SIR,
THE Sickness of these Times, and my many other occasions, Novem. 26. My
Letters to the Vice Chancellor about the Service to be in Latin at the
beginning of Terms, etc.
made me forget to write to you before the beginning of Michaelmas Term last,
concerning the Sermon and Prayers usually had at St. Mary's at the beginning of
Terms, which were wont to be not so orderly as they should, nor with so good
Example to other places at large in the Kingdom, as such a University should
give.

For, First, the Communion was Celebrated in the Body of the The Communion to
be Celebrated in the Chancel.
Church, and not in the Chancel, which, though it be permitted in the Church of
England in some cases of necessity, where there is a Multitude of People; yet
very undecent it is, and unfitting in that place, where so few, (the more the
pity) use to communicate at these Solemn times. But this abuse I caused to be
rectified in Dr. Duppa's time, and I hope neither you nor your Successors will
suffer it to return again into the former Indecency.

Secondly, though none do come to those Solemn Prayers and Sermons, but Scholars,
and those too of the best Rank, yet to no small dishonor of that place, the
Sermon is in Latin, and the Prayers in English: As if Latin Prayers were more
unfit for a Learned Congregation, than a Latin Sermon. And the truth is, the
thing is very absurd in it self, and contrary to the Directions given at the
beginning of the Reformation of this Church; for in the Latin Service Books,
which were first Printed in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, there is an
Express, both Direction and Charge, that notwithstanding the altering of the
ordinary Form of Prayers throughout the whole Body of the Kingdom from Latin
into English: Yet in the Universities such Prayers, unto which none, but they
which were Learned did resort, should be in Latin. And for my part, I do much
wonder, considering how Public that Direction was, that the University at the
beginning of Terms should fall from this Ordinance, and so divide the Service
and Sermon between Latin and English.

Upon Consideration of this I acquainted His Majesty both with that Printed
Direction of Queen Elizabeth, and with the Breach of it by the University at
the beginning of Terms; whereupon His Majesty was pleased to give me in Charge
to see this ordered, and to take a Course for a Remedy in the future, and that
hereafter Service, Sermon, and Communion, should be at all beginnings of Terms
Uniformly in Latin, since none resort to either, but such, as well understand
it. These are therefore to pray and require You at some convenient Meeting of
the Heads, to acquaint them with this Direction of His Majesty, and to take
care, that both at the beginning of the next Term, and of all Terms following,
the Service and Communion be in Latin, as well as the Sermon. And that such, as
are not furnished, may the better provide themselves of Service Books in Latin,
so soon as conveniently they can, you shall do well to make it so much the
sooner known to the Heads. And this I must not forget to tell you, that when I
took this first into Consideration, it was thought fitting to put it into the
University Statutes. But afterward I considered, that since the Statutes were
to remain to Posterity, it would lay no small Scandal upon these times, when
they should see by the very Statute it self, what a stranger the University was
to the Prayers of the Church in a Learned Language. And hereupon having first
acquainted His Majesty with this also, I thought it better to leave it out of
the Statutes, and to reduce it to this privater way, which opinion of mine His
Majesty was pleased graciously to Approve.

Two things there are, which You and the Heads must take present The
Vicechancellor and he that (...) with him at the Communion, to wear the
Surplice.
care for: The One is, that the Vice Chancellor, and he that helps him to
execute, (whosoever he be) be in Surplices; but whether the Vice Chancellor
will put on his Surplice, when he goes to the Communion, or put it on at the
first, and so read Service, and sit at the Sermon in it, I leave to his own
Judgment; but I like the latter better, and the Surplice must be under both the
Habit and the Hood. The The Singing Men to answer in (...).
Second is, that there must be care taken with the Singing Men, that they may
answer the Litany and all other places of the Service, where they interpose, in
Latin, which they may easily practice and be ready to perform at the beginning
of the next Term; but if they cannot, the Litany must be sung, or answered by
the Masters without the Organ, till they can: for the main business to have all
things in Latin must go on. So wishing you all Health and Happiness, and the
University that Honor, that belongs unto Her entire, I leave you to the Grace
of God, and Rest

I hope you take care that all Letters of My Letters to them concerning
business of Importance to be Registered.
mine, which concern Business of this or the like Nature, be Registered.

Croyden, Nov. 26. 1636. Your very loving Friend W. Cant.


Honoratissime Cancellarie!
Qui in commodum nostrum quasi asslat us raperis, Honori etiam nostro velut
(...) from the (...) versity for my delivery of their Letters to the Queen
about their Play.
de specula it a prospicis, ut nec rogare amplius, nec monere ausi simus, ne
vel hinc curae vel benevolentiae, inde tuae detrahere videamur, a quibus it a
procedunt beneficia, ut ea jam inter mores tuos (...), atque unum illud restare
nobis arbitremur, peractis demum omnibus, gratulari. Certe, ut nil non Tibi
(...), Academiae non Oculum tantum Te, sed and Manum praebuisti. (...),
fatemur, defecit nobis ille donandi decor, qui Theses and Axiomata observantiae
immiscuimus, and Syllogismis sceptrum vexaturi, Abacum in aulam transtulimus;
tum certe irruere magis quam accedere, and largiendi munditias odisse Academiae
Signum erat, sed simul est opprobrium: quaeque nos quasi Literatorum argumenta
delectarunt, apud alios in Rusticorum indicia transierunt. Sed dum pexum Corpus
ita aversata est Lycaei nostri Philosophia, ut nec honestum retinuerit, and
Superflua evitans, etiam necessaria aliqua ex part Praeciderit, ea prorsus
incuria (graviore enim verbo uti non licet) hoc egit, ut gratiose satisfecisset
solium, si Thura sine Nausea admisisset benign satis, si ignovisset Sacerdoti.
Et certe intellexisset adhuc Academia, quam minimum esset beneficij donare,
nisi Te nobis praefecisset Coelum. Te dicimus meliorem medicum, qui non tantum
salutis, sed and virium and coloris rationem habes; qui non solum caput Veneris
nostrae, sed and reliquas parts ita perfeceris, ut dum nos in majoribus velis
eminere, id etiam egeris, ut nec in minoribus deficiamus. Tibi ergo acceptum
referimus, quod accipiantur nostra; Tuo splendori, quod iste Academiae Naevus
tollatur. Inscite donare, Te etenim Porrigente, etiam and frustula nostra,
maculata magis quam picta, id pretij induerunt, ut non tot simulacra, sed tot
aedificia, nec tot Vestes, sed tot distentas Syntheses obtulisse visi simus:
adeo (...) illa, Tuo honestamento aucto inter (...) (fere dixeramus inter'
(...)) ponuntur, dum tam protradente dextra muneri nostro non id solum
ornamenti, sed ea insuper and authoritas, and Religio accessit, ut eodem animo
receptum sit, quo Datum. Certe ante hac Reges and Reginas magnifica audivimus
nomina, jam and pia Sentimus. Ipsorum quidem Majestatis est, quod solium
Augustum, Tuae vero Curae, quod and Nutricium habeamus.

E Domo Convocationis December. 12. 1636. Vestro honori and Paternitati
devinctissima, Acad. Oxon.


ARTICLES, Agreed upon, and Concluded the 16th. (...) of Agreement between the
University of Oxon, and the Company of Mationers, Feb. 16. (...).
of February, 1636. Between the Vice Chancellor, Proctors, and Heads of Houses
in Oxford, and two of the Wardens, and some other of the Company of Stationers
in LONDON.
FIRST, the said Vice Chancellor and Heads do Covenant on their Part, that the
University shall not suffer the Printers of Oxford, for Three Years next
Ensuing, to Print the Latin Grammar, called Lilie, nor the Bible The Books are
specified in the Order from the Council to the Company of Stationers.
, etc. Neither shall they Authorize or License any other under their Power, or
by Virtue of their Privilege lately granted, to Print any of those otherwise,
than as the Company of Stationers, and the Parties therein interessed shall
permit.

Secondly, the said Vice Chancellor, and Heads do promise and undertake, that
an Order to this purpose reasonably agreed upon by the Council on both sides,
shall be Ratified and Confirmed by Convocation under the University Seal,
betwixt this present, and our Lady Day next ensuing.

Thirdly, the Wardens abovenamed, and their Brethren of the Company do
Covenant, and Grant to, and with the said Vice Chancellor, etc. That upon such
an Order had, and obtained from Convocation under the Public Seal of the
University, the Company of Stationers shall under their Common Seal, firmly
bind their Body and Company Yearly to pay 200 l. unto the said University,
during the time expressed in the Order, by even and equal Portions: That is to
say, 100 l. at our Lady Day, and an 100 l. at Michaelmas, beginning their first
Payment at our Lady Day next.

Fourthly, the Wardens abovenamed do undertake to obtain this Covenant
likewise from their Company under Seal; That in Case the University of
Cambridge, and the said Company shall agree in like manner, that the power of
Printing such Books be there suspended, and that the said Company shall give a
greater Sum Yearly unto the University of Cambridge in lieu thereof: That then
the said Company shall add such Sum or Sums unto the Sum formerly expressed of
200 l. as shall make the Portion or Portions of Money equal with that which is
paid to Cambridge. And the said Sum well and truly paid unto the University of
Oxon at such times by equal Portions, as are before specified.

Lastly, It is intended, and the full meaning of both Parties is, that this
course of suspending their Power by the University, and the Yearly payment of
such a Sum by the Company of Stationers shall be renewed at the several ends of
such Terms of three Years, in manner and from above specified; until it shall
be reasonably agreed on by both Parties to relinquish the same. In Witness
whereof the Parties abovementioned have interchangeably set to their Hands.

Rich. Baylie, Vice-can. Oxon.
Jo. Prideaux, Exon. Rector.
To. Pincke, Cust. Coll. Novi.
Phil. Parsons, Aulae Cerv. Princip.
Tho. Walker, Coll. Univers. Magist.
Tho. Brown, Procur. Senior.


Salutem in Christo. SIR,
I Have received your Letters, by the Stationers, and with them The Copy of a
part of my Letters to the (...) about the Stationers agreement, and the
reserving of the 200 l. Per Ann. for the settling of the Learned Press Feb. 24.
a Copy of the Articles agreed upon between you. These Articles I can find no
fault with; For certainly it will be more benesicial to the University for the
advance of a Learned Press to receive 200 l. a Year, than to print Grammars and
Almanacks, etc. And more Honor too, when it shall appear, to what
extraordinary good use you turn this Money. I have therefore directed them to
my Council to draw the Agreement upon these Articles in Form, and so to settle
the business; and they give good Reason why the fourth Article should be
secured apart: But I like the Conclusion best of all; Namely, That this
Agreement may determine at the end of Three Years, if the University find it so
sitting for them.

For Cambridge, as I know not, what they will do in this business, so neither
will I be forward to meddle with them, but leave them to use their Privilege in
such sort, as themselves shall think best. True it is, that when Bishop
Harsenet, one of their own, was so far from assisting, that he oppressed their
Privilege, and dissuaded me; yet I stuck close to them, and carried their
Business alone: Nevertheless, they shall never be able to go tell my Lord their
Chancellor, that I offer to force their Privilege in the least. Yet if any
difference between Them and the Stationers come in public, I shall moderate
things according to reason, as far as I can.

Now in the mean time I shall require this of you, and your Successors, that
this Money, which you yearly receive, may be kept safe, as a stock apart, and
put to no other use, than the settling of a Learned Press; and I think it were
not amiss, that some handsome Register-Book were bought, in which might be kept
alone your Acts concerning the Settlement of the Press aforesaid, and in
another part of the Book all your Receipts, and all your Disbursements: And if
you and the Heads like this Proposal of mine, I would then have you order it so
by an Act of Convocation: And I will presently acquaint the King, what great
good use we are like to make of the gracious Privilege he has granted, least
any other Man should tell him, we have basely sold it.

Now to your other Letters. And first I pray, use any fit means The Doctors
made at his Majesty's late being at Oxford either to pay 20 l. a Man, or to do
their Exercise. And this to be Published in Convocation.
by Letters or otherwise to send to the Doctors, that took their Degree at his
Majesty's late being in Oxford, that each of them repair to the University, and
perform their Exercise before the Act next ensuing, or pay their 20 l. a Man,
according as was ordered at the time of their Presentation. I would likewise,
you would let them know, that this 20 l. a Man shall be turned to no other use,
than to the setting up of the Learned Press, that as many of them as mean well
may be the forwarder to pay it. And further, I think it were not amiss to
Publish this in Convocation, both that it may be known to what use I mean to
put the Money, and withal, that their Friends may take notice, and send them
word, if they will, that I am resolved so soon as the Act is over, to sue every
Man in the Vice-chancellor's Court, that pays not his Money, if he have not
done his Exercise, which I will most certainly do, without respect of Persons:
And therefore it is fit, it should be made known as soon as may be.

I pray the next Monday commend me to the Heads, and let them About ^.
know, that I expect from them all, that their several Companies frequent the
Schools diligently, and behave themselves there orderly and peaceably; and I
expect from your self and the Proctors, that the Schools be carefully looked
unto, and that the Disputations be quick and Scholar-like, but not tumultuous:
Your Predecessor kept them in very good order both his Years, and I hope you
will not fall short; And I pray tell Proctor Brown, that whatever his brother
Proctor do, I expect service from him.

But my main Business of all is to put you in mind, that I have not Concerning
the strict observation (...) the new (...).
receved any account from you all this Year, how the new Statutes are put in
Execution, and that not only for matter of Disputations, but for all things
else: And the reason of this my Care to have an Account, is twofold.

First, If the Statutes fall into a neglect, and an half Performance now at
their beginning, and in my own lifetime, there will be no hope that ever they
will recover it after; and so all that great and most useful Labor for the
University will be lost: And I have all the reason in the world to prevent this
inconvenience if I can. And these two Years of your Vice-chancellorship, the
observation, or the not observation of them therein will be a great help or
hindrance to the Statutes for ever. Therefore I pray, as ever I shall entreat
any thing of you, take all the care you can in this great business, and give me
an Account from time to time how it proceeds: And you shall do well to send for
Doctor Turner, and desire him in my name to give you all the assistance he can,
and you may show if you will, how zealously I have written to you about this
Business.

Secondly, Because I remember I have heard, that the former Proctors distasted
something about the alteration of the Statute for Readers, and that since that
time there has been a transmission of that Distemper from Proctor to Proctor,
which must needs do a great deal of harm, considering, how much they must be
trusted with the Execution of the Statutes: Therefore I pray deal seriously
with both the Proctors, but especially with Proctor Brown, and let him know,
that he can give me no Content, if for the remainder of his time he be not
careful of the Statutes, and their due performance. And at Easter, when the new
Procters are chosen, I must desire you to look to them, if they do not look
carefully to the Duty of their places, and in this particular especially.
Besides, I hear a whispering from thence, that during your short abode at Sarum
in this Term-time, the Schools were scarce ever called so much as once. I pray
God it may be found they have called the Schools at all since the Publication
of the new Statutes. You shall do well to examine this, and by the answer which
the Proctors give you, you will be able to discover something both of their
diligence and intentions; besides, it cannot be, but that Mr. Belle's death and
a new and unexperienced Successor must needs give some hindrance to the
Statutes which pertain to Service: But I hope this will be but a temporary
inconvenience, and soon blown over by the diligence of Mr. Gayton, and tell him
I expect it.

Besides, you shall do well to have a care of Noctivagation, and other A care
to be had of Noctivagation, etc.
disorders, else you will quickly have the Distempers of the Night break out in
the Day; and now the Spring comes on, if your self do not take some pains that
way, I doubt the Proctors will be negligent enough, though of their negligence
I can give no reason, unless it be because by the new Statutes the University
is made half sharer in the Mulcts, which how small they are, will appear by
their accounts.

With a special Caution for the observation of the Statute for speaking
Speaking of Latin urged.
Latin.

Lambeth, Feb. 24. 1636/7. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Had almost forgotten a business to you of greater consequence To Dr.
Prideaux concerning his review of Mr. Chillingworths Answer, etc. March 3.
than this, and I cannot well tell whether Mr. Vice Chancellor has acquainted
you with it or no; for I writ not unto him very expressly in the business, but
now recalling it, I thought fit to write thus much to your self. You know, that
Mr. Chillingworth is answering of a Book, that much concerns the Church of
England; and I am very sorry, that the young Man has given cause, why a more
watchful eye should be held over him and his Writings. But since it is so, I
would willingly desire this favor from you in the Church's Name, that you
would be at the pains to read over this Tract, and see that it be put home in
all Points against the Church of Rome, as the Cause requires. And I am
confident Mr. Chillingworth will not be against your altering of any thing,
that shall be found reasonable. And to the end, that all things may go on to
the Honor of the Church of England, I have desired Dr. Potter, (who is
particularly concerned in this business) so soon Books Licensed to the Press to
have a form of Approbation annexed.
as ever he is returned from London, to speak with you about it. And when all
these Trials are over, I would be content, that both this Book, and all others
that shall be hereafter licensed in the University, have such an Imprimatur of
the Licencer before it, as we use here above, which I shall leave to the Wisdom
of the Vice Chancellor and the Heads.

Lambeth, March, 3. 1636/7 W. Cant.


A Passage out of a Letter of the Vicechancellor's.
THE University do now generally resent, that your Grace obtained, The Benefit
from the Charter of Printing, and the Agreement with the Stationers upon it,
turned to the Learned Press. April. 10.
and the King confirmed unto us the greatest Benefit that ever came to the
Public; and, God willing, no Man shall disturb it, while I sit Vice Chancellor.


My Answer to it.
IT is a hard thing in this Age, to bring Men to understand the good that is
done them; and therefore I am the more glad, that the University does it, that
so great a Benefit given them by such a King, may not only be received, but
acknowledged by them, and the (...) Mr. (...), Coll. Oriel. Mr. Glisson, Coll.
Trin.
Memory of it delivered to Succession: And I shall hope that your Successors
after you will keep it in that way, into which it is now put, unless they can
find a better and more useful for the Learned Press.

April 10. 1637. W. Cant.


Mr. Vice Chancellor,
THERE was an English Translation of a Book of Devotion, Concerning the calling
in of the last English Translation of Bishop Sales his Book of Devotion. May 5.
Written by Sales Bishop of Geneva, and Entitled, Praxis Spiritualis sive
Introductio ad vitam devotam, Licensed by Dr. Haywood, then my Chaplain, about
the latter end of November last; but before it passed his hands, he first
struck out diverse things, wherein it varied from the Doctrine of our Church, and
so passed it. But by the Practice of one Burrowes (who is now found to be a
Roman Catholic) those Passages struck out by Dr. Haywood, were interlined
afterward, (as appears upon Examination before Mr. Attorney General, and by
the Manuscript Copy) and were printed according to Burrows's Falsifications.
The Book being thus Printed, gave great and just offense, especially to my
self, who upon the first hearing of it, gave present Order to Seize upon all
the Copies, and to Burn them publicly in Smithfield. Eleven or Twelve Hundred
Copies were Seized and Burnt accordingly; buut it seems Two or Three Hundred of
the Impression were dispersed before the Seizure. Now my desire is, that if any
Copies of this Translation be, or shall be sent to Oxford, you would call them
in, and take such Order for the Suppressing of them there, as is here already
taken. And so I commend you to God's Grace, and rest

Lambeth, May 4. 1637. Your Loving Friend W. Cant.


SIR,
YOU are now upon a very good way toward the setting up of Mar, 5. A Branch of
my Letters to the (...) concerning the Matrices, Letters, and Composer for the
(...) ss.
a Learned Press; and I like your Proposal well to keep your Matrices, and your
Letters, you have gotten, safe, and in the mean time to provide all other
necessaries, that so you may be ready for that work: For since it has pleased
God so to bless me, as that I have procured you both Privilege and means for
that work, I should be very glad to see it begun in my own Lifetime, if it
raight be. And because the beginning of such a work will be very difficult, as
also the procuring of a sussicient Composer, and Corrector for the Eastern
Languages, you have done exceeding well to think of him at Leyden, and to get
him over upon as good Terms as you can, and to give him an Annual Pension in
the mean time, that he may not be tempted from your Service. So God speed you.

I have sent you down by this Carrier my Book of the University My Book of
(...) sent for the Library (...) to see their Daties.
Statutes, which I give that the Library-keepers may read their own Duties in
it; for having none, I doubt they keep neither old Statutes nor new, so well as
they should. And it may be, if you and the rest of the Curators would look well
to it, you might find many things there, out of order, and sit to be amended.
And while I am upon this Argument of placing the Statute-Book in the public
Library, I pray acquaint the Heads at the next meeting, that I am informed,
that the Concerning the keeping (...) the Statutes too close.
Statute-Book in some private Colleges is kept up too close from them, whom it
concerns; which is a great hindrance to the due Publication of the Statutes,
and ministers occasion to many Men to pretend Ignorance, instead of showing
Obedience. I pray therefore commend my love to the Heads, and let them know,
that I expect every Head of College and Hall, where there is a Library, to take
care that the Book of Statutes be placed and chained in it, that it may be of
free access to the Students in each Society; And that in such Halls, as have no
Library, the Statute-Book be placed as safely, and yet as publicly as it can
be. And further, I must and do require of every of the Heads, Additions to be
inserted inthe Statutebook of every Col. and Hall.
that all the Additions and Alterations made upon the Review of the Statutes be
put into all and every Statute-Book which is kept within their several
Governments. And I do require of you, Mr. Vice Chancellor, to see it done, and
to give me an account of it. For it will be no great Labor to you at some
convenient times to send for the Statute-Book of every College and Hall, and
see whether it be done or no; and if the Additions should not be writ into
every Book, it would cause one College to be otherwise informed concerning
their particular Statutes than others are, and so cause more frequent recourse
to the Leidger-Book, than would otherwise be necessary, and perhaps breed other
disserences also.

I find that the Proctors of the last Year, and I doubt their Predecessors
Concerning the Proctors collecting the Mulcts.
also, have been too negligent in Collecting the Mulcts; and it may be those
that are new come in, will be negligent also, if you call not upon them
betimes; I pray therefore commend me to them and tell them, that I will expect
their Performance in this particular, as well as their diligence in all things
else; and that I hold it a very unworthy thing that out of a plausible popular
humor to decline the Envy of any private Man, they should so far neglect their
Duty to the Statutes and the Public. And certainly if the Proctors go on in
this way, and either wholly neglect it, or thrust it upon the Vice Chancellor,
I shall not only take it very ill from them; but at the end of their Year,
either I shall cause the Delegates not to pass their Accounts, till they have
paid it themselves, or else sue both them and the Delinquents in the
Vice-chancellor's Court for such Mulcts as are left by them uncollected. And I
pray let the Heads know, what I have Written in this Particular also.

I have some more Manuscripts almost ready for you, but I would (...).
willingly have some larger place made, and assigned for them, either in the
old Library, or in the new Additions to it; for I saw the last Summer, that the
place, where they now are, would not hold all which I have sent already. And
the sooner this place is provided, the better, for to prevent Casualties; I
could be content, they were out of my Hands.

Lambeth, May 5. 1637. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Would have you send for Mr. Brevin, and let him know not only A Branch of a
Letter to the (...) concerning Mr. (...) his Degree of Master, May 19.
the difference of a Master of Art at Oxford and Samure, but the ill
consequences also, which may follow upon it, in case he should have his Degree
confirmed; and that I advise him to go the other way, and to stay half a Year,
and so to be created Master, and that in the mean time I will speak with his
Friends here: but certainly for ought appears to me yet, or is like to appear,
I will never give way to the confirming of his Degree, things being at Samure,
as you have reported them.

I like your Proposal very well for Mr. Cartwright, and am glad to (...) Mr.
(...).
hear that he is so Passing sit for the Greek, and every way else so well
deserving for this or a better Place. I have not leisure to write a Letter to
the Heads, which may lie Leidger against that time; but I am very heartily
willing to give my consent, that when the Voydance shall come, Mr. Cartwright
may be the Successor, and to that end I give you free and full Power to move
the Heads, or to do any other Act fitting, or conducent to the good success of
this business. And so much I pray let Mr. Cartwright know, and withal give him
thanks for his fair and respective Letter to me. One thing is considerable, I
take it, the Statute requires that somewhat should be done with the Bedel of
Law in relation to the Learned Press; but my Memory does not hold it perfectly,
what it is; And therefore you shall do well to consider it. And now upon a
sudden considering Gaytons sufficiency, it is come into my head to ask this
Question! Why may not all three Esquire Bedels join in the Learned Press, though
perhaps but one of them need be the chief Manager: For ought I know, this may
be very well worth your considering.

I am very desirous to prevent Perjury by all means possible, and So much of
the Statutes, as con cern manners or exercise, to be contracted into a little
Volume, and Printed for the Use of the Younger (...).
therefore if you can tell how to order it, that so much of the Statute Book
may be Printed; as may direct the younger sort in matter of Manners and
Exercise: You shall do very well to take it into full Consideration with the
Heads; and then put it in practice accordingly. But I would have the Collection
made to be Printed in a little Volume for the daily use of the Students that
may desire it. In your last Passage, I think you are mistaken; for certainly
the great Leidger-Book of the Statutes is to be placed in Archivis among the
University Charters; and not in any Cubb of the Library, nor to be come at The
(...) Book of Statutes to be (...) in (...).
without more (...) than one: And for this (as I remember) there is a
particular Statute. But howsoever, I will not have that Book trusted under any
Library-Keeper's Key, and for the Statute-Book, which I sent down; You did well
to leave it in the Cubbs, where it must remain, unless you can sind some other
way to prevent the endeavor of the Dutch to transcribe it.

Lambeth, May 19 1637. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Am very glad I put that to the question, concerning the joining Part of a
Letter to the Vice Chancellor concerning the (...); Bedells, their assistance
at the learned Press May 26.
of the other two Bedells with the Law Bedel to assist at the Learned Press,
considering that it jumps so well with your Care and Thoughts in the same kind:
And yet, though I think their assistance may be very useful to that Work, it will
certainly be necessary, that the Statute be observed, and the main Trust be
lest upon the Law Bedel. For else you know between many Stools, what is like to
go to Ground. But indeed if the University would set sadly to it, and bring in
some Batchelors of Art to be Yeomen-Bedels, which are well grounded and
towardly To bring in some Batchelors of Art to be Yeomen-Bedels to serve the
Press.
to serve that Press, as Composers, or otherwise it would in time be of
excellent use. And they, which thrived well and did good service, might after
be preferred to be Esquire Bedels, and so that Press would ever train up able men
for it self. And though there be time enough to think of this Business; yet
certainly it would not be amiss, now while it is res integra, to Propose it (in
general at least) to the Heads, that every man may have his eyes upon, and help
to perfect so good a Business which yet I leave to your free Consideration.

I am glad the Divinity Disputations in course go on. I hope now Divinity
Disputations.
that is mastered, other difficulties will be put the better over. But in any
Case give continual Charge concerning the speaking of Latin. For Speaking of
Latin urged again.
if that be not followed, it will be a heavy business to many of the Younger
sort, when they come to take their Degrees; and the time of four Years for the
putting of that Statute in execution will draw on apace.

When I read your Letters I was doubtful, in whom the Gift of The Clerkship of
St. Mary's and the be stowing of it.
the Clerk-ship of St. Mary's was, till after considering how the Fees did
rise, I conclude it must needs be in the University. And while I was reading
your Letters, I did think to leave it wholly to your self, for which of your
Men you pleased; but afterward reading a Letter that came from Dr. Turner, he
put some thoughts into my Head, that such a man might be chosen Clerk, as may
be servicable to the Learned Press, either as a Founder of Letters, or as a
Press-man in some inferior Service. This is a very good consideration and
timely put in; I pray therefore speak with Dr. Turner about it, and if such a
man may be had in any Case, let him be chosen: But if otherwise it happen, that
you must take a man at large, then I leave you free to take, which of your own
men you please. Yet whosoever you make Clerk, I hold it very sit that the same
man that is Clerk, may The Clerk of St. Mary's not to be Clock-keeper.
not have the keeping of the Clock at St. Mary's to shorten Hours at his
Pleasure, especially in Lent, to the great hindrance of those disputations, and
the disordering of the University in all Exercises. But I think very fit, that
some honest man were taken into that service, that would not be so easily
found, nor perhaps so ordinarily corrupted, as the Clerks use to be. And for
this service of his, he may be allowed some small thing Yearly out of the
Clerk's wages. I leave all this to your Consideration, but believe it as very a
Trisle as it seems, it reaches very far into the Discipline of the University.

May, 26. (...) W. Cant.


SIR,
I Am very sorry you are to seek for men to answer in the Law A (...) to the
Vicechancellor concerning Answerers in the (...) and Physic Act. June 16.
and Physic Act; and am very loath to give way to any, that want time to
answer, and have that Exercise, stand for their Degree. Were it not better,
that one of the Doctors should answer the rest, than to take his course? truly
for my part I think it more honor for the University to have no proceeders in
in either Faculty, than to be driven to this Exigent. And it were fit
hereafter, you did agree The proceeders in either Faculty toprovide his
Answererhimself
with the Doctors, that proceed to provide an Answerer, and not leave the
University to provide one for them, and not to suffer the Degree of any one
Doctor to pass, till he were able to name, who should answer in that Faculty. I
pray consider seriously of this with the Heads.

Lambeth, June 16. 1637. W. Cant.


SIR,
FOR Mr. Crofts and his great Horses, he may carry them back A Passage of a
Letter to the Vice Chancellor for Mr. Crofts and his great Horses to depart
Oxford.
if he please, as he brought them. For certainly it cannot be fit for the
University, though the exercise in it self be exceeding commendable: For the
Gentlemen there are most part too Young, and not strong enough; besides you
cannot put that charge upon their Parents, without their particular leave and
directions; but this especially is considerable, that where ever this Place of
riding shall be, where one Scholar learns, you shall have 20 or 40 to look on,
and there lose their time, so that upon the whole matter, that place shall be
suller of Scholars, than either Schools or Library. Therefore I pray give Mr.
Crofts thanks fairly for his good intentions; but as thus advised, I cannot
give way to his staying there to the purpose he intends; nor is it altogether
inconsiderable, that you shall suffer Scholars to fall into the old humor of
going up and down in Boots and Spurs, and then have their excuse ready, that
they are going to the Riding-house; and I Hereupon Mr. Crofts presently left
Oxsord.
doubt not, but other inconveniences may be thought on, therefore I pray no
admittance of him.

In this year the Porch at St. Mary's was finished at the cost of my Chaplain,
Dr. Morgan Owen, which was 230 l.

Lambeth June 23. 1637. W. Cant.


Salutem in Christo.
AFter my hearty commendations, etc. The time draws now on Dr. Baylie continued
Vicechancellor a second Year.
for the appointing another Vice Chancellor for the Year ensuing, that so the
Government of that place may go orderly and peaceably on, as (God be thanked)
it has hitherto done. But when I consider with what temper and moderation Dr.
Baylie, Dean of Salisbury, has carried himself in all Businesses, which went
through his hands in the Year past, and particularly in the manageing of the
many and great businesses, which happened at his Majesty's late being there,
and what content he has given the University; I am resolved according to the
course, which I have usually held, to continue him Vicechancellor for the Year
following. And though the trouble be great, which accompanys the due execution of
that place; Yet I hope the former years experience, will make this ensueing
Year seem less Burdensome to him, and this my new choice of him which I now
make, very welcome both to himself and you.

These are therefore to pray and require You to allow of this my choice of Dr.
Baylie, and to give him your best assistance in all such things as shall
concern the Honor and good Government of that University, which not doubting
but every of you will do, I leave you all to God's blessed Protection, and rest

Lambeth, June, 30. 1637 Your very loving Friend and Chancellor, W. Cant.


To my loving Friends the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctors, and the
rest of the Convocation of the University of Oxford.
FOR your Act, Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites! In To the
Vicechancellor concerning the Act in the dangerous time of infection June 30.
plain English, keep an Act or keep none! Take it quite away, or defer it, do
what you will, but I will not lie open to the Censure, that may pass upon it,
either for the present omission, or for the consequences of infection, which
may follow upon it. You are many and wise, and upon the place, and therefore to
your selves I leave it, with this caution, that at the first if you keep not
the Act at the time, deferring will seem less to the World, than cutting off;
but in the end it must come to the same thing, for I presume you will not keep
a Winter Act: And for any thing that concerns your self in particular, that is
not a matter considerable, for it is but a little Pains lost; and not so much,
if you can tell how to lay a Speech in Pickle till the next Year.

June 30, 1637. VV. Cant.


SIR,
I Understand, that Richard Bull one of the Yeomen Bedels is lately My Letters
to the Vicechancelor in the behalf of William Ball for a Yeoman Bedel's Place.
July 14 1637.
dead, and that there are so many Suitors for the place as somewhat distract
the University: I should be sorry any such petty occasion should divide that
Body, and do hereby heartily pray you, that while I leave all Men to their
Liberty; you will take care to keep them in Peace, and to see that the Election
pass orderly. And yet truly, though I leave all men that have suffrages free, I
cannot but marvel, that there should not be a full concurrence of Voices for
the choice of William Ball, Servant to your late Predecessor Dr. Puike. For to
my knowledge he took a great deal of very good Pains in writing out the
Leidger-Book of Statutes for the University. In which respect I for my part
cannot but recommend him to the care both of the Heads and of the Masters
assuring my self, that he will be a very serviceable man in that place, both
for his Pen and otherwise, and therefore I do hereby pray you to do him the
best Offices you can, that he may be He had the Place.
chosen. So I leave you to God's blessed Protection, and rest

Croydon July 14 1637. Your very loving Friend, VV. Cant.


SIR,
MR. Greaves of C.C.C. began to read the Arabic Lecture upon Wednesday Mr.
Greaves Deputy Arabick-Reader. in Mr. Pocock's absence.
19 July? as Deputy to Mr. Pocock, to whom I gave leave to Travel to
Constantinople and the Eastern parts for the better perfecting himself in the
Arabic and Eastern Languages, and I allowed him the stipend of the Lecture
toward his Travels.

Concerning Mr. Brown and your Stationers, there is little more to A Passage of
a Letter to the Vice Chancellor concerning Mr. Brown and the Stationers July 28.
be said. For the truth is, since Mr. Brown, buying at the first hand may sell
as cheap as the Merchant, he will certainly draw all the Custom of the whole
Town to himself. And certain it is, this would be a considerable benefit to the
particular Students who are to buy; but it must be the utter undoing of all the
other Booksellers about the Town, which again on the other side is more
considerable, and that as well in regard of the Honor and Justice of the
University, as of the Livelihood of the men themselves and their Families. The
truth is for ought as yet appears to me, Mr. Brown must not be suffered to sell
by retail for the reason aforesaid. And you were as good order it so your
selves, as have it ordered above to your Hands; for I remember some two years
since, there was a great Complaint brought to the Councel-Table, that some men
in London would be both Merchants of Cloth, and yet keep a Drapers-shop, and
sell by retail; and it was overruled at the Board that they might use which
they would but that they might not use both. And I verily believe, if your
Stationers complain thither, (as fear of undoing may make them do any thing) I
shall be commanded to Order you in this Case of Mr. Brown after the same
manner. Besides this, there is something considerable in the thing it self. For
though it be true, that Mr. Brown in this way may, and no doubt will undersel
your other Stationers, and so undo them, and enrich himself; Yet when they are
all undone, may not he then, or any other, that shall succeed him in that way,
raise the price of Books, under some pretense or other, and sell them as dear
as the Stationers now do? It is therefore certainly a business of great
Consideration in it self, and in the Justice of the University, that so many
Men and Families be not ruined, after they have served there for their Freedom,
and Liberty for some Saving to particular Men. And for an Expedient in a middle
way, I do not yet see, where it may be had; and certainly one way or other, the
business must be settled, and the sooner the better.

Croyden, July 28. 1637. W. Cant.


Most Reverend Father in God, my very Honorable good Lord!
I Had long since in my former Letters acquainted your Grace, according Dr.
Fell's Letter to me concerning the too great Number of Victualling-Houses in
Oxford.
to your directions, with the particular mischief, that arises out of the
multitude of Victualling-Houses in this place, but that I was informed that by
your Grace's care, an Order was made, that no Justices should License
Alehouses, but in open Sessions, and that the Number should not exceed Three
and Twenty. But finding, that this excellent remedy takes no good effect, I am
once more bold to be troublesome to your Grace, hoping, that by your Assistance
and Favor, which is never wanting to us, we may in some measure amongst our
selves correct this spreading evil. I know your Grace is very apprehensive of
the Malignity of this desperate evil, the occasion of many's ruin amongst us,
the Number of Victuallers being incredible, and likely to grow continually. The
Cure (I conceive) is not by punishing the immediate Delinquents, either by
Imprisonment, according to the Statute 5 to Edw. 6. or by whipping by the
Statute Primo Reg. Caroli, but (as I have learned by serving two Apprentiships)
by Indicting the Brewer upon the Statute 4 to. Reg. Jacobi, who must pay 6 s. 8
d. for every Barrel he shall deliver into any Tap-House not Licenced. These Men
are Solvendi, and if the Penalty be required, they will be soon weary of
trading this way; and by this means, we stop the Current at the very Head and
Fountain. I hope the Justices in the Town-Sessions will not hinder this good
work, they having much increased the Number of the Burghers by renewing very
lately their Commission, wherein Five of them are added, One being a Brewer,
who neither by Law, or in Reason, should be a Judge in this kind, etc.

At this time Dr. Fell sent me a List of Alehouses (...) in (...), 94.
94 Alehouses, which were unlicenced within the City of Oxford.

Christ-Church, Oxford, August 15. 1637. Your Graces ever to be commanded in
any service for the good of Church, or State Sam. Fell.


Salutem in Christo. SIR,
I Received your Letter concerning the great number and increase August 26. My
(...) to Dr. (...), Letter concerning a Number of Ale-Hoases unlicenced in
Oxford.
of Ale-house-keepers and Victuallers unlicenced in the University to the great
dishonor of that place, and as great mischief to many young Students there. I
thank you heartily for this care and pains, and do hereby assure you, that I
will give you all the assistance I possibly can to cure this Malady: And if you
find that neither the Order which I caused to be made, nor the other Remedies,
which your self mention, will cure this business (as it seems to do) I pray
acquaint Mr. Vicechancellor with these my Letters, and let him know, I would
have him, your self, and the other Justices, to proceed upon the Statute 4 to.
Jacobi, and make every Brewer pay 6 s. 8 d. for every Barrel he shall deliver
into any Tap-house not Licenced.

It seems by your Letter, that this Statute well followed, is a probable
Remedy, and indeed I think it will go far, if it be well followed. I perceive,
you have but one doubt against it; and that is, least you should find
opposition from the Town-Justices, who (you say) have of late both renewed and
enlarged their Commission by the Addition of Five, one of them being a Brewer.
Will the University still sleep, while the Town slips these things upon them? I
am sure, I once took order, that the Number of Town-Justices should not exceed
those of the University, that so things might be carried with indifferency. And
if they shall now oppose in this business of the Alehouses, it will be a good
occasion for me to move My Lord Keeper again to dissolve their Commission,
which I will not fail to do, if they give me cause: So I pray proceed, and
God's Blessing be upon your Endeavors, while I rest

I trouble you with these Letters, because Mr. Vicechancellor was newly gone
away from me with a whole Bundle of Instructions, just as your Letter came to
me. W. (...).

Croydon, August 26. 1637. Your very loving Friend W. Cant.


SIR,
THough unknown, I have presumed to be so bold, as to solicit Letters from
Oxford to Mr. Fish of Clarkenwell to convey two Youths beyond Sea.
you in a Business, viz. to know, whether you could send over one or two, who
for Religion sake, are desirous to be entered into some Order beyond the Seas,
especially that of the Fratrum Minorum, or Jesuits. So expecting your Answer,
and unwilling to disclose my self, till I have it, I rest Mr. Fish brought me
this Letter August 29. 1637.


Direct your Answer as soon as you can, to one Richard Pully in St. John's
College in Oxon.

Yours, August 23. Superscribed thus: To his very Loving Friend, Mr. John Fish
in Clarkenwell give These. Leave this at one Mr. Fish's at Doctors-Commons, to
be delivered unto him. LONDON.

Salutem in Christo. SIR,
I Have yet received no Letter from you this Week, if I do, you My Letters to
the Vicechancellor (August 29. 1637.) sent presently away, for care to be had
of this Business.
shall have an Answer on Friday, if I have so much leisure. In the mean time I
send you this enclosed, which came to my Hands this present Afternoon; I pray
examine the business with all the Care and Industry you possibly can, as well
for the discharge of your own Duty and Credit, as mine, in the Government of
that place. And if there be such a Man as Pully here mentioned, be sure to make
him fast, and examine him thoroughly touching all Particulars, that you shall
think material for the Discovery of these unworthy Practices for the seducing
of Youths in that University, or elsewhere, especially concerning the Author of
this Letter, and what Youths have been dealt withal after this sort, either in
that House or any other of the Town. And whether any Jesuits, or others, have
lain hankering up and down thereabouts, or be there at this present to that
purpose, or any other as bad. In all which, I desire you to use the utmost
diligence and discretion that you can, and let me have an Account with all
convenient speed. So I leave you to God's Grace, and rest

This falls out very unhappily, not only for the thing it self, which ought by
all means to be prevented; but also for the Clamors, which the late Libellers
have made, that there are great endeavors for reintroducing of Popery.

Croydon, August 29. 1637. Your very loving Friend W. Cant.


SIR,
I Am glad you found all in Health, and all things else so well at September,
1. 1637. A Passage of a Letter to the Vicechancellor concerning Mr. Greenwood
of Brazen-nose, and the formet business concerning the Letter sent to Mr. Fish.
your return; and yet I cannot but see, that both Factions would be busy
there. Concerning the Popish Faction, I writ hastily to you to prevent a
Danger, which I thought was Imminent, and God grant you may secure it! but in
any case name not Fish, if you can possibly avoid it; but carry it as if the
Letter were Intercepted, and be as careful, as possibly you can. And concerning
the Puritan, I see plainly, that Brazen-Nose has some as bad, or worse than
Cook was about four Years since. And that Greenwood, who Preached on Sunday
last, is like to prove a peevish Man, which I am the more sorry for; because
you write he is a good Master of his Pen, and therefore like to do the more
harm. But since he has so cunningly carried it, (for the Fashion is now to
turn the Libellous part into a Prayer) I think the best way is to take no
notice of it at all; but the more carefully to observe, what the Man does in
the University: For I would have no Man publicly called in Question, where a
fair Answer may be given and taken, that the Peace both of the Church, and of
that place may be preserved, as much as may be. And yet to confess my thoughts
to you, I think Mr. Greenwood had in this business, a very Factious, and a
Rancorous meaning.

When you have made all the use you can of the Letter I sent you on Wednesday,
take a Copy of it, and send me back the Original safe.

September 1. 1637. W. Cant.


SIR,
UPon the receipt of your Grace's Letters on Wednesday, I instantly An Account
from the Vicechancellor about the business concerning Pullin of St. John's,
Received Sept. 5. in answer to my Letters on the Wednesday before.
set a Spy upon Pullin, one of our Scholars of the House of two Years standing,
sent to the Carrier for a view of all the Letters sent to St. John's; none were
directed to Pullin either on Thursday or Saturday: Neither did Pullin on
Thursday, or ever since look toward the Carrier. On Friday morning, I took him
coming from Prayers in the Quadrangle, where I might see how he behaved himself
at Citation. I instantly searched his Pockets, took his Keys of Study and Trunk
from him, searched them (he staying in my Lodging) I looked over every Book and
Paper; I found nothing that might give the least suspicion that he is inclined
toward Popery. I examined his Chamber-fellows, what Company resorted to him;
They protested they never saw any, besides those of our own House, one or other
to come unto him. I returned to him, demanded what acquaintance he had in Town;
he professed he knew none but one Isam of Christ-Church, who went Six Weeks
hence to his Friends in Ireland, and him he knew at Westminster-School, I
cannot learn that Isam is inclined that way. I further questioned, whether he
ever received Letters for any other since his coming to us; he vowed no, I
showed him the Letter directed to Fish, enquired whether he knew the Man or the
Handwriting, he vowed no. Diverse other Interrogatories I put him, but could
not gather either from the matter or manner of his Answer the least ground of
suspicion. I have diligently enquired of others, who might know I left him to
the Vicechancellors disposal, but withal to look well to him, and what Letters
came to him.
him, but have not for which I might suspect him. Under charge he is, not to
stir out of the College, nor to speak with any Stranger without my leave upon
pain of Expulsion, and thus he shall rest till your Grace shall free him.

September, 4. 1637.

SIR,
SInce the finishing of your new Library will cost you a Thousand To the
Vicechancellor concerning the Addition to the new Library, Sept. 8.
Pounds, I am heartily glad you have Seven Hundred Pounds in Chest toward it.
I pray therefore acquaint the Heads, that I would have this work presently
begun, (especially considering how long it will be in doing) that so the
Learned Press may really and heartily be set upon; which I do desire to see on
foot.

The Act, that was put off from the usual time to the The Act taken away by
reason of the Sickness.
7th. of October, was on Saturday the 9th. of September quite taken away from
this Year, by reason of the unreasonableness of the time, and the danger of the
Sickness spread about the Country.

Croyden, Sept. 8. 1637. W. Cant.


SIR,
YOU cannot carry too careful an Eye, either over Pullin or the To the
Vicechancellor, Sept. 15. concerning Knot's having Mr. Chillingworth's Book
from the Press, sheet by sheet.
rest; for certainly some are about that place to seduce as many as they can.
And particularly Dr. Potter writes me word, that Knott is now in Oxford, (I
would you could lay hold of him) and has the Sheets from the Press, as they
are done; and that he pays Five Shillings for every Sheet, and that you are
acquainted with this Rumor. I pray be very careful in this also, for I know the
Jesuits are very cunning at these tricks; but if you have no more hold of your
Printers, than that the Press must lie thus open to their Corruption, I shall
take a Sowrer Course, than perhaps is expected. For though perhaps they go so
cunningly to Work, as that I shall not be able to make a legal Proof of this
soul Misdemeanour: Yet I find that Knott makes a more speedy Answer, than is
otherwise possible, without such seeing of the Sheets, I shall take that for
Proof enough, and proceed to Discommission your Printer, and suppress his
Press. And I pray fail not to let him know so much from me.

Croyden, Sept. 15 1637. VV. Cant.


SIR,
I Have received the Paper of Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons, why he A Passage of
my Letters to the Vice Chancellor Sept. 22. about Mr. Chillingworth's answering
the second Part of Knott's Book.
is so loath to meddle with the second part of Knott's Book, thinking the
Answer to the first sufficient; and truly were all men that shall come to read
his Book of his sufficiency, I would be of his Opinion, especially supposing,
that to be true which he gives for one of his reasons, namely, that there is
nothing in the Second of any worth or moment, that is not a repetition of
somewhat in the First. Upon all things laid together, I am somewhat divided in
my thoughts, what to resolve in this business; yet thus far I dare resolve.

First, I would not have the Answer farther delayed which Mr. Chillingworth
says he must needs do, and that for some Months, if he Answer the second Part.
Secondly, If he Answer the first only, I would have him Print at the end of it
those Reasons, which are fit to be public why he does not Answer the second
Part, and especially that Reason which he expresses, namely that the second
Part contains almost nothing, but repetitions of the former. Thirdly, In the
Answer of the first Part, I would quote to a Page where the same is repeated in
the second Part, that so the World may take notice, that both Parts are
answered in one. And Lastly, I would have him acquaint Dr. Potter with as much,
as may any way be fit, that so no discontent may arise between them.

Croyden Sept. 22. 1637 W. Cant.


SIR,
DR. Fell is now with me, and returns to Oxford in the beginning of Letters to
Dr. Shelden about Dr. Fell's resignation of the Marg. Lecture, and Dr. Lawrence
succeeding him November. 3. 1637.
the next week. At his return, I would have you or Mr. Vicechancellor speak
with him about his Resignation, which he has promised me to make, both of his
Lecture and Prebend of Worcester; and that so soon as their Worcester Audit is
over, (which I take is this November) he having this Year an Office in that
Church to be accountable for. And when you have once spoken with him about it,
You may then go on, and make the Business as sure as you can.

When all is done, you must deal with Dr. Laurence to be very mindful of the
waspishness of these times, and to be sure to read upon no argument, that may
make any the least trouble in Church or University, which I shall in part lay
upon your Care to look to; for so much as concerns Dr. Lawrence, so wishing you
all health, etc.

Lambeth, Nov. 3. 1637. Your very loving Friend, W. Cant.


SIR,
I Am glad to hear the Garnsey man is so well a deserver in (...) (...) out of
my Letters to the Vicechancellor Nov. 3. concerning Mr. Brevin of (...) his
incorporation.
College, and as glad that he wants but a quarter of a Year of full time to be
Master of Art. I pray persuade with the Young man to stay, and then give him
his Degree with as much Honor, as you please. And you may tell Dr. (...) the
jealousies, which I have against the making of a Precedent in the other way by
incorporation, as the Case stands. And though the Marginal Statute indulge to the
King's Subjects in his own Universities, yet that is nothing to Samure. Samure.
And therefore certainly I shall not like that which is desired.

I know nothing in the Statutes, that exempts a Pro-proctor from any Concerning
the Care of the Proproctors and Masters of Schools for Exercise in Divinity.
Exercise which lies upon him in the University, or a Master of the Schools
from Exercise in Divinity. Therefore let Mr. Duncombe do his Exercise in God's
name, for I will have no such precedent begun either against or without
Statute; neither am I well pleased, that able men should be so willing to seek
all occasions to shift off Exercise in Divinity.

W. Cant.


SIR,
I Sent to the Vice Chancellor to speak to the Heads at the Monday meeting,
that they follow the Canon in their Prayers before Sermons, November. (...) To
the Vicechancellor concerning Prayers before Sermons according to Canon
both in the University, and out, and to require them to give notice of it to
their several Companys.

W. Cant.


QVOD omnino semper retinenti, atque difficilius facit Academia, manum The
Degradation of five men for neglecting to appearat the Act should have been
kept. Received Nov. 18.
hodie capulo admovet, gladium stringit, aciemque ejus in immorigerors, forte
an rebels, filios intentat; Quorum adversus sieve incuriam, sive contumaciam
iras graviores concipit, certioremque infligit vindictam; quippe compertum
semper habuit, eos maxim contra Disciplinam ejus bonosque mores obvios ivisse,
qui in leviusculis, and promptioris obsequii rebus parere recusaverint. (...)
ita res est, saeviente peste Londini, grassanteque per vicos passim and pagos
lue, Saluti suorum prospiciens Academia, Comitia Julio celebranda in Nonum
Octobris protelat; sed ne tunc ad spem and Vota piae matris cessante Tabe,
decernit Venerabilis Convocatio, praesentis Anni (...) prorsus abolenda. Quod
tamen ne Candidatis hujus anni in damnum cedat, cavet itidem venerabilis Domus,
ut magistrorum quilibet ad sextum aut Septimum diem Octobris compareat, ac
gratitudinis (...) ob complendum (ipso facto sine ulteriore negotio) Gradum
december solidos in usum Academiae ultra feoda omnia persolvat. Non comparens
(...) impeditus, ultra Feoda omnia viginti solidos eroget, ipsoque facto
magister audiat, numeris omnibus absolutus. Sin quispiam sive socordiae sive
contumaciae litans, ad dictos dies non compareret, nec secundum tenorem
praedictorum nummos erogaret, indignata vel tam crassam negligentiam, vel (...)
Contumaciam, statuit Vniversitas, ut a Gradu (...) abarceretur.

Reportarunt Obsequii pariter ac Gratitudinis praemium pii ac (...) filii:
caeteros, nominatim Guilielmum Adams and GuilielmumGoulston e Coll.
Lincolniensi, Oliverum Wallup e Collegio Pembrochiensi, Guilielmum Holt, e
Collegio Magdalenensi, Eusebium Dormer, ex (...) Mgadalenensi, publico hoc
instrumento sistit Academia; iisdemquae minuto-varia, at serica de scapulis
detrahit, de manibus eorum Pilea ipsi, indigna Capita, qui libertatis
Academicae insignia gerant) excutit, cosdemque nusquam inter magistros
numerandos pronunciat, in cujus censurae majorem fidem (sic imperante
Convocatione) Literas has ad Valvas Templi B. Mariae Virginis affigi ac
prostare curavimus.

Insuper sciant isti Tenebriones ipsa Statuta, ad quae Sacramenti Religione se
obstrinexerunt, brachium in eos non imbelle exeruisse, quin manu fortiori de
Gradu etiam Baccalaureatus, quem (...) vigore Statuti ipsos deturbasse: Cujus
tenor sequitur liquetque. Tit. 9. Sect. 7,

Item, tu jurabis, quod incipies realiter intra annum, Quod siquis post
praestitum istud juramentum (absque (...) dispensatione) nihilominus haud
incoeperit, privetur ipso facto, non solum gradu ad quem novissime praesentatus
fuerat, sed and aliis omnibus, quos prius susceperat.

I have received an ingenious handsome Epistle from him that was Monk at
Toulouse, and as I am most unwilling to break any Letter of Statute, so do I
not think, that the words which you have sent up, have any purpose to bar an
Englishmen born especially in a Case of such exigence and extremity; but is
only a Bar upon such Englishmen as shall voluntarily forsake their own
Universities to take their Degree beyond the Seas; And in this sense the
Statute is deservedly penal upon them, but God forbid that it should be
extended against an Englishman in such a Case of Difficulty and Distress, as
this Man is. Therefore I leave him to you and the Heads to show him all the
favor which you shall think fit for him.

Lambeth, December. 1. 1637. W. Cant.


SIR,
UPon Monday last according to promise there was notice taken at December. 1.
To the Vicechancellor, their (...) for (...) of (...) within a (...) Compass of
(...).
the Green-Cloth of the Cause of the Privilege for carrying of Billet, etc.
according as the Officers had promised me, and according to the Brief, which I
had collected out of your Letters, and with my own hand delivered to Mr.
Comptroller; and as the Officers tell me, you shall hear no more of the
business, which promise, I hope they will perform.

W. Cant.


SInce the Publishing of the new Statutes, there has been some complaint made,
that the younger sort cannot have access often enough to the Statute-Book,
which is reserved in every particular College; thereby to know all Hours for
Lectures, and all other Duties required of them. Hereupon it was thought sit,
that an Abridgment should be made of the Statutes, especially of those, which
concern manners and exercise. This pains was undertaken, and the Abridgment
made by Mr. Thomas Crosfield of Queens College, and was Printed and Published
in January 1638. but according to the old Style in England, 1637. The Title of
the Book is, Statuta (...) e Corpore Statutorum Vniversitatis Oxoniensis, ut in
promptu and ad manum sint, quae magis ad usum (praecipue Juniorum) facere
videntur.

SIR,
For Mr. Chudley, in the sense which I writ, and as you took it, To the
Vicechancellor (...), Mr. Chudley's Dispensation for a term to be made Master.
the Example will be so full of danger, and the breach of Statute so violent
against it, with a Nullo modo proponatur, and ne quisquam proponat sub poena
Banniconis, as that for my part, I shall never yield to it for him or any
other. And therefore you did well, before you proposed any thing to the Heads,
to acquaint me with those Bars in Statute, and with the danger of the
Consequence likely to fall very often in every Year wanting one Term, and no
more. But in the end of your Letters, you tell me that young Chudley came to
you, and expressed himself otherwise; namely for a present Creation. And this way
(you say) expresses more present savor and respect to him, and is of less
danger in the precedent for the future. The young Man ((...) seems) deserves
well, and the Princes Tutor has been very earnest with me for him,
Nevertheless I shall not in this way peremptorily appoint any thing, but leave
him to you and the Heads to do whatsoever you shall think fittest; and with
advice, rather to show no favor, than to creat a Precedent, which may endanger
the Statutes and the Government after. Of which I shall ever desire you to be
tender and careful.

Lambeth, Feb. 9. (...). W. Cant.


A Strict Charge given to the Vice Chancellor and Proctors, to look ^.
that the Lent Disputations be carefully performed, in a quick and Learned way,
and without disorder.

Lambeth, Feb. 12. (...). W. Cant.


MR. Kilby of Lincoln-College made a Sermon, in which he brake Mr. Kilby
censured for breach of the Five Articles, Feb. 12. (...).
his Majesty's Declaration concerning the Five Articles; but he submitted
himself, and his Censure stands upon Record. The Sermon was Preached upon
Tuesday the 30th. of January, and he was censured Feb. 12th. 1637/8.

The Students of Christ-Church and Exeter, grew so unruly the last Out of a
Letter of the Vicechancellor, concerning some disorders between Christ-Church
and Exeter Coll. Men in the Schools in the second Week of (...) this Year (...).
week, (the Masters interposing and wrangling in the Schools, and their Boys
fighting out of School,) that I was forced to Command an absolute Cessation of
all manner of Disputations betwixt the two Houses; and so they rest quiet ever
since.

Most Reverend!
WE are Encouraged in the common favor, respectively vouchsafed Letters from
the University for the taking down of the Conduit at Carfax for a (...).
by your Grace unto the University and City of Oxon, to present our common
Grievances, and to appeal unto your Grace for a Redress, wherein we shall most
willingly rest and settle.

The Jurors consisting of Twelve Privileged, and Twelve Free men Empanell'd by
the University to enquire after such Misdemeanors as are impleadable in a
Court Leet lately held in your Grace's Name, have presented with joint Consent
unto your Vice Chancellor the Conduit (...) in the Marketplace at Carfax, as a
Nuisance.

The Vice Chancellor (as opportunity was ministered) gave notice hereof unto the
Heads at their Monday Meeting, and assumed to deliver as much unto Mr. Mayor,
adding his Request, that it might duly be considered, what was best to be
resolved in this kind.

We, whose names are here underwritten, have diliberated upon the Presentment,
do freely assent to the Body thereof, and acknowledge the Conduit there placed
to be a just Grievance.

The Remedy is not so easily prescribed; neither should we happily so jointly
concur in the amends, if we undertook to determine the same.

Our Appeal unto your Grace is unanimous, both University and City, submitting
our Accomodations unto your Grace's Resolution, most humbly beseeching your
Grace to take this particular into Consideration, and so to order the same, and
dispose of it for the Good and Honor of the University and City, as you in
your Wisdom shall think fittest. And what your Grace does herein determine and
prescribe, we readily embrace: And by our best Endeavors (God willing) will
promote the same; So taking humblest leave, we continue (justly bound) to pray
for your Grace's Prosperity.

March 5. 1637. Richard Baylie, Vice-can. Oxon.
Jo. Wilkinson Aul Magd. P.
Tho. Isles, Sub-dean of Christ-Church.
To. Pinck, Custos Coll. Nov.
Paul Hood, Rector Lincoln. Coll.
Fran. Mansel, Coll. Jesu Princ.
A. Trewen, Praes. Coll. Magd.
Tho. Walker, Coll. Universe. Mag.
Dan. Escott, Coll. Wadh. Guard.
Tho. Clayton, Coll. Pemb. Mag.
John Saunders, Aul. B. Mariae Princ.
John Glisson, Procurator Jun.
Degorius Whear, Aul. Gloc. Princip.
Christ. Rogers, Aul. Nov. Hosp. Princip.
Gab. Richardson, Vice-prin. Coll. AEn.
Alex. Fisher, Coll. Mert. Vice-Cust.
Rich. Trimnel, Coll. Ball. Vice-mag.
Hen. Tozer. Coll. Exon Sub-rector.
Jo. Meredith, Coll. Omn. An. Vice-Cust.
John Reve, Aul. Cerv. Vice-princ.
Jo. Duncomb, Dean of Oriel Coll.


TO these Letters of the University, I gave this Answer in the My Answer to the
University-Letters concerning the (...)
general in my Letters to the Vice Chancellor (March 19. 1637/8.) that I would
not trouble my thoughts, nor proceed further in the business of the Conduit at
Carfax, till they and the Mayor with his Brethren were agreed about leaving the
Materials to my disposal, for the good both of the University and that City.

Dr. Lawrence, Master of Baliol College, was chosen Dr. Lawrence chosen to be
the Lady Margaret's Reader Mar. 20.
the Lady Margaret's Reader on the 20th. of March 1637/8. upon the Resignation
of Dr. Fell.

W. Cant.


NO Masters of Art of Samure or other place shall be incorporated, To the
Vicechancellor concerning the Non-Incorporation of Masters of (...) etc. (...).
ult.
till they have spent so much time in Oxford, as added to their time spent at
Samure, or elsewhere, shall make up the time required by Statute.

Martij ult. 1638. W. Cant.


IN a Convocation on Wednesday, April 4. Mr. Masters was restored (...).
Masters and (...) Restored.
to the University, who was banished thence in the Year 1632. for abusing some
of the Heads the Year before in his Speech, as being then Terrae Filius. Mr.
Wallup was likewise restored to his Degree of Master, who was degraded Ann.
1637. for his neglect of appearing at the Act kept on the 6th. and 7th. of
October, by reason of the Sickness that Year in diverse places.

I am glad, You and the Heads are sensible of the weakness of the Two Passages
of my Letter to the Vicechancellor, April 13. about strengthening the Schools.
Schools in the point of their Timber, and certainly Dr. Hawley's Memory will
suffer in it, who was trusted with that Work. I am of Opinion (for ought
appears to me yet) that no other way but Posts will secure the business, and
there must be two Posts in every School, where there are more than one Beam. I
know there are other devices which Carpenters may mention: But they are to me
as great Eye-sores, as a Post can be, and yet will not secure the Work, for
neither clamping with Iron, nor Bracers from the Wall to the Beams, or two half
Posts close to each Wall, can secure the middle of the Beam, where the greatest
weakness is, and whence the Danger will come.

I am very glad to hear so well of the young Monk, that was; and About Martin
Wescombe to be Master this next All.
I pray let him have his Degree to be Master with all favor: For I do not see
any inconveniency possible, by allowing any Man that time for his Degree, which
he has studiously spent in any other University. So let him be Master this
Act, and God bless him.

Lambeth, April 13. 1638. W. Cant.


THis Week notice was given me of some Disorders of the Younger Notice of some
disorders of the Youth this Week against the Proctor with my Answer. (...) Mr.
(...) of (...) Coll. Mr. (...) of (...). Coll.
sort against Proctor Lawford (at the end of his Speech when he was to lay down
his Office) in affronting him in the Convocation-House, and Stamping and
Hissing him at St. Mary's; and I returned the Vice Chancellor this Answer: That
he should do well to vindicate the Proctor with severity. And if he could find
the Principal Ringleader, to Banish him the University, and put some severe
Punishment upon the rest. In which if he did fail, we should have the Youth
break out often into these Insolences. And the Proctors disheartened to do the
Duties of their Places.

April 13. W. Cant.


SIR,
YOur Judgment has passed very right upon the Principal of April 27. 1638.
Concerning Gilpin's Expulsion from Magdalen Hall.
Magdalen Hall and Gilpin. And I plainly see, the business must be divided
between them; and that Division I leave to you to make: Yet with this Caution
that you suffer no man to escape unpunish't, for Incivility and Disrespect to
his Governors; if the Complaint be justly made to You, and your assistance
called for according to Statute. And on the other side, you shall do well to
make the Precise part understand (as you have occasion to deal with them) that
they are not Punished for their Conscience, But because they will never reform
an erroneous Conscience, nor forbear Practicing according to it, and that to
the disturbance of Government. So the whole re-examination and future
Settlement of that business I leave wholly to you.

I thank you heartily for your discreet Prosecution of that Base Riotous
Concerning the Riotous Disorder against Proctor Lawford.
Business, when the Proctor gave over his Office, and am very sorry the Heads
are so Ill advised, as to think the whipping of two or three Boys, is
Punishment sharp enough for such an Offense. What you will do, I know not: But
if I should come to the knowledge of the Principal Offenders, if you did not
Banish them the University, I should try how far my Power would stretch. The
truth is, if exemplary Punishment be not laid upon some of them, it will be of
more dangerous Consequence, than for ought I see, the Wisest of your Heads
think on.

Lambeth, April 27. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Did not settle the assembling of the Heads upon Mundays to the May 4. My
dislike of the Punishment resolved on by the Heads, for the late Disorder.
end my Vice Chancellor should ask their leave, or be overruled by their
advice for the Punishing of a Crime so Notorious and Public as this Tumultuous
Carriage at the late Resigning of the Proctor's Office was, and to deal freely
with you, I am no way satisfied either with the Heads or Your self in this
business: Not with the Heads, because if they would not yield to Bannition, yet
they should have ordered Upon this the ^ in his (...) May 7. (...). that he
could not make full (...) against any, else he would have been more Severe.
it to public Punishment; the Crime being so public as it was. And the shame
of a public Punishment, would have wrought more both upon the Persons, and for
the Example, than greater Smart in a private way. Besides I am sure enough that
they, which have so unworthily smothered this Punishment, will not be over
severe in their Private Execution. Neither am I satisfied with You: For when
you saw in what a disproportionable way to the Crime the Heads inclined to go,
You should have told them plainly, and have performed it, That you would not
yield to any such ending of the Business, till I were made acquainted with it,
and had approved it, which I should never have done, but have brought the
Offenders to some public Shame or other. And indeed I am not a little troubled
at this breach upon Government; which I ever persuaded my self, you would not
have suffered. And I have much ado to hold my self from calling this Business
to a more Public reckoning, but that the disgrace both of the Heads and You
must attend it. And I pray, let them know, how sensible I am of this great
disservice to the University Government.

Lambeth, May 4. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
FOR the business concerning Shurley, I have both thought upon May (...). (...)
Cafe in Residing in the University, and having two (...) with Cure.
it, and advised with others, and am clearly of Opinion, that the Statute,
which gives leave to a Man's stay in the University, that is under 40 Years of
age, does not privilege a Man that has a Vicarage, and is sworn to Residence
unless he be dispensed withal for Residence according to Law. But in Cafe of
two Benefices and one of them a Vicarage, and both with Cure, which is
Shurley's Case, I think the Statute has no meaning that a Man shall live
absent from both under any University-Pretence whatsoever. And I believe,
should the words of the Statute be doubtful, no man would interpret them with
such Prejudice against the Church. You shall therefore He has obeyed and is
(...) to (...) upon one of his (...).
in God's name send Shurley home and not suffer him to live there, either to be
so great a Scandal to the Church abroad or to give such an Ill Example in the
University. And this I assure you, and so you shall let him know from me, That
if he do not repair to his Residence, being called thereto by his Bishop, I
will expel him the University; and then let him seek his Remedy by Statute, if
he can: And I Will be as good as my word. And I do hereby require you to give me
an Account how this business proceeds from time to time.

Lambeth May Vlt. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Pray instantly call a Congregation, and change the first Question An (...)
and (...) in liturgia (...) a justam (...) Scandali Materiam?
of the three appointed for the Act. They which proposed it to you, were
inconsiderate bold Young Men. And so I pass them over for busy Fools, which
can think there can be nothing in the State, but by and by it must be made an
Act-question. And for your self, I do much wonder, where your Judgment was,
when you could let pass such a Question, and not only in your Private Thoughts,
but in Congregation, and that without consulting me about it. And this I Will
tell you, I know diverse in Oxford are discontented with it already, and they
have reason: And so there is Justa Scandali Materia in taking the Question. And
every Man sends his Friend up a Copy to London, and that I know will make a
Noise here; And I make no doubt but it will come to the King's ears before
Sunday that I can come to him. And though you do change the Question (as I
command you to do presently) Yet there will not be wanting, which will say,
That you would never have proposed this without me; and that certainly I
commanded it to see how it would take. And that if it had taken well, it should
have gone on: But that now I see it otherwise, I am content to disclaim it. In
short, if the worst Enemy I have in the Kingdom had studied to do me a shrewd
turn, they could not (as the times are) have found out a way more cunningly to
have wounded me, than this, and I did not think it possible till now I see it,
that you could have been so overseen in this business, as you are in proposing
this Hereupon the Respoadent and (...) were changed (...) upon the Receipt of
these Letters.
Question in the Congregation, Me inconsulto. There Is now no remedy; but to
call a Congregation, and change the Question which I once more require you to
do presently.

Lambeth June 7. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
FOR the main business of an Act or no Act, it seems you are resolved The
Suppressing of the Act or (...) it only, left to the choice of the Heads.
upon the Negative; and I find you have considered the great Difficulty which
attends this Resolution, and which lies between the matter of Credit and Safety.

It Is true, no Act, and you hazard your Reputation very far; and so much the
more, because you have missed two Years together already. And it is as true,
that so many places about you being infected, and that Cambrige men may flock
thither, (though that place be touched) You have great reason to think of your
safety; but for my own part I shall do as I did the last Year, that is, leave
you to your own Judgments, and prescribe nothing either for or against; With
this, that I would have you remember, that the last Year the Act being put off
very late, you lost your Reputation, and the Town was as full of Strangers, as
though an Act had been kept, and consequently the Danger The Sickness increasing
in all these neighboring Parts the Act was suppressed in Convocatition on
Thursday the 28th of June, 1638.
as great, but that it pleased God to bless you. And if it should happen now
that the Act should be put off, and the Company come notwithstanding, and fill
the Town, and (which God forbid) any danger follow, you will then incurr the
Danger and lose the Credit. I write this only to put you in mind, how the Case
stands, but will not command any alteration of that, which You and the Heads
being upon the place shall think fittest for your selves and it.

Word is now sent me that the New Convocation house is finished.

Croyden, June 25. 1638. W. Cant.


After my hearty Commendations, etc.
THE time puts me in mind of nameing unto you a new Vicechancellor. Dr. Frewen
chosen my Vicechancellor.
For the Dean of Sarum, Dr. Baylie, has now undergone the pains and Care of
that Place two Years together; and I shall not hold it fit without greater
necessity, than I hope can befall me there, to over-burthen any man with more
than two Years together in that careful and troublesome Office. Dr. Baylie for
his time has been very careful to give both my self and You, as much
satisfaction and content, as well may be expected in the Execution of such an
Office: And has taken a great deal of Pains to uphold the discipline, and
increase the Stock of the University. So that he has left a good example to
his Successor in both kinds. And now I have made choice of Dr. Frewen, Dean of
Gloucester, and President of Magdalen College to succeed him; who as he is
every way very able and sufficient for the discharge of that Place: So has he
this great advantage, that he has been Vice Chancellor heretofore, though under
another Chancellor of the University, and by that means is well acquainted with
all those things, which are incident to the Office: And thereby will be easily
able to master those things which would be difficult to another man's
beginnings. And this falls out so much the better, because at Michaelmas, that
great and beneficial Statute (give me leave to call it so) concerning the
Examination of those, that stand for Degrees, must begin to be put in
Execution. And though I do not hear, that the Younger sort have been so careful
to provide themselves by speaking Latin in their several Colleges, as I was to
give them warning that they might; yet that shall put no stop upon me, but that
I shall expect and require the Execution of the Statute.

These are therefore to let You know, that I do hereby nominate and choose Dr.
Frewen to be my Vice Chancellor for the Year ensueing, and to pray and require
You to allow of this my Choice, and to give him all the Respects due to his
Place, and all other. Aid and Assistance by your Counsel or otherwise, which
shall be requisite, the better to enable him in the discharge of the Office,
which he now undertakes. Thus not doubting of your readiness, and willing
obedience herein; I leave both him and you all to the Blessing of God, and rest,

July 11. 1638. Your loving Friend, and Chancellor W. Cant.


To my very loving Friends the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, the Proctors and
the rest of the Convocation of the University of Oxford.
I Have now no Business to you but only to pray you, that in this Aug. 3. 1638.
To the Vicechancellor to look to Scholars, for Taverns, etc.
Dead time of Vacation, You will be watchful that the Scholars spend not their
time in Taverns and Alehouses, and so help themselves to put on a Habit, which
will not be fit to be worn in Term, nor at any other time. And you cannot do a
greater Office in all the time of your Vice-chancellorship, than to hinder the
growth of this Spreading Evil, etc.

Croyden, August 3. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Thank You heartily for your Care about the Taverns and the Aug. 10. For Care
about Alehouses.
frequenting of Alehouses, about which base places You cannot be too careful.
For they are certainly the Bane of a great many young Men, which are sent to
the University for better Purposes; and if you do not now and then give them a
Night walk, they will easily deceive all your Care for the Day. To look to the
Scholars at his Majesty's coming to Woodstock by reason of my Absence, which
was never before since I was Chancellor.


I Cannot be at Woodstock this Year when His Majesty comes, by reason of
Business which the King himself has laid upon me, and must be done at that
time, or not at all. I am sorry it so falls out, but I have spoken with his
Majesty, that my Absence may not hinder the wonted Grace which he shows to the
University. I have likewise spoken to the Officers of the Household about Your
Entertainment that Day. I have also sent to My Lord of Oxford to attend there
in my Room. It will be time for you now at your Monday Meeting, to propose to
the Heads the keeping of their several Companies at Home, that they may not
disturb the King's Game, nor otherwise offend the Court by their frequent going
thither; of which I pray be very careful.

Croyden, August 10. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Thank You for your Care to make a present stop of the use of prohibited Aug.
17.1638. To the Vicechancellor about Gowns. The fault appeared to be the
Tailors only, and so I gave order for Punishment.
Gowns among the younger sort. But if you punish only the Tailors that made
them, and not the Scholars that wear them, I doubt You will not easily remedy
the Abuse, unless it appear to You, That the Tailors made them without the
Scholars Appointment; then indeed the Scholars are Blameless, otherwise not.

Croyden, August 17. 1638. W. Cant.


IN this time of my Absence from Woodstock, things were carried From the
Vice Chancellor, Aug. 27.1638.
well at Court by the Heads; and they had a very Gracious Entertainment there,
and gave the King good Content, and were dismissed without Complaint against
any Scholar for disturbing his Majesty's Game.

SIR,
FOR the Business concerning the placing of the Sons of the Lady To the
Vice Chancellor, Sept. 20. concerning the placing at St. Mary's, the Sons of
Earl's Daughters married to Knights.
Lewis with the young Noblemen; I am sorry that they which are Suitors, have
so much as one Precedent for it. But since it is so, I am glad that was before
my time; for certainly I am not like to make a Second. And I pray do you
consider what it may breed in the Issue, If all the Children of Noble-men's
Daughters that are Married to Knights, shall challenge the same Privilege in
the University, that the Sons of the Noblemen do, and with what Power and
Discretion the University can give it, considering they have not the Privileges
with Noble-men's Sons in any other part of the Kingdom besides, nor can you at
present see what Constructions may be made of it above, it being upon the
matter the giving of a Precedence. The Truth is, I would be very glad it were
in my Power to gratify that Honorable Lady without prejudice to the
University, which I doubt in this Particular cannot be. And besides, I am
persuaded this proceeds from the forwardness of Dr. Mansel and her Kinsman, Dr.
Glenham, and not from her self; though if it did come from her self, I cannot
tell what other Answer to give; therefore I pray give them the fairest Denial
you can.

Croyden, Sept. 20. 1638. W. Cant.


WHereas there is an Omission in the Statutes concerning the Examination
Passages out of the Vice-chancellor's Letters, with Answers to them. 1.
Concerning Examinations in Term time. It needs not; the one being in Statute,
the other being by Statute put into the Hands of the Proctors. 2. Concerning
Proctor Corbet of Merton-College, about his assisting at the Communion at the
beginning of Term.
of the younger sort before they take their Degrees, I advised the
Vice Chancellor to consult the Heads for a supply of this defect in Statute,
who did so, and sent me word that the Heads had Ordered, That all Regents
should examine in their Course, those only excepted, who are dispensed with for
their Absence by the Congregation; and that every Candidate repulsed as
insufficient by Examiners, should not be admitted to a second Examination in
six Months after. To this I gave Answer, That they should do well in a Business
of such Difficulty, and so unpleasing to the young Students, and perhaps to the
Regents also, to have this their Order confirmed in Convocation, unless they
did find any thing in Statute to make such Order of their binding.

To the Proctor of Merton-College, Mr. Corbet, I delivered your Grace's Advice,
That he should do well to substitute some other to officiate for him at the
Communion at the beginning of Terms, if the tenderness of his Conscience would
not give him leave to conform to such seemly Gestures, as are thought fit to be
used at that Service: His Answer was, That he did conform therein at the last
Communion; the which, how true, my Predecessor now with your Grace, is best
able to resolve you. I found him (I confess) more tractable than I expected;
but since that time he is quite relapsed (the Fruit of his Friend's, Mr.
Channell's Sermon, wherein among other the like passages he told us: That he
that does more than Canon requires, is as great a Puritan, as he that does
less.) By his last Discourse, I find him resolved neither to conform nor absent
himself without Command, which I have assured him already is folly to expect.
Yet to this purpose, he desired me to send you this enclosed Petition; a Copy
whereof here follows,

To the Right Reverend Father in God, William, by the Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; his Grace, the Honorable Chancellor of the
University of Oxford.

The Humble Petition of Edward Corbet, Proctor Corbet's Petition.
one of the Proctors of the same University.

WHereas your Petitioner was wished by Mr. Vice Chancellor in your Grace's
Name, either to bow toward the Altar at the University Common Prayers, or to
forbear to officiate. He humbly shows your Grace, that from his Heart he
Loves and Honors the Church of England, and does not only rigidly and
carefully observe her Doctrine and Discipline, but would to the utmost of his
weak power defend the same with his Pen or Blood. And therefore he humbly
beseeches your Grace, that if above and besides what is established, any thing
be thought fit to be practiced, your Grace would vouchsafe either to order and
command him to do it, or else be pleased to leave him to that Liberty which our
Religious King and Orthodox Church have allowed him, so should he pray for your
long Life and happy Government in the Church.

And to all this I gave the Vice Chancellor this Answer following.

I Thank you for your discreet handling of Proctor Corbet. And first for the
thing it self; I have received his Petition, and will not give him any Command,
either to do, or desist, or to appoint any Substitute, but leave him, and let
him do as it shall please God and himself. And secondly, for the manner of this
his Refusal, I must tell you, that it is all one in substance, with the
Petition which Mr. Channel himself delivered me about a Twelve Month since;
and that since your late being with me, I have received an Answer
Notwithstanding this to your (...); you shall give the Proctor no Answer at all
from me.
not much in effect differing from this Petition, from two or three
Refractories in different Parts; and now your Predecessor tells me, that he
being lately in his Visitation of his Peculiars belonging to his Deanery, had
the same Answer given him, That they looked for a Command. By all which put
together, I see the Faction have informed themselves, and are agreed to make
this Answer, To call for a Command, which from me they shall never have, till I
may be warranted my self by public Authority: But we find, that besides
Articles and Canons and Rubricks, etc. the Church of Christ had ever certain
Customs which prevailed in her Practice, and had no Canon for them; and if all
such may be kicked out, you may bid farewell to all Decency and Order. In the
mean time I will acquaint His Majesty with this Distemper growing, that the
Blame may not be cast upon me.

THere is an Abuse has continued long, and is, I think, very fit (...). Every
(...) to have a distinct Bell tolled to his Lecture.
to be Remedied. It is, that when diverse public Lectures are at the same Hour
in the University, One Bell (if I mistake not) has been used to toll to all of
them, by which means the Auditors to all Lectures take occasion to repair to
the Schools, and when they come there, perhaps but one Lecturer reads, and then
they cannot find their way back to their several Colleges, but spend their time
as they should not. To prevent this, I pray communicate with the Heads, and
make an Order, That a distinct Bell be tolled to every Lecture, that so the
Auditors may know for what Lecture it is, and This is since ordered by the
Heads and settled.
apply themselves accordingly. And I think it is very fit, that the Professor
intending to Read that Day, should give warning to the Clark for the tolling of
his Bell.

Lambeth, October 5. 1638. W. Cant.


ON Wednesday the 10th. of October, the Vice Chancellor and the The New
Convocation-House in use. October. 10.
University entered upon the use of their New Convocation-House, without any
other Solemnity, than a solemn Speech of Benefrom the Vice Chancellor.

On the same Day the Examinations of (...) for Degrees began Examination for
Degrees.
to be put in Execution according to the Statutes.

WHen the Proctor saw that your Grace would not command Out of the
Vice-chancellor's Letter, October. 15.The Manner of Proctor (...), Conformity.
(...) Conformity in Gesture at the beginning of Term, he requested me to
require it; (pretending that my Predecessor had done so before me,) I refusing,
he then proffered to conform of his own accord, but he either did it not at
all, or did it so poorly, that it was scarce observable by them that were
present. The Vice Chancellor could not observe it, by reason of his Officiating
at the Communion: Howsoever this is gained upon him; That either he did conform
and cannot deny it to the Faction; Or else, that he is a gross Dissembler to
the Vice Chancellor and the Authority born there.

SIR,
I AM informed by the Dean of Christ-Church of a shameful Non-Residence To the
Vice Chancellor, October. 18. to send away Mr. Little and Mr. Verier to reside
upon their several Benefices.
practiced by two Christ-Church Men, under the pretense of University
Privilege; whereas such a foul Abuse is no way to be endured; one of them is
Mr. Vereir, he had a Living given him by the University in Worceslershire 12
Years since. And he has ever since (as I am informed) lived in the University,
and spent that sacred Revenue most profanely. The other is one Mr. Little, and
he has had two Vicarages in Yorkshire these 7 Years, and has performed no
Church-Duty upon either of them, but only that he makes a merry Journey once a
Year into those Parts, and then returns again, and wastes the rest of his time
in Oxford under pretense of Suits. It was time to take this (...), for the
Vice Chancellor sent me word, October. 22. that there is much declaiming at St.
Mary's against Non-Presidents in general. Of which these give too just Cause.
But it is no way probable, that both these Vicarages should be litigious 7
Years together. And howsoever, it will be a great Scandal and Dishonor to the
University to have such shameful things as these countenanced under the Name of
Privilege. I have written to the Dean to lead the way to you, and expel them
out of Christ-Church if they have any Footing there; and therefore I do hereby
Pray and Require You to proceed to Bannition against them in the University, if
they do not presently repair to their Livings and reside there; of which I
shall expect an Account from you.

And hereupon I writ to my Lords of York and Worcester, to call these two Men
to reside upon their several Benefices.

The like Course shall you take with one Woodruff; I shall speak Woodruff's
Non-Resistence.
first with Dr. Baylie about him, for the Monition was given him in his time.

Lambeth, October. 18. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Have written to my Lords, the Archbishop of York and Bishop To the
Vice Chancellor, October. 31. My Resolution about Non-Residents in general.
of Worcester to call Vereir and Little to Residence; and if the one have
prevented that Call, and the other mean to do it, it is well. For I am resolved
(and so you may signify to the Heads at your next Meeting) (...) purge the
University of all Non-Residents, which have not express Letter of Statute to
relieve them, and bind my hands. And as for the Statute of the Realm, which had
a great deal of Reason, upon which to ground it self, when 'twas made; but (God
be thanked) by the Learnedness of the Age, has little now; as I may not
violate it, so neither will I suffer unworthy pretenses to abuse both the
Church and it, if it lie in my Power to apply a Remedy to so gross an Abuse.
And I pray, let the Heads know, that I would not have endured so gross
Non-Residence (as I find Mr. Vereir and Mr. Little guilty of) to shelter it
self in that University, had I sooner known of it, than now I came to do by a
mere Accident.

Lambeth, October. 31. 1638. W. Cant.


SIR,
IN this Case of Non-Residence, I pray require all the Heads of A Note to be
brought in of all the Beneficed Men in every College and Hall. Which was done
accordingly.
Colleges and Halls to bring you in a Note of all Beneficed Men, which live
under their Government: At what distance their Benefice is from the University,
the value in the King's Books, and otherwise, (if they can learn it) how long
they have held it.

Lambeth, November. 2. 1638. W. Cant.


COncerning the Incorporation of the Guernsey Man mentioned, The Guernsey Man's
Incorporation.
page 210. there has at his humble Suit been a new Consideration taken by the
Vice Chancellor and the Heads for the Statutableness thereof. And it was found
upon this Review, that the Statutes considered two sorts of Men; The first are
such as never have been Members of our University or Cambridge. Of these treat
the Statutes, the first, de Incorporatione, and seem to distinguish them into
Aliens and Natives: The second sort are such as have been Students sometime in
either of the Universities. As for the Natives (in which Number the Guernsey
Man is) the Words of the Statutes are, -- Quibus incorporari permittitur, Si
tempore in Academia sua requisito, and praestitis prius Exercitiis, gradus
susceperint. Upon which Words the Question was whether a Native having taken a
Degree in a Foreign University, might call that Academiam suam, which is
resolved by the use of the same Word, Suos twice in the same Paragraph, where
it stands indefinitely for any University, where either Foreigner or Native
has taken his Degree. As in this Form, -- Vt admitatur ad eundem Gradum, etc.
quibus ornatus est apud Suos. Whereupon it was judged by the Heads, that there
was no Bar in Statute to exclude the Guernsey Man (he producing first Letters
Testimonial of the University, where he proceeded, That he had spent as much
time in his Studies there, as is required by the Orders of that University, and
that he had performed his Exercise) from the Benefit of Incorporation.

Upon the same Ground, way was given for the Incorporation of one of the Sons
of Sir Henry Vane, Comptroller of his Majesty's Mr. Vane incorporated Master.
Household.

To the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Chancellor of the University of Oxford.

The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of Milton, Hasley, Petsworth, Lewknor,
A Petition against the (...) of Oxford for spoiling the Highways by their too
great Carriages.
etc.

Humbly shows,

THat the Petitioners have bestowed great Costs and Charges in repairing their
Highways, through their several Parishes, leading from the University of
Oxford toward London; That the Carryers of Oxford do carry such unreasonable
Carriages, viz. sometimes 40, 50, or 60 Tun at a Load, by which means they do
spoil the Highways, that notwithstanding the Petitioners great and
extraordinary Charge in continual repairing of them, the ways are made almost
unpassable.

The Petitioners most humbly beseech your Grace to give Order that the said
Carryers of Oxford may be restrained to such certain stint and reasonable
weight of Carriages, especially in the Wintertime and foul Weather, as in your
Grace's Wisdom shall seem (...), for the good of Travelers in the Highway,
and ease of your Petitioners. And they (as in Duty,) etc.

Upon this Petition, for redress of this Abuse, I writ to the Vicechancellor.

SIR,
I Here enclosed send you a Petition delivered this Week unto me, My Answer for
redress of this abuse, directed to the Vice-chan cellor.
concerning the Highways toward London, and beyond our own Liberties. I have
been the only Man that have kept up the Carryer to his four-wheeled Carriage
for the University sake; but if this Petition be true, it will force me to take
off my Hand, and then I know he must take off two of his Wheels; and that done,
let him carry what Weight he can. I pray You and the Heads to take this into
serious Consideration, and to think upon some Remedy. That which I ever thought
on was not to go by the weight of his Carriage, for then he will be continually
laying on more, and you are not able to watch him, but by the number of his
Horses, which should not exceed five or six at most; and then himself will not
dare to lay on more load than his Horses can well draw through those bad ways;
and if the Carriages be so great that he must use more Horses, let him use a
second Cart, and divide his Team. If you can think upon a better way than this,
I shall be glad of it, but You must prudently think upon some way for Remedy;
for if it come to public scanning at the Council Table, or the Assizes, it
will be ordered, whether you will or no, and perhaps in a sourer way, and not
so agreeable to your Liberties, as this way it may be done.

Lambeth, Nov. 23. 1638. W. Cant.


I See good effects already of that Statute, which has been most Out of Dr.
Turner's Letter to me (of Merton-College) of the good Success of the new
Statute, de Examinandis Candidat sent about (...) time.
cried down by those from whom I least expected it, the Statute de Examinandis
Candidatis, and promise my self much more hereafter. I was present at one
Examination, and was glad to hear both the Regents examine so sufficiently and
discreetly, and the Candidates so ably and readily. I cannot believe that the
ablest Proceeders in former times, if they had been examined upon the sudden,
could have acquitted themselves better than these Candidates (such as I
stumbled on by chance) did upon expectation of a certain unavoidable
Examination. The moderation which your Grace prescribed to Mr. Vice Chancellor
in the Execution of this Statute, has set it very well on Foot, which if it
had been pursued roughly at the beginning, would never have held, or else would
have bred great Distempers in the University. For the Regents (who at the
beginning of Term) kept out of the way, insomuch, that the Proctor of thirty of
the Junior Regents could scarce meet with three Examiners, if they had been
held up stiffly at first to the rigor of the Statute, and so enforced some of
them to lay open their own Infirmities or Disabilities, they would either have
absented themselves quite, or else have made some desperate violent opposition
against the Statute, and the Authority that should back it. But by this
Moderation which Mr. Vicechancellor The Care and Moderation of the
Vice Chancellor herein.
uses toward them, (conniving at some defects now and then, where they come
short of the Statute) he has won the Regents so, as that they conform
themselves in a good measure to the intent of the Statute. For they examine
through all the Arts and Sciences, in which the Candidates are bound to have
been Auditors, asking fundamental Questions in every one, not propounding
studied Subtilties to gravel and discourage young Students. And when the
Statute has gotten head, (which many Men had fore-doomed, and therefore did
not fit themselves for it against it should take place,) I doubt not but the
Regents will rise to a higher pitch, and the Candidates likewise will come
prepared for it. But that which will set a special Edge upon both, is Mr.
Vice-chancellor's assiduous Presence at their Examinations, which I must
confess looking to his former Solitude and Retiredness, I could never have
expected from him.

There was Complaint made to me by his Majesty, of the great No more than 15
Doctors to attend His Majesty at Woodstock.
number of Doctors, that usually resorted to Woodstock at his being there;
whereupon to prevent this Abuse for the Future, I writ to the Vice Chancellor
that they should lessen their Number, which was done accordingly; and in their
Monday Meeting, on the 17th. of December, an Order was made by the Heads, That
the number of Doctors designed to attend His Majesty at Woodstock should not
exceed Fifteen: That they should all go in wide sleeved Scarlet Gowns, (not in
Habit and Hood) save only the Preacher, who during his Sermon should wear his
Hood also; And further, That both the Proctors should go in their wide-sleeved
Gowns too. And that it might the better appear what Doctors should go, It was
likewise Ordered, That this Number should always a little before every His
Majesty's resort to that Place, be chosen out of the Company of the Doctors
there for the performance of that Service.

Trusty and Well-beloved, etc. The King's Letters to Christ-Church for
suppressing their Westminster Supper, dated about the 20. of December.

WE are informed that you have for some Years suffered a very ill Custom to
continue in that our Collegiate Church; for whereas there are diverse Scholars
chosen to be Students of that House, and diverse others, that live there as
Commoners, but the greatest part of the Scholars are chosen from our School at
Westminster; there is a Supper maintained Yearly, commonly called a Westminster
Supper, at which all and only Westminster Scholars do meet. This Supper we hold
to be a very ill Custom, and no way fit to be continued: For first, it is a
thing not allowable in Government, that any party of Men should have a several
Meeting, which is a direct way to Faction and Combination, and it teaches the
rest of the Students in such a Society to bandy themselves together against the
other, that they may not be thought to be neglected. Secondly, such a Meeting
must needs cause more Expenses than many Students are able to bear, especially
in such chargeable times as these are. Thirdly, it gives an occasion of much
Drinking and Riot, and consequently of all the bad effects which follow such
excesses; besides no small disorder in leaving or keeping open the Gates of the
College, for ingress and egress, for resort to that disorderly Meeting, at
later Hours than are fit. And most usually to add to all this Disorder, this
Supper must be kept upon a Friday-Night, against both the Canons of the Church
and Laws of the Realm, and to the great Scandal of all sober Men that hear of
it.

These are therefore to Will and Require You, the Dean and Chapter, to suppress
that Supper or Meeting, by what Name soever it be called; and to call the
Students together, and to command them in Our Name, that they presume not at
any time hereafter to resort together to any such Meeting, either in the
College or out of it; and to Register these our Letters among the Orders and
Decrees for the Government of that Church, as You and every of You will answer
it at your utmost Perils; and these our Letters We Will shall be binding, not
only upon your Selves, but upon your Successors, that this ill and dangerous
Custom may never rise up into Practice again, Given etc.

I Thank you heartily for calling for Arms of your Privileged Men, Out of my
Letters to the Vice Chancellor for Privileged Men to provide Arms, January,
17th.
and I pray be careful that they be ordered to the full as high as any
Townsmen of their Rank and Condition; and so they that love neither you nor
your Liberties may not be able to take any Advantage against you, either in
regard of the Number, or the sufficiency of the Arms. And I pray see that this
be done with all Care, and without any Partiality.

Lambeth, Jan. 17. 1638/9. W. Cant.


HEreupon the Vice Chancellor with other of the Heads charged 20 of their
Privileged Men with Corslets, and 30 with Muskets, which did almost equal the
Train-Band of the City, though 20 Privileged Men charged with Corslets and 30
with Muskets.
the Privileged Men were but an handful in respect of the other.

From Oxford, January 28th.

SIR,
YOU had need be very careful of the University, for while none To the
Vice-chanceller, Feb. 7. for watchfulness against the Jesuits.
of you think of it, the Jesuits and their Instruments are busy thereabouts;
and at this present they have seduced a young Youth of Exeter-College, I have
forgotten his Name, but it begins with a His Name is Weal.
W. and the young Organist of St. John's, who slipped away; now whilst the
President was at Sarum. I have granted an Attachment against them, if they can
light upon them before they take Shipping; as also against Cherriton, for that
I hear is his Name, who seduced them. You had need be very careful in these
Businesses, for else we shall very deservedly hear ill of it.

Lambeth, Feb. 7. 1638/9. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Am informed that the Masters, many of them sit bare at St. To the
Vicechancellor, concerning the Masters wearing their Hats and Lawyers Gowns,
and for him to look to them. Feb. 20. (...). I approve their sitting bare, so
long as they go along the Streets in their Caps, and keep Form, which the
Vice Chancellor assures me they do.
Mary's, having their Hats there, and not their Caps; rather chosing to sit
bare, than to keep Form, and then so soon as they come out of the Church, they
are quite out of Form all along the Streets. I am likewise told, that diverse of
the younger sort, and some Masters begin again to leave the wide-sleeved Gown
apace, and take up that which they call the Lawyer's Gown. If both or either of
these be, you had need look to it in time, before it gather Head. And if it be
true for the Gowns, you must chide the Tailors that make them very severely,
besides what you do to the Scholars.

Lambeth, Feb. 20. (...). W. Cant.


SIR,
I Pray take care of Lent, and the Disputations in their Beginnings, To the
Vice Chancellor, Feb. ult. the forbidding of Set Coursing betwixt Colleges in
Lent.
and speak to the Heads of Houses at your next Meeting, that they warn their
several Companies; that they keep Disputations at the Schools diligently, but
very orderly and peaceably. And since I have now by many Years Experience
observed, That coursing between one College and another is the great Mother of
all Disorder, and that it is almost impossible to have decent and orderly
Disputations, if that be permitted; These are to require You, That You suffer
no such Coursing at all under any Pretense. And farther, I would have you speak
with the Principal of Brazen-Nose, that he would command their Cellar to be
better looked to, that no strong and unruly Argument be drawn from that
Topick-place. And I pray desire the Heads to be very careful, that the
Disputations may be Scholike and peaceable.

Lambeth, Feb. ult. (...). W. Cant.


AT our Meeting on Monday last, 'twas ordered that from henceforth From the
Vice Chancellor, March 4. Circuiting for Degrees to begin from the Schools.
all Circuiting for Degrees shall begin from the Schools. We have now lest only
the Friday Court in St. Marie's Church, and I hope that will not dwell there
long.

March 4. 1638/9.

AN Order for the Lent Disputations, That no Batchelors be suffered Batchelors
Disputations in Lent. The Vicechancellor concerning the Towns requiring
Contributions of the Privileged Persons toward their 15 Soldiers out of his
Letters, April 15. Procuratores Mr. Fulbamex AEd. Christi. Mr. Heywood, E.
Coll. AEr. Nas. An Information how diverse Discontinuers from Oxford resort to
Cambridge for their Degrees, to elude the Statutes of their own University.
to answer two in a School, or in the Divinity School, which was commonly
called the Horse-Fair, etc.

Lambeth, March 29. 1639. W. Cant.


LAst Week there arose a little Difference 'twixt the City and University, but
it is already composed. They required of all Privileged Inhabitants a
Contribution toward the fitting out of their 15 Soldiers. I denied it, Yet in
the Close, That they might have no Color to complain of our Coldness in a
Business of such Importance; I gave way for the taxing of such privileged
Persons, (and such only) as exercise any kind of Merchandise amongst them. This
(when they saw they could get no more) was accepted, and so the Quarrel ended.

Oxford, St. Mary-Magdalen Coll. April 15. 1638/9.

ABout the 20th. of April, I received Information how the New Statutes at
Oxford were like to be eluded by diverse Non-Resident young Men which resorted
to Cambridge for their Degrees, which Information follows, in haec Verba.

HEaring that the new Statutes at Oxford permit none but those who totally
reside and study there to take Degrees, and admit no Computation of Terms, more
than those wherein they were commorant there, so that many Discontinuers cannot
in so short time proceed, as formerly there they might have done, and here with
us they may yet, whereby many Batchelors of Arts of Oxford came this Year for
their Degrees of Masters of Arts here, which this Year they could not obtain at
Oxford, which I endeavored to prevent, least Oxford should in a short time
lose half their Proceeders, especially the Noncontinuers, for which I had no
thanks here, because the Vice Chancellor and Proctors lose Fees thereby, and
the Colleges too; and there alleged to me that it was no prejudice to Oxford;
for if it were, that University would have given public Notice, or written to
Cambridge, etc. and that I had no particular Command from the Chancellor so to
do, whereby one Walter Crook, late of (...) College in Oxford, got out of Caius
College Master of Arts, notwithstanding that I alleged it was a prejudice to
the University of Oxford, for that he could not obtain that Degree there this
Year; but the rest by opposing him publicly, did not put forward so much as
for Incorporation, though in Town, except one Thomas Robins, Late of Corpus
Christi Oxford; as I take it, a Bachelor of Arts and Curate, etc. whom I
stayed, being accidentally in Capite Senatus twice or thrice, so that he is
returned to his Cure with a heavy Heart, as I hear Crook got out in the Head,
when Dr. Eden attended Wiseman's Grace, for when I was in Capite, I stayed
Crook, and gave that for my Reason. Yet I perceive, that if his Grace send not
to the Vice Chancellor next Term, all will pass of any Degree, and few thereby
will be left at Oxford, and the intent of their Statutes eluded by our
Brethren, etc. Hereby I have procured many Frowns, and some Adversaries in
Caius College for Crook's sake, and in St. John's for Robins, besides the
Officers, etc. for all. Thus much I am bound in Duty to signify to you, that
it may presently be known to his Grace, whom I conceive it so nearly concerns.

Upon this Information I writ to the Vice Chancellor of Oxford, as follows.

SIR,
I Have received Information from very good Hands, how our Statutes A Branch of
my Letter (of April 25.) to the Vicechancellor upon this Information.
are not only like (...) eluded, but a great many Proceeders which have
Restraint put upon them by the Statutes, run to Cambridge to take their Degrees
there. And this I conceive will be a very great prejudice to the University,
and to the Officers there. That you may the more fully understand all
particulars, I send you part of the Letter, which gives you Information; but
because the Hand is known, I desire you to lay it by you, and keep it for your
own use. That which I would have you do for prevention in this Business is, I
would have you presently now before your Journey, write a Letter to the
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, and therein tell him, that you hear of this
slipping aside of Oxford Men without any leave of the University to take their
Degrees at Cambridge, and thereby to elude our Statutes; then I would have you
desire of him and the Heads, in the Name of the University of Oxford, That no
Man be suffered to take any Degree in Cambridge whatsoever, unless he bring the
Consent of the University of Oxford under Seal; and you may promise the like
Justice to them; in the end you may intimate if you please, that finding this
Inconvenience you have acquainted me with it, but that you hope the University
of Cambridge will be so careful, as that I shall not need to interpose in it,
and I pray desire an Answer from him, that we may know what to trust to.

April 25. 1639. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Pray receive this assurance from me, and I doubt not but the The
Vicechancellor of Cambridge his Answer to Dr. Frewen's Letter touching the
Business aforesaid.
Practice of our University will make it good, that according to your just
desire, nothing shall pass here amongst us, either in this or any other way
that may give the least interruption to the mutual Amity and Correspondence
between the two Universities, etc.

Cambridge, May 7th. 1639. Ra. Brownrigg.


SIR,
I Am informed that You give out, that after the University-Examination To Dr.
Fell, Dean of Christ-Church, concerning his private Examinations after the
public. Dr. Fell has assured. that there shall be no Examination in the
College hereafter but it shall preceed Examinations of the University.
is past, You will have them examined again in the College, which is to put a
Scorn and Disrepute upon the Regents for their Pains, and utterly to disparage
the Examinations, as if you in Christ-Church were able to do more than the
whole University in that point. And this to deal clearly with you, I neither
may nor will endure. If you will examine your Students sufficiency, I like that
well enough, do it in God's Name. But then do it before they come in public to
the University-Examination; for after that is once past, I will endure none in
any private College to prejudice it. And I pray take heed what you do in this
and the like kind, that your Zeal to that, which is good, distemper us not; for
if any Men be negligent, their Fault will not be well amended by your
over-doing. I doubt not but you will take care of this, and give me Content.

Lambeth, May 30. 1639. W. Cant.


SIR,
I AM informed that there is one Francius a Polonian or Transylvanian, To the
Vice Chancellor concerning Adamus Francius.
that is a desperate Socinian, and lives either in Oxford or Cambridge in a sly
manner to pervert the younger sort; I pray do you be as watchful as you can,
and make your Examination after him with as little noise as may be, but as much
Care, etc.

Lambeth, May 30. 1639. W. Cant.


And the like Advertisement at this time I sent to Cambridge also, Both the
Vice-chancellors sent me word that they could hear of no such Man for the
present, but that they would enquire further after him. The Difference between
Proctor Fulham and Dr. Fell Dean of Christ-Church, in the case of Moore.
concerning this Francius the Socinian.

I Received a Complaint under the Hand of Mr. Edward Fulham of Christ-Church,
and Proctor of the University, against Dr. Fell, which was sent me by the
Vice Chancellor, in his Letters of June 3. at the entreaty of the Proctor. The
occasion this, as it follows in the Proctor's own Relation, in haec verba:

ON the 31st. of May about 8 at Night, Mr. Proctor Fulham witho there Senior
Masters of that House standing near the College-gate, observed amongst others
coming out of the Town into the College in their Hats one Edward Moore with his
Hat on; the rest, as soon as they came within the view of the Proctor, modestly
put off their Hats, and endeavored to hide them; but Moore passed boldly by
the Proctor without moving his Hat, whereupon the Proctor called him back, and
questioned him for wearing his Hat in the Town, telling him, that since he was
in a fault, it would have better becom'd him to hide it, than to wear it on his
Head. Moore clapping on his Hat, replied, that he was in the College. The
Proctor twice or thrice admonished him to put off his Hat; but he refusing, and
contesting with his Hat on, the Proctor (having before complained on a Scholar
of the House that had affronted him in like manner, and being very much
slighted, as he conceived with this Answer, That in such Cases he was to be
considered there but as an ordinary Master of Arts,) gave him a gentle Box on
the Ear; and the said Moor continuing in his Contumacy, was charged according
to Statute by the Proctor to go to the Castle; but the said Moore went not, but
repaired to Mr. Hide, being his Deputy-Tutor in the absence of Mr. Glisson to
be advised. Mr. Hide brought Moore to Mr. Dean of Christ-Church, and complained
of the Proctor as if he had done the Scholar wrong. Upon this Complaint, Mr.
Dean sends for the Proctor to his Lodging, in the presence of Moore, and Mr.
Hide condemns the Proctor, and justifies Moore, and very much rated and checked
the Proctor; telling him, that he had done more than he could justify, and
that he should have nothing to do in the College; and that if he meddled thus
in the House, he would meddle with him: That he was not Dean of Christ-Church,
nor should be. And (by way of Derision) asked him, why he questioned not him
and other Doctors that passed by that way, for their Hats; adding, That he got
no good Will by being so busy; and so warned the Proctor to appear before the
Chapter next Morning at 9 of the Clock, to answer for what he had done, in the
mean time allowed Moore all Liberty of Speech to interpose and justify his
Fault. And Mr. Dean expressly told the Proctor, That Moore should not go to the
Castle notwithstanding Command; and Mr. Hide (though sworn Pro-proctor) at the
same time abbetting the said Moore told the Proctor he had done more than he
could justisie in striking the said Moore, and that he ought not to go to the
Castle upon his Command; using many other Words of Contestation and Reproach to
the Proctor and his Authority. And Mr. Hide also said, That he had bid his
Scholar not go to the Castle, but first go to Mr. Dean to complain -- Mr.
Proctor has observed and informed Mr. Dean as much, That the
Gentlemen-Commoners sit in the Hall in Hats before him, bring them to the
Church constantly, walk and stand under his Window, some in Boots, and most in
Hats; and as the Proctor passes by, they stand to it, upon what Encouragement
he knows not.

Edw. Fulham, Procur. Sen.


UPon this Information, I referred the Examination of the whole Business to Mr.
Vice Chancellor, with a Charge, that in regard that Moore had broken the
Statute of the University, (though he had then a little slipped by the Proctor into
the College) he should commit him to the Castle in pursuance of the Proctor's
Command, and to uphold his Authority, that it might not grow contemptible all
the Year after in the University. And that then, if he found the Complaint of
the Proctor to be true, he should speak with the Heads, and see whether any fit
Course could be taken for removing of Hide from the Pro-proctor-ship; and that
he should cause Moore for his Fault and his Sawciness together to be publicly
whipped in the Convocation House, or banished the University. And as for the
Dean, I did reserve to my self what Check I would put upon him. And after the
Proctor had made offer to justify all this Complaint upon Oath, I writ to the
Dean as follows,

SIR,
I Have received two Letters from You the last Week and this, and My Letters to
Dr. Fell about the aforesaid Business.
both concerning the Accident fallen out between you and Proctor Fulham in the
case of Moore. In your last Letter, you tell me there is a lameness fallen upon
you, (which I am sorry for) and had not that happened, you would have come and
given me an Account of the Business at Lambeth; but had you come, you would
utterly have lost your Labor. For I would have spent no time, having so little
to run to waste, to hear one side only, where two are concerned.

For the Business it self, I see you decline answering it to the
Vicechanchellor, under pretense, that it was done within your Gates. But first,
I would pray you to (...) that the Fault in question was done without your
Gates, for it was for wearing a Hat in the Town. And howsoever, be the Cause
what it will, I will not suffer any private Governor to wrong a public
Officer in any kind whatsoever, but that he shall answer it to my
Vice Chancellor if he do. For I well know, the Proctor will have little Credit
abroad in the Streets, if he shall have Contempt put upon him at Home in his
College. Secondly, your declining the Vice Chancellor in this manner, and your
refusing to answer upon Oath, when the Proctor offers to justify all his
Complaint by Oath in every particular, makes me think the Proctor's Relation is
true in every Circumstance; and if it be true both in Circumstance and
Substance, though for Government sake, (which you have so slighted in the
Proctor) I shall be unwilling to put any Sowerness upon you in public; yet
must I tell you, you have carried this Business like a sudden, hasty, and weak
Man, and most unlike a Man that understands Government. And should you go on
with other things according to this, I shall have cause to repent somewhat. And
assure your self, if I hear any more like this I shall easily know what I have
to do. This to your self under Seal; so etc.

Lambeth, June 22. 1639. W. Cant.


THE Vice Chancellor in the mean time proceeded against Moore, but finding the
Youth very Humble and Submissive, and but new come to the University, and the
Proctor himself earnestly interceeding for him, took his private Submission,
but enjoined him publicly in Christ-Church Hall to deliver the Proctor an
Epistle with an acknowledgment of his Fault, which was done accordingly. And
for Hide, he was passed by, and was not Pro-Proctor this Year, but one Mr.
William Cartwright of Corpus Christi had that place.

LIbros MS. quos antehac misi, (Florentissimi Academici) locatos vellem, non
ubi My Letters to the Convocation the third time, when I sent them my
Manuscripts and Coins, with the Book belonging to them, Entitled, Elenchus
Numismatum.
nunc sunt, quasi lncarcerati, sed ubi simul esse possunt, uno intuitu
conspiciendi, and una quasi vertendi manu. Locum, si sort aptum, Dignissimo
Procancellario nostro designavi, per illum voso; assignandum in novis, and
seliciter, uti spero, adjectis veteri Bibliothecae ad Occidentem AEdificiis.
Gazophylacium hoc satis firmum cupio, (thesaurus enim est, quem misi, and jam
mitto) and satis amplum: Volumina enim multa sunt. Nam septingenta and amplius
(ni fallor) a me accepistis, and nunc misi supra (...) septuaginta quinque
Quorum sexdecim Hebraica sunt, and Syriaca, Arabica quinquaginta quinque
Persica quindecim, Graeca viginti sex, Latina quadringenta triginta novem,
Gallica tria, cum tribus Italicis, Anglicana and Anglo-Saxonica duodecim,
Germanica tria, cum uno Chinensi, and Armenico uno. Et etiamsi per
vigilantissimum Procancellarium certior factus sim locum hunc non adhuc
receptioni Librorum aptum, istos tamen nolui diutius apud me retinere, ne si
forte Senio jam and Laboribus pene exhaustum Mors celerior invaderet,
dissiparentur Libri, quos summa Cura, and non sine sumptu, congessi, Vobisque
and Successoribus distinavi. Ex his Volumina non panca, sed illa Latina mihi
dono dedit, Vir multis Nominibus Honorandus, Comes Arundelius, quae una secum
reduxit e Germania, ubi and Ego multa redemi blattis tineisque mancipata, sicu:
olim memini apud vos Corpora Juris Canonici and similia, Chirothecis premendis
and deinceps involvendis seposita; Jesuitis interim, qui rebus ibi nimirum
(...), jactantque se Collapsarum Literarum Vindices, hanc jacturam Scriptorum
Veterum aut approbantibus, aut, quod certum, aspicientibus nec tamen
impedientibus. Et hinc est, quod in quibusdam horum Librorum, nunc Principium,
nunc Finis dcest. Nolui tamen ne Fragmenta haec penitus (...), quum been novi
multiplicem esse posse, and satis fructuosum vel horum usum. Cum his MS. unum
mitto Typis mandatum Parisiis anno superiori; duobus Tomis constat, Titulus
est, Libertates Ecclesiae Gallicanae. In priori Tomo sunt Libertates istae, in
posteriori sunt Probationes (...) per certa and antiquissima Regni illius
Munimenta. Opus in Regno illo revocatum scio, and per quosdam ibi Episcopos in
gratiam Romanae Sedis condemnatum, connivente interim, aut non public renuente
Cardinali Riorlejo: Sed eo magis curiosiusque servandum in Bibliothecis
Reformatarum Ecclesiarum. Et haec Causa est, cur una cum MSS. hunc Librum misi,
(...) an unquam iterum Typis mandandum. Et in quo quilibet legere potest, quid
de Universali Regimine Ecclesiae Romanae sentiat Ecclesia Gallica, ctiamsi
libere ita loqui aut nolit, aut non audeat. Libros hosce omnes nunc vestros sub
cadem condition and eisdem Legibus in Bibliotheca Bodleiana reponendos mitto,
quibus priores meos antea subjeci. Et (...) locus aptus iis parari possit,
vobis and salvae in dicta Biblotheca Custodiae eos committo. Quod reliquum est,
gratias Procancellario vobisque ago, quod omnia tam pacate, tam ordinate fiant.
Et praecipue, quod Examinationes Candidatorum secundum Academiae statuta in
maximum corundemCommodum, and summum Academiae ipsius honorem tam feliciter
procedant. D. O. M. Academiam ipsam, vosque omnes in tutelam suam recipiat,
vobisque benedicat. Et quoties coram Altari Dei and Christi ejus procidatis,
videte, sitis inter orandum memores mei Peccatoris, sed and

Amici and Cancellarii vestri, W. Cant.


MItto etiam jam tandem, sed paene e memoria exciderat, Librum meum tamdiu
promissum, qui Numismat a mea antehac missa, ordine quaeque suo continet, and
sicut in Arculis quinque secundum Cellulas suas digesta sunt. Librum hunc Fidei
vestrae committo, petoque a vobis, ut siqua alia Numismata, aut ipse mittam
(sicut and nunc non pauca mitto:) aut aliunde parata sint, velitis illa ctiam
vacuis Cellulis reponere, and in Libro hoc inscribere, eo ordine, quo and in
Libro, and in Cellulis nominantur.

Dat. ex AEdib. nostris Lambethanis, Jun. 28. 1639. W. Cant.


Reverendissime Cancellarie!
ACademiam hanc vestram tam firmo Patrocinio praemunis, tam vario beneficiorum
Thanks from the University for my (...), (...).
supplemento constanter auges, ut nihil soris occurrat nogotii, vel ex
cujusquam invidia vel gratia, sed totum quicquid est, ex tua solius
Munificentia. Quae and omnem propellit hijuriam, and omne optandum suppeditat.
Quin and largior tibimanus est effundenti, quam nobis accipientibus. Superat
Amplitudo Vestra non solum Indigentiae nostrae, sed Ambitionis mensuram,
cumulusque thesauri ingesti Gazophylacium angustat: desiderantur enim Scrinia
codicibus, quos (...) vestra Liberalitas ex omni Orbis Cardine conquisivit.
Atque ut Moles addendorum Voluminum ultra loci prioris captum turgescit, ita
and (...) nostrum sugit Novitas Characterum (...); Linguarum Varietas, and
inaestimabile Manuscriptorum pretium, omnem Linguae aut Calami gratantis Copiam
transcendit. Quibus demum officiis haec dona compensabimus, quae nondum
intelligere, and vix quidem possumus (...)? Integer beneficiorum (...) cubus
ipsi onerosus est (...). Nam ut alia immensa taceamus, (...) numerus Voluminum,
quae modo, ac dudum misisti, aut mittenda curasti in Volumina, quae misi de
proprio, fuere Mill (...) duo.
mill quadringenta quadraginta duo. O! quam multis victurus es Monumentis! Tua
enim sunt Opera, cum Tua sint Benesicia, quaecunque ex tenebrarum sepulchro,
vel ex corruptelae (...) vindicasti. Postquam diserta haec Supellex
Occidentalem Bibliothecae partem, huic usui adaptandum ornaverit, Theologorum
inspectium Corona imaginem induet Conventus Apostolici; cum istic Linguae
Omnigenae, si minus audiri, saltem videri (...) ac legi. Interim Librorum
habitaculum quod extra est Bodleianum crit inter Laudanum. Alius licet Cistam,
dedisti Tu Gemmas, Literarum Gemmas, bello rapaci superstites, lacerae
Germaniae spolia, non solum a tenebris tineisque sed custodia and manibus
Jesuitarum redempta; Vt sagittae de suis pennis desumptae in ipsos possint
aliquando torqueri. Quamvis ista nolueris diutius apud Teretinere, ne esse
inter cos, qui moricndo prosunt, quibus vivendo nollent; sic tamen
transmisisti, ut siqua spes immortalitatis, and virtutem Prosequentis gloriae,
Tua sint futura Post mortem: Quam tibi tam (...) precamur, ac nobis luctum,
literis caliginem, Religioni errorem. Plus satis oberrati sumus, o Sancte
Nutritor humilis Nutriculae, peculiari vestro promptuario: quid alterum
Antiquitatis assertorem in parts vocas? adcone Benefaciendi avarus es, ut
fieri cupias tam alienae profluentiae vas, quam tuae fons? and alteri debere
velis, quo possis, debitores tuos Obligatiores tenere, ac plusquam captivos
constringerc? oculum satis vigilem rebus nostris domi intendis, number and orbem
circumspicis? Number ab exteris Nationibus Germania (...); accersis, quicquid
uspiam conducat tam politiae literarum quam Incremento? quis modus irrequietae
huic munisicientiae, quis finis? Nullus, nisi immensitas, nullus nisi
interminata AEternitas. In libro hoc clandestino, cui Titulus, Libertates
Ecclesiae Gallicanae, lucem possidemus non modicam, velat ignem nigro sopitum
silice; hunc itaque accuratius versabimus, vestri consilii memores; qui donando
etiam doces, docendoque bis donas. Antiqua insuper, quae misisti, Numismata,
quibus temporum series (in solamen amissi temporis, and quodammodo revocabilis)
conclusae latent, ac dispositae, Opes eruditas (multa enim in uno largiris, and
uti nos libris locupletas, sic instruis pecunia) pulchra haec irritamenta
industriae, quae scientiae Nomine honestam instillent avaritiem: Haec and fiqua
sint accessura una cum Libro Indice, and utendi legibus, quas more divino
miscere soles beneficiis, (...) sacrosancta, and nullatenus Violanda
custodiemus. Dona reponemus haec omnia, non eo Solum, quo Jubes loco, reponemus
oculis, animis, memoria, Perenni gratitudine. Imput are si velis aliquam
gratitudinis particulam rite ordinato obsequio (quod nihil aliud est nisi
spharae vestrae sic institutae lex necessaria and sequax Primi Motoris rotatio)
certe pergratissimi sumus (...), ne simus miserrimi. Quin etiam Paternitatis
vestrae precibus Benedicti, non modo latiores Progressus conabimur, sed
fidentiores Procidemus coram Summi Patris Altari, dum illic inter orandum
recordamur Tui, quem sanctum Altar custodem habuit fidissimum, ac
preciosissimum Exornatorem Tibi praemium, nobis gratiam multo facilius
impetrabimus.

Domo nostrae Convocationis Julii 4. 1639. Sanctitatis vestrae obsequentissima
Ancilla Oxon. Academ.


ABout this time Mr. Vice Chancellor repelled two ignorant Batchelors July 10.
Two ignorant Batchelors repelled by the Vice Chancellor from their Admission;
They were of Glocester-Hall.
from their Admission, which was a very wholesome Example to uphold the Statute
of Examination. But thereupon I writ to him, not to let it rest there, but to
call in question those Masters that examined them, who went directly against
their Oath, in giving Testimony to such ignorant Men, and desired him to be as
careful as he could in this Business. And this Repulse was made in the view of
the New Regents, who were then all there present to be admitted.

For this his first Year the Vice Chancellor brought into the University 831 l.
brought into the University Chest for this Year.
Chest in ready Money 831 l. 19 s. 2 d. all Deductions made; and repaid likewise
to Sir Thomas Bodley's Stock the 500 l. borrowed thence for the Purchase of
Land for the Anatomy-Lecture. And being so beforehand, he bought in the
Annuity which they paid to one Giles for Ground, on which the Schools stand;
the Annuity was Eight Annuity of 8 l. per Ann. bought in.
Pounds per Annum, he paid for it 122 l. Memorandum, That the 500 l.
abovementioned was no part of the 831 l. which the Vice Chancellor brought in.

So that now there remains in the University Chest at Corpus Christi almost
1000 l. and in Sir Thomas Bodley's Chest at the Schools 600 l. The University
stock at present.
and the Yearly Incomes of the University for the future may be pitched upon a
Medium at a Thousand Marks communibus annis. Other Vicechancellors brought in
very fair Accounts, and some larger than this, but they were expended upon
their Building according to Sir Thomas Bodley's Will, etc.

W. Cant.


After my Hearty Commendations, etc.
THE Vice Chancellor which now is has gone through the troublesome Dr. Frewen
continued Vice Chancellor a second year.
Office of the Vice-chancellor-ship for the space of one whole Year, and this
time of the Year puts me in mind thereof, which calls for a new Nomination and
Election according to Course and Statute to be made. But though I proceed to a
new Nomination, yet I can no way hold it fit to nominate a New Vice Chancellor,
but shall continue that Trouble and Pains to Dr. Frewen for one Year more. And
this I hold necessary to do, not only for the great Integrity and Sufficiency
with which he has managed thatOffice for this Year past; but also in
particular for the great Success with which God has blessed him in putting
that useful Statute of the Examination of Candidates into Practice, which must
needs tend to the great Benefit and Honor of that University in all succeeding
times. And I am very desirous to continue it in the same Hand, and under the
same Care for another Year, to the end it may the better settle.

These are therefore to let you know, that I do nominate and choose Dr. Frewen
to be my Vice Chancellor for this Year ensuing. And do hereby pray and require
You to allow of this my Choice, and to give him all due Respect and Assistance
in all things necessary for that Government. And thus not doubting of your
Readiness and willing Obedience herein, I leave both himself and you to the
Grace of God, and rest

Your Loving Friend and Chancellor, W. Cant.


POSTSCRIPT.
THere is an Advertisement, which though I have given You Mr. Warning, given,
that the Masters keep their Seats, whilst either any public Letters are read,
or solemnSpeeches made in Convocation.
Vice Chancellor already in a private Letter, yet I thought now fit to mention
it again in these public Letters, that the whole University might the better
take notice of it. There is I confess, an old but a very ill Custom continued
in the Convocation-House; Namely, that whenever the Vice Chancellor or either
of the Proctors have an occasion to read any public Letters, or make any
Solemn Speech to that Body; the Masters do all or most of them rise from their
Seats and come and stand confusedly before him that speaks, expressly contrary
to Statute, and taking off all Decency and Dignity from that place. It Is
probable, That this might arise at first upon a desire to hear some
Vice Chancellor or Proctor who had a lower Voice; but far better it is, that
any such should be imperfectly heard, than the whole Order, Form and Dignity of
a Convocation-House should be thereby lost. These are therefore to require
every Member of that House to keep his Seat according to Statute, and not to
stir or draw nearer the Vice Chancellor or Proctors upon any pretense of
hearing, or any other whatsoever, and that they so continue in their Seats all
the time of every several Convocation. And if any Man shall thus against
Statute presume to leave his Seat, and so either break the Order, or disturb
the Peace of the House, I do hereby require, that the Vice Chancellor command
him to Prison, and give me Notice of his Name; and that he that is to speak
proceed not on with his Speech, until the House shall continue settled in every
part. And further, No Man to enter the Convocation-House upon pain of
Imprisonment, that is not a Member of that Body.
I require the Vice Chancellor and Proctors for the Time being, and their
Successors, to commit any Man to the Castle, that shall presume to come within
the Convocation-House Door, that is not a Member of that Body. And I do require
that these my Letters be Registered, that this Direction may be the better kept
in Memory.

Lambeth, July 10. 1639. W. Cant.


THE Vice Chancellor hearing of three poor Scholars, (two of Exeter The
Vicechancellor sent his Warrant for three Scholars, who had shown College-plate
in Town which (...) had battered together.
College and the third of Christ-Church) that had showed certain small pieces
of Battered Plate in a Towns-man's House, sent his Warrant for them. But two
fled, and the other came before him; where being not able to make any Defense,
than by casting all upon them that appeared not, the Vice Chancellor expelled
him the University; whereby it is hoped the College-Plate for the future will
be safer.

July 22. 1639.

THere was a great Inconveniency found in the Examinations of Fixed Seats for
the Examiners and the Candidates.
such as came for Degrees; for the Examiners and the Examined could hardly be
kept at a sitting distance in such a Throng of Auditors; and being upon the
same Level, it was therefore thought fit, both for the Ease and Reputation of
the Examiners, and the public discharge of that Business, that nothing might
pass by whispering, That the Examiners should stand in the Seat appointed for
the Natural-Philosophy-Reader (that School being by Statute appointed for the
place of the Examinations,) and another Seat be set up opposite for the
Candidates, and a Seat upon one side for the Vice Chancellor and Proctors to
sit whenever they should please to come to the Examinations. And this was
done accordingly, that it might be ready against Michaelmass-Term.

September 11. 1639. W. Cant.


SIR,
THis next passage I shall desire you to communicate with the Heads, A Branch
of my Letters (of October. 4.) to the Vicechancellor about the observing of
Formalities.
and let both them and the Proctors know, That I have been informed that some
Masters come to St. Mary's, and stand or sit there bare in Sermon time, not out
of any Devotion, but only to hide their Hats. The end why I write this to you
is, because I doubt if you look not well to it at the beginning of Term, you
will find a Breach upon that Decency of the University before you be aware; and
the reason why I desire you to impart it to the Heads and the Proctors is,
because I know the Work will be too heavy for you alone, if they shall not
concur to give you their best assistance in their several Stations. These are
therefore to pray and require every of them to look strictly to their several
Charges, and to assist you in all things according to the Statutes in the
University, in which if any Man shall fail, I shall take it so much the worse
from him, as there is greater necessity to hold up good Order in the brokeness
of these times. And further, I think it not amiss that you employ the
^^omen-Beadles to look about the Church in Sermon time, and see who they are
that in any cunning way offer to break the Statutes. I know this will be a work
full of Envy to them; and therefore I think it may be very fit that you think
of a Course how they may have profit by it, to sweeten their pains. And for my
part, if you and the Heads shall find it so fit, I think it were not amiss, if
out of the mulcts for those Offenses some Proportion were given to them for
their pains. But above all things, I desire you and the Proctors, and all else
whom it may Concern, to continue your wonted Care of the Examinations, which
will I hope prove a great Honor, and a greater advantage to the University.

Lambeth, October. 4. 1639. W. Cant.


ONE Elzy, a busy Attorney of the King's Bench, pleaded his Exemption Elzy the
Attorney.
in point of Debt from the Chancellor's Court; and brought a Writ out of the
Court of King's Bench. But at last found his Error, and submitted, yet not
till some of the Judges of that Court had in a manner declared themselves for
the University Jurisdiction, as his Case stood.

October. 12. 1639. W. Cant.


THE Chandlers (two of that Company being Aldermen of the The Chandlers about
the Price of Candles.
City) took upon them to sell Candles at a Price above that which was set by
the Vice Chancellor: And being called to an Account, they at the first, and
again, wilfully refused to submit. The Vice Chancellor, by the advice of the
Heads, was resolved to make the two Aldermen an Example for the rest: Namely,
first to call them, and demand the Mulct due for their Offense: And if they
refused to pay, then to call them into the Chancellor's-Court; and that if they
appeared not there, he would call a Convocation and discommune them. But at
last, when they had thought better on it, they promised Submission.

October. 4. 1639. W. Cant.


YOUR Grace's Directions touching the raising of Seats for the A Passage out of
the Vice-Chancellor's Letters touching the Seats for the Examinations.
Examiners and Candidates appear already to be very useful, and very much to
advance the Examinations. On Thursday we began, when though the School full from
one end to the other, yet all stood silent and attentive; and well they might;
for the Actors on both sides performed their Parts so well, that we met again
in the Afternoon; and near three it was before that days Examinations were
ended. Your Grace has been sundry ways most munificent toward this
University: Yet (without Flattery be it spoken) this one Statute is Your
greatest Benefaction. Fear of Shame and Repulse prevailing more upon our Youth,
than the severest Discipline of any private College whatsoever could have done.

October. 13. 1639. A. Frewen.


COncerning the hour of your Vespers, I would have you to weigh A Passage of my
Letters to Dr. Fell, D. of Christ Church, concerning a (...) made to him by the
Students there, for the change of their hour of Vespers from four to five.
well one main thing; which is, That as the Morning Service is every where to
end by Twelve at farthest, so the Vespers never begin before Three, and end by
Five. And this I take it is universal. And the reason of it (as I conceive) is,
That the Prayers of the Church, howsoever different in place, might be jointly
put up to God in all places at the same time. How sit it will be upon
particular respects to vary such an universal Tradition, would be well thought
on. As for the Hour which they say they shall gain to their Studies by this
change, that works little upon me. For if Men be so studiously minded, that
Hour may be taken, as well after Prayers as before. And Prayers coming between,
will rather be a Relaxation to them than a hindrance. Besides, I cannot foresee
what Example this may produce in other Cathedrals. And I would be very loath
they should learn an ill Example from the University. Therefore I pray think
well of these and other Circumstances, before you make any change.

Lambeth, October. 18. 1639. W. Cant.


I Am informed, that under pretense of Printing a Greek Chronologer Sir H.
(...) Greek Letters in Turner the (...) hands. On Thursday (...). 13. ^ the
Greek Letters, and delivered them by weight as (...) received them: there were
(...) any wanting. He came very unwillingly (...).
(one Malala) which Mr. Gregory of C. C. was preparing for the Press: Turner
the Printer (I know not by what Commission) got into his Hands all Sir Henry
Savil's Greek Letters amounting to a great number, some of them scarce worn. It
was in Dr. Pinck's time. I pray speak with the Dr. about it, and call Turner to
an Account before the Heads, what is become of them. I doubt Turner's Poverty
and Knavery together has made a riddance of them. I pray examine this Business
thoroughly before the Heads, and let me have an Account when you have done.

Lambeth, October. 18. 1639. W. Cant.


SIR,
I Would have you send me word in what state my Arabic Lecture To Mr. Thomas
(...), of C. C. C. concerning my (...) Lecture. Mr. Greaves was at this time
Deputy-Reader to Mr. (...), who ^.
stands at Oxford, on what days and hours of the days you read, and what
Ordinances are made (if any be) by which you guide your self in that Business:
And farther, I would have you set me down what Statutes may be necessary to
govern that Lecture in the perpetuating of it, in case it should please God to
make me able to do it. I pray do this with as much convenient speed as you can,
and privately without noise: So to God's Blessing and Protection, etc.

Lambeth. F. omnium Sanctorum, 1639. W. Cant.


THE University of Oxford in the time of King Edw. III. had the The State of
the Title of the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor of Oxford, for Licensing and
Suppressing of (...), etc. And this against the Mayor and Justices of the Town.
This was drawn up by Council out of that which was showed them by the
University.
sole keeping of the Assize of Bread and Drink in Oxford, and the Government
and Correction of all manner of Victuallers, and Victualling and
Tippling-Houses there.

This Power continued in the University for about 200 Years without
Interruption, until the Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. which gave power to two
Justices of Peace in every Shire or City to License Alehouses; and ordained,
That none should keep any Alehouse but such as should be so Licensed.

By color of this Statute (in regard there was therein no express saving of
the Privileges of the University) the Mayor and Aldermen of Oxford, being
Justices there, have Licensed Alehouses.

The Chancellor of the University and his Vice Chancellor, Commissary and
Deputy at the time of the making of the said Statutes were Justices of Peace
within the City. And the Privileges of both Universities were afterward in 13
Eliz. confirmed by Act of Parliament; and in all Acts of Parliament since made
touching Alehouses, the Correction and Punishment of all Ale-House-keepers and
Tipplers in Alehouses in the University, is reserved solely to the Governor of
the University.

The University of Cambridge in the Fifth Year of King Richard II. had their
Privileges by Parliament granted to them, such as the University of Oxford had,
and no other. Yet when the Officers of the Town in the Sixth Year of Queen
Elizabeth, attempted to License Alehouse, they were restrained by the Queen's
Letter, and that University has ever since quietly enjoyed the Privileges of
the sole Licensing of Alehouses.

In the Book of Directions touching Alehouses, set forth 1608. His late
Majesty declared, that the Officers of both Universities should have the Power
of Licensing and ordering of Alehouses, and not the Officers or Justices of
the Town.

And His Majesty in his Charter of Confirmation of the Liberties of the
University of Oxford in the Eleventh Year of his Reign, has been graciously
pleased to grant that no License shall be made to any Victualler or
Ale-House-keeper, without the special assent of the Chancellor.

There are now 300 Alehouses Licensed in Oxford, which occasion great Disorder
in the University.

It is therefore most humbly desired on the behalf of the said University, That
his Majesty would be pleased by his gracious Letters to be directed to the
Mayor and Commonalty of Oxford, to command them not to intermeddle in the
Licensing of any Person to keep Alehouse or Tap-House within the Jurisdiction
or Liberty of the said University or City of Oxford.

TRusty and Well-beloved, we Greet you well. We are informed His Majesty's
(...) to confirm this Right for appointing of (...), etc. in the Chancellor and
Vice Chancellor.
that our University of Oxford had heretofore the Government Correction of all
manner of Ale-House-keepers, Alehouses and Tippling-Houses within the
Liberties thereof: And we were graciously pleased lately by our Letters Patents
to grant to our said University, That no Alehouses without the special consent
of the Chancellor or Vice Chancellor should be Licensed there. It seems strange
to us (which we hear) that there should be now Three hundred Alehouses in
Oxford: And we believe they would not have risen to that number, had the power
of Licensing them rested only with the Vice Chancellor and other Governors of
our said University, as it does in our University of Cambridge. We do therefore
charge and require you, as you tender our Pleasure, and mean to enjoy the
Liberties which you use under our Favor and Goodness, that you henceforth
meddle not in the Licensing of any Person to keep Alehouses, Tap-Houses, or
Victualling-Houses within the Jurisdiction or Liberty of the said University,
and City of Oxford, but that you leave the same to the Vice Chancellor and
other Justices of Peace there, who are Members of the said University.

Given at Westminster the 27th of October, 1639.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved, the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Commonalty of our
City of Oxford.

I sent away these Letters to the Vice Chancellor upon Friday November 8th.

W. Cant.


UPON pretense that it was not in me alone to absolve the Chandlers, From the
Vice Chancellor: The Submission of the Chandlers to the University.
on Monday last I brought them to the Meeting of the Heads. Where having in the
first Place pleaded Ignorance in excuse of their Contumacy, they then confessed
openly, That it belonged to the Vice Chancellor to regulate them in their
Trade, and humbly besought me to raise their Price. This done I dismissed them,
caused the Register to make an Act of what had passed, and four days after (
viz. on the first of November) granted their Request; so that I hope the
University's Right in this particular is now settled for ever hereafter.

November. 4. 1639. A. Frewen.


I Am informed by Mr. Lenthall, That for the Physick-Garden the From the
Vice Chancellor concerning my (...). of Danby's gift of an 100 l. for the
Physick-Garden.
Earl of Danby intends to put his Heir, the Vice Chancellor, the Dean of
Christ-Church, and the President of St. Mary Magdalen-College in trust to see
his promised 100 l. per Annum for ever hereafter employed as he shall direct.

A. Frewen.


To this my Answer was as follows:

I Like the Earl of Danby's Business worse and worse; and the joining My Answer
to the foresaid Passage.
of his Heir to those Heads you mention worst of all. For if he may not ever
do, and have what he list, you shall have greater Imputations of Ingratitude
thrown upon you than the thing is worth. And now I begin to believe you will
have nothing settled till his Death.

Lambeth, November. 7. 1639. W. Cant.


EVery Body speaks well of the Examinations. And though I would To the
Vice Chancellor for some of the Heads to be now and then at the Examinations.
not put any such Burden upon the Heads of Houses, yet you should do very well
if you could handsomely insinuate it to them, what an Advance it would be to the
University in that Business, if now and then at their leisure some one or other
of them would come thither, and sit with the Vice Chancellor and Proctors to
hear the Examinations. But this I leave free to you and them.

Lambeth, November 7. 1639. W. Cant.


AT this time the Vice Chancellor sent me word, that after they Charge given to
the Librarykeepers by the Vice Chancellor and Visitors to look well to my
Manuscripts and Coins.
had visited Sir Thomas Bodley's great Library, they went to see my Books and
Coins, and that having compared them with their Catalogue, they found all well
and safe. But yet the Library-keepers had a great charge given them to look
carefully to them, being they stood unchained, and the place where they stand
almost hourly frequented by Strangers who come to see them.

November. 11. 1639. A. Frewen.


My Answer to this was as follows.

SIR,
I Thank you heartily for your Care of my Books. And I beseech My Answer to the
Vice-Chancellor's foresaid Passage, touching the care to be (...) to my
Manuscripts and Coins.
you that the Library Keeper may be very watchful to look to them since they
stand unchain'd. And I would to God the Place in the Library for them were once
ready, that they might be set up safe; and and chained as the other Books are;
and yet then, if there be not care taken, you may have some of the best and
choicest Tractats cut out of the Covers and purloin'd, as has been done in
some other Libraries.

Lambeth, Nov. 15. 1639. W. Cant.


WHilst I was at the Examinations on Saturday Novem. 16. there A Gent. unknown
came to hear the Examinations Nov. 16. 1639.
came into the School a Stranger who seemed to be of very good Quality; for he
had three or four Servants attending him. There he sat a diligent Auditor for
the space of an hour. Then went forth, and taking Horse at the Gate, vanished,
without leaving any possibility of a discovery what he was; for there was not
any Scholar seen in his Company; nor can I find that he did so much as stop at
any Inn. What ever the ends of his coming were, he cannot but speak well of the
Exercise; for 'twas at that very time singularly well performed.

Out of his Letters of Novem. 18. 1639. A. Frewen.


My Judgment upon this was as follows.

SIR,
IT IS a pretty Accident of the Gentleman's coming to hear the Examinations My
Answer to the foresaid Passage.
upon Saturday last: And I am heartily glad the Exercise was so good, and
worthy his Audience. But as his coming was unexpected, and his departure
sudden, so we must be contented to leave his Person unknown, unless some
accident discover it. But what say you to this? May it be some Jesuit attended
with three or four The Vice Chancellor sent me word that now the Heads were of
the same Opinion.
Novices, that came to see what this new Business is in the University? For why
any Gentleman in the Kingdom should come and go in that fashion, without so
much as saluting the Vice Chancellor, being present upon the place, I for my
part cannot tell, nor do I believe any would so do.

Lambeth, Novem. 20. 1639. W. Cant.


IT is strongly presumed that Mr. Bowden, a Divine of Trinity-College, A
Passage out of the Vice-Chancellor's Letter Dec. 2. concerning Mr. Bowden of
Trinity-College.
has drowned himself. His Discontent (as their Vice President informs me)
arose from Contemplation of his Debts to the College, which he foresaw he
should not be able to clear at their Audit. On Thursday Seven-night in the
Morning he was met very early going toward New-Parks, and has not been seen
since that time.

A. Frewen.


The like Passage I had from Dr. Baylie concerning Mr. Bowden, which follows.
Mr. Baylie concerning Mr. Bowden. He was found drowned on Thurs. Dec. 12. 1639.
at Kings Mills by Holywell. And the Coroners Inquest found him a distractedMan;
and so indeed he was.


ABout the beginning of the last Week one Mr. Bowden, Fellow of Trinity-College
(whom they have suspected for crazed heretofore) after the exchange of some
cross words with the President in the Gate, betwixt 6 and 7 in the Morn, went
out of the College, and cannot as yet (though diligently sought) be found. It
is feared that he has drowned himself.

December. 2. 1639. Ri. Baylie.


A Young Man, lately Commoner of Wadham-College and expelled An Information
from the Vice Chancellor; touching two Fellows of Wadham-Coll. assaulted and
wounded by a Commoner lately expelled that House.
thence, comes last Night to the Sign of the Greyhound; there he puts on a
false Name, and under that disguise sends for two of the Fellows of that
College (to whom he bore a grudge) to Sup with him. They come, he, seconded by
another, whom he brought with him for that purpose, and Vizarded, meets them
under our Grove-Wall; there they assaulted the naked Scholars and shrewdly
wounded them. One of them is apprehended, and in the Castle, the other is fled,
but known.

Oxford, Dec. 2. 1639. A. Frewen.


Whereupon I writ to the Vice Chancellor, that he would be careful to do what
might be done by Law for the vindicating of the two Fellows, and the great
wrong done them. And that he that was known and fled might be taken.

FOR your Court Leet, if it be so expenceful as you mention, and To the
Vicechancellor about settling Judge Jones's Order between the University and
the City, concerning their Court-Leets, etc.
of so little use, since the Vice Chancellor can do all in his private Chamber
without contradiction, which he can do in that Court, I shall not advise any
frequent keeping of it. Yet since I writ last, my Lord of Berkshire, their
Steward, has been earnest with me, that the Articles of Agreement between the
University and the Town might be settled according to Judge Jones his Order;
and truly I think that were not amiss to take the offer while they are willing.
For my now Lord of Berkshire presses me to move the Judge to (...) it: And as
far as I remember the stop has been in the Town it self, and neither in the
University nor the Judge. And though their refusing of setting to their Hands
were especially concerning the Court Leet; yet I do not think but that all
Orders may be agreed to, if they please, and that yet you need keep that Court
no oftener than you think fit your selves.

According as you write next to me, so shall I speak to the Judge about it.

Lambeth, December. 6. 1639. W. Cant.


I Am sorry to hear that the Lady Margaret's Reader is so subject to Dr.
Lawrence La. Margaret's Reader, to be dispensed with for not Reading, by reason
of his Sickness and often Relapses.
Infirmities: And if he continue so weak and full of Relapses, I think you
shall do well to dispense at least with his diligence the next Term, if he
gather not strength in the Interim. For I would be loath so able and careful a
Man should lose himself by taking so much Pains before he enjoy a confirmed
Health; which certainly is fit for you and the University to consider,
especially since you write that he has been almost every Week this Term at
Death's Door.

Lambeth, December. 6. 1639. W. Cant.


ON Monday Nov. 18. the Vice Chancellor sent his Majesty's, concerning
Concerning 300 Alehouses in Oxford, and the ordering of them according to his
Majesty's Letters.
Alehouses, to the Mayor and Aldermen. Upon the Receipt of them they consulted
very privately, but yet it was easily known to be about the Contents of that
Letter, because they enquired how many Alehouses were in every Parish. And
this doubtless they did, to see if they could disprove the Information given to
his Majesty, concerning the number of 300 Alehouses within the Town. But Dr.
Fell, Dean of Christ-Church, who by my direction looked very narrowly into the
Business, made his Information good by the Testimony of the Ale-Brewer's Clerk,
Servant to that College. And though this number be extremely too great; yet so
long as Bakers and Brewers have the power of granting Licenses, no Man is like
to be denied, that will take his Bread of the one, and his Ale of the other.

The Vice Chancellor presently gave me notice of all this, least the Town
should inform the Earl of Berkshire their Steward, and perhaps untruly, and so
possess him against the University: And it seems they did so. For my Lord
meeting me at Court, spoke with me about the business, and acknowledged from
them but 160 Alehouses, and that most of these were Privileged Persons, and
Licensed by the University, contrary to their own Promise and Undertaking at
the open Sessions; but spoke nothing of the procuring of the Letter it self,
which I was very glad of, and (...) his Lordship, that I verily believed he was
misinformed in all particulars, as I doubted not but it would plainly appear.

In the mean time the Vice Chancellor very discreetly went on to the The Order
by which the Vice Chancellor proceeded in the (...).
Reformation of this Scandal to the University; in which he proceeded thus.

First, That it might appear he aimed at the good of the University, in the
License which he drew up for the future, he makes it a Forfeiture of his
Recognizance for any Ale-House-keeper to receive any Scholar into his House to
drink and tipple there.

Secondly, So soon as he had his full Proof that there were 300, he commanded
the Constables of every Parish to bring in the Names of all such as sell Ale
there. This Note he communicated with the Proctors, and turned out all such as
in their several Night-Walks they had found to keep disorderly Houses.

Thirdly, After this he sent the same Note to some of the most substantial and
orderly Men in every Parish, and by their Advice struck out all those which had
any Trade or other means to live by, that being a far fitter Course for them
than Ale-House-keeping.

Fourthly, To the end no cunning of the Town might be able to elude this, he
delivered to the Ale-Brewers the Names of all such as are now Licensed, with a
charge not to serve Ale to any other upon Penalty of paying the Mulct, which
both the Statutes of the Realm and of the University inflict upon Offenders in
that particular.

And as for the Allegation which they made to my Lord the Earl of That almost
all this vast number of Alehouses were Licensed by the Mayor and the
Town-Justices.
Berkshire in their excuse, that proves utterly void. For 1st, The number of
300 at the least is fully proved. 2dly, Were it true that the most of these
were Privileged Persons, that would not help them neither: For the greatest
part, even of the Privileged Men, have been Licensed by themselves for their
own Profit. 3dly, On the University part no Justice has given allowance to any
but the Vice Chancellor only: Neither can any License continue longer than for
one Year. 4thly, The Vice Chancellor Vid. Dalton. p. 376, and 377.
that now is, has been in that Office a Year and an half, and in all this time
has not Licensed any one till now, that His Majesty's Letters Alderman
Bosworth (as I have been since informed by very good hands) Licensed 100 for
his part, and tied them all to take their Beer of him.
came down to settle that Power in me and the University, according to our
ancient Privileges in that behalf. It Is true, that some produced ancient
Licenses subscribed by some of the Vice-Chancellor's Predecessors, as namely by
Dr. Pinck and Dr. Baylie in their several Years respectively. But these, as
they were out of Date, so were they very few, not exceeding 20 in the whole
number. By all which it appears manifestly, that almost all this Scandalous
number of 300 were Licensed by the Mayor and the Town-Justices, and not by the
University, as has been suggested to my Lord their Steward.

The Vice Chancellor took for his Assistant in this Business Dr. Pinck, Warden
of New-College, who had been Vice Chancellor, and best understood the State of
the Town (though Dr. Fell had means to be best acquainted All these Passages are
collected out of the Vice-Chancellor's Letters to me of November. 20. of Nov. 25.
and of December. 2.
with the number of the Alehouses:) And for a beginning suppressed 200 of the
300, and then found it impossible for the present to sink them lower, there
being so many poor and indigent People amongst them, who have no other possible
means of Subsistence. Among these appeared a lamentable Spectacle: For the only
Son of Mr. Braddell (who had for many Years together in my Memory been
Principal of St. Mary's Hall, and lived well, but in too free a fashion) was
now found to be one of this number; yet for some reasons the Vice Chancellor
refused to License him among the rest, unless the Principal of Brazen-Nose, and
the Provost of Oriel (which were of his Father's ancient Acquaintance, and now
pleaded for him) would become his Sureties; and so the Business stands at
present.

December 7. 1639. W. Cant.


ARticles of Agreement 'twixt the University and City, being made by From the
Vice Chancellor concerning an old Composition, 23 Eliz. which gives the
University half the Amercements of the Court Leets.
Justice Jones, 'twas on all hands thought fit that they should have a time of
Probation before they were signed by Your Grace and their Steward. In this
interim we found a Composition made Eliz. 23. wherein it was accorded that the
Amercements of our Leet (which the Judge had awarded wholly to the Town) should
equally be divided 'twixt both Bodies. This when the Judge saw, he altered his
Opinion in that particular, and ordered that the Composition should still stand
in force. The Mayor, Recorder and Town Clerk there present assented, but next
day fell off, upon pretense that the Commonalty would not yield: And here we
stick. They press to have the Judge's first Order confirmed, which gives all
the Amercements to them. We plead an ancient Composition (seen since, and
allowed by the same Judge) which gives us half. Their own Recorder is ashamed
of them, and has sundry times complained to me of their peevishness and breach
of Promise in this particular. If they be now in earnest (whereof I much doubt)
we will give them a Meeting when they please, and once more try whether by a
friendly Parley these Differences may be composed.

Oxford, December. 9. 1639. A. Frewen.


THE Earl of Danby sent last Week Outlandish Workmen to enter Outlandish
Workmen sent by the Earl of Danby for the Physick-Garden.
upon the Physick-Garden. They were directed to the Dean of Christ-Church, Dr.
Clayton, and my self. We have perused diverse Models which they brought, and
amongst them pitched upon one, which we think will be most proper for that
place.

December 9. 1639. A. Frewen.


I Would have you at your next meeting acquaint the Heads, that the Warning
given for the Oxford Men to use the Prayer which the Canon requires before the
(...) at St. (...) Cross. The Vice Chancellor has undertaken this by his
Letters of Dec. 16. 39.
Oxford Men who came to preach at St. Paul's, do not so frequently use the
Prayer which the Canon of the Church requires before their Sermons, either in
matter or form, as the Cambridge Men do. And there is more notice taken of it
than I could wish there were: Therefore the Heads shall do very well to warn
their several Companies concerning it. And I pray be you careful to see it
observed there, and that will teach them to do it abroad.

Lambeth, December. 13. 1639. W. Cant.


THere came a Letter this Week from Cambridge to my Chaplain, Dr. An
Accumulation desired at Cambridge by Mr. S. Wilkinson, once of Madg. Hall,
Oxon. Dec. 20.
Bray, in which I find that one Mr. Samuel Wilkinson, a Master of Art,
sometimes of Magdalen-Hall, and now Parson or Vicar of Chelsey, came thither to
be Doctor, and would accumulate. And this was certainly to elude our Statutes.
Dr. Stern, one of the Heads there, called for his Certificate from you
according to the Letters which you lately sent to that University by my
Direction: But he being able to show none, save only a Ticket from Mr. French,
the Register, was refused. I pray call French unto you, and examine what
Tickets he uses to send in this kind, and by what Authority; and I pray put him
to it close. For if he may do this, we may have Proceeders slip away from us, I
know not how. As now it might have been, if Dr. Stern had not been a very
respectful Man to me.

December 20. 1639. W. Cant.


UPON this the Vice Chancellor called Mr. French to an account, Out of the
Vice-Chancellor's Letter, Frenche's Answer concerning the aforesaid Passage.
who confessed that Wilkinson writ to him the last Vacation, to know what Year
it was he proceeded Master; and little suspecting what use would be made of it,
(and the less because it was about the middle of the great Vacation) he sent
him a Note out of the Register, which was it he presented at Cambridge; but
protests, that since the Vice-Chancellor's coming in Office, he never gave more
than that one Ticket.

December 23. 1639. A. Frewen.


IN the interim hearing that Wilkinson had underhand gotten a Recommendation
My Lord Holland's Recommendations of Wilkinson to Cambridge, and his Lordship's
promise that (...). should keep the Agreement made with Oxford about Proceeders.
from my Lord the Earl of Holland, Chancellor of Cambridge, and having occasion
one day to meet with my Lord, I spoke to his Lordship about it; but my Lord
remembered no such thing. Yet told me he would speak to his Secretary about the
Business, and then give me a farther Account. Which the very next day he did;
and confessed unto me that he had given him a Recommendation, but thought
Wilkinson had come attested from the University. And withal his Lordship said,
that the Reason which he gave him why he went to Cambridge for his Degree, was,
because the Fees were greater in Oxford. Upon this his Lordship promised me
that he would write to Cambridge, that the University should be very careful to
keep the Agreement made with Oxford concorning Degrees.

Lambeth, Dec. 26. 1639. W. Cant.


Christmas Day falling upon a Wednesday this Year, the Mayor of Oxford Out of
the Vice-Chancellor's Letter: The Mayor's proclaiming that there should be no
Market for Christmas Day.
stepped in before the University Clerks, and proclaimed no Market. This he did,
grounding himself (as it is conceived) upon the strength of Justice Jones his
Arbitration. In the which (though altogether beside the Question) he told the
Vice Chancellor, That he thought the Market belonged to the City, though the
Government of it to the University. The Vice Chancellor doubted not but that he
should be able to right the University in this particular.

Dec. 23. 1639. A. Frewen.


THE Violence of the Storm on St. John's Night threw down the The Battlements
of the School thrown down by the Wind. From the Vice Chancellor, Jan. 6.
Battlements over the Room where Your Grace's Manuscripts are billited, but did
no more hurt. Fearing that the Leads might be bruised, and a passage through
them for the Rain made by the fall, I caused it to be thoroughly searched, and
presently repaired; so that now the Books are out of all danger.

Oxford, Jan. 6. (...). A. Frewen.


One John George, Deputy-Register to old Mr. Jones, petitioned me for a
Reversion The Registership of the Vice-Chancellor's Court (...) for by John
George. The Vice-Chancellor's Information concerning Jo: George, and the having
of never a Table of Fees to regulate that Court. Jan. 13.
of the Registership it self of the Vice-Chancellor's Court: But I refused him,
and writ to the Vice Chancellor to know the Conditions of the Man; who sent me
word as follows.

HEartily glad I am that your Grace has refused this John George for having a
Reversion of Mr. Jones's Office. For he is a saucy, insolent Companion. And
should he once come to enjoy the Place in his own Right, it is likely, would
prove insufferable. What yearly Rent he pays for his Deputation, or what he is
to give for the Resignation, I cannot tell. Yet thus much I know, through the
greediness of the Register and Proctors, the Court begins to hear ill, nor am I
able to redress it so fully as I would, there being no Table of Fees whereby to
regulate them.

Oxford, Jan. 13. (...). A. Frewen.


UPON the Vice-Chancellor's mentioning to me the having no Table of Fees for
the regulating of that Court, I writ to him to draw me up one, and send it me:
And that then I would consult with the Doctors of the Arches, and some well
experienced Proctors, what Fees might be fittest for such a Court, and send it
him back perfected, to be confirmed in Convocation, if it be thought fit.

Lambeth, Jan. 17. (...). W. Cant.


ON Saturday Jan. 25. died Mr. Robert Burton of Christ-Church, who Certain
Passages out of the Vice-Chancellor's Letters of Jan. 27. Mr. Burton's Legacy.
A Dunce of New-Inn.
has given 5 l. per Annum for ever to the University-Library, besides a
considerable Number of Books, to be taken out of his Study. And because a
Benefactor to the University, I was present at his Funeral.

At our last Examinations we repulsed a Dunce of New-Inn, who was not able so
much as to give us a difference betwixt Quisquis and Quisque though a Candidate
to be Master of Arts.

To put an end to the Town's snarling at us for taking from them the A Division
in the Town about the Alehouses.
power of Licensing Alehouses, I last Week cast them out a Bone, which has
set them at odds amongst themselves. Understanding that some sold Ale without
my leave, I sent out a Warrant to the Officers in every Parish. They finding by
it that their Poor should reap the Fruit of their Pains, readily obey, make a
strict search, inform and press to have the Penalty exacted, which has bred a
strange Distemper amongst them. and a strange one it must be, that can disjoin
them (as this has done) in their feud against the University.

Here follows the Copy of the Vice-Chancellor's Warrant.

THESE are to require you and every of you, immediately upon Receipt hereof The
Vice-Chancellor's Warrant.
to make diligent Inquiry in your Parish after all and every Person and
Persons, that do take upon them to sell Ale or Beer within your said Parish,
besides them whose Names are underwritten. And that you do certify me who
they are, and he ready to prove and justify their selling without License,
that I may exact thereupon the Penalty of 20s. for the use of the Poor of your
Parish, from each of them so offending. Also I require you to make diligent
search (taking with you a Constable) what quantity of Ale or Beer the said
Persons have in their several Houses, and to inform me what Brewer or Brewers
have served the same: That I may punish them according to the Law. Hereof fail
you not, as you will answer the contrary at your Perils. Given, etc.

Our University Coroner being last Week to sit upon the Body of a Privileged A
Privileged Person drowned.
Person drowned near Christ-Church, sends his Warrant, (according as the
Statute directs him) to the Constable of St. Olave's to warn a Jury: He
presently consults the Mayor, and the Mayor the Town Clerk, the City Oracle,
and both instruct him to disobey, because by their Charter they are exempted
from all Service without their Liberties, as this Place was, though yet within
the Parish of St. Olave's; which forced us for the present to send into the
Country for a Jury, The Town not warning a Jury at the command of the Coroner
to warn one.
which lost time, and cost trouble. Of the Legality of this their Plea we here
are not able to judge; yet much suspect that no Exemption in any Charter
reaches to Service of this Nature: But admit it to be legal, yet was it withal
uncivil, and were not the Times as they are, I should ever long make some of
them smart for it. And on Friday last I brought one of their Bailists almost
upon his Knees, for furnishing an unlicensed Tippling-House with Beer. And
easy 'twill be for a Vice Chancellor, if he intend to correct them at any time
invenire baculum.

Oxford, Jan. 27. (...). A. Frewen.


AT this time I writ to the Vice Chancellor to speak to the Heads Warning given
for orderly Disputations this Lent.
before Lent begin, and to desire them, that they would be very careful of
their several Companies, that the public Disputations then may be quick and
Scholar-like, and yet without Tumult. And this I left principally upon his Care
to look to, calling the Proctors to his Assistance.

I received a Letter this last Week from a Reverend Bishop in this Amesius and
F. Hommius, Patrons for Presbyterial Government, reprinted at Oxford.
Kingdom, in which he complains that Amesius and Festus Hommius (though I think
before your time) have been Reprinted in the University. They are professed
Friends to the Presbyterial Government. And though they may Speak and Print
what they please at Leyden or Amsterdam, yet methinks it is a great Oversight to
make them Speak by our selves and our Presses, especially in the Universities.
For too many Men, in these broken Times, will be apt enough to say, That we
allow and approve of that Doctrine, which we Print by License. I pray speak
with the Printers; and let them know from me, that I will not allow them to
Print any Book, though it has been Printed before, without new leave from the
Vice Chancellor for the time being. And that if they do Print any thing without
such leave, I will utterly suppress them. And I pray send me word in what Year
of our Lord these two Books were Printed there.

Lambeth, Feb. 7. (...). W. Cant.


ON Sunday Morn at the beginning of Sermon a Fire kindled and A Fire in Jesus
College-Lane.
brake forth in Jesus College-Lane; it threatened some great danger, being begun
among so many Thatched Houses. But (God be praised) the greatest danger was
that of the burning and pulling down two or three Thatched Houses, and spoiling
of poor Men's Sunday Cloths.

Oxford, Feb. 10. (...). Ri. Baylie.


THE University and the Parish of St. Mary's are agreed for the casting St.
Mary's Bell and Steeple.
of their broken Bell, and the Repair of their Steeple. They are to go halfs,
which comes to 40 l. Charge to the University. They raise it not out of the
University Stock, but by Six Pence from every one that contributes toward the
Maintenance of our Privileges.

Oxford, Feb. 17. (...). A. Frewen.


LAST Week a Scholar of Trinity College was brought home hither A Scholar of
Trinity College robbed and wounded.
dangerously wounded by two Theives, who betwixt Wantage and Lamborne assaulted
him, and there took from him his Money, and well-nigh his Life. For wounded as
he was, they left him bound fast unto a Tree, where he almost Perished before
any passed that way to relieve him.

Feb. 17. (...). A. Frewen.


THERE is one Ostendorpfe, a Dutch Man, who lives at or near Ostendorpfe, a
Dutchman, not to be incorporated Doctor.
the Bath. He is a very Empirick, or worse. He has taken his Degree of
Doctorship at Leyden, and (as I am credibly informed) has spoken heretofore
very slightly of our Universities. His Practice has been very dangerous and
rash. And now I hear for his better Countenance, he has a purpose to be
incorporated at Oxford. But, I pray, be very careful, that it be not done upon
any Pretense whatsoever; for the Man certainly is an ill Deserver.

Lambeth, Feb. 19. (...). W. Cant.


I Ever entertained a very fair Opinion of this Course for Examinations, The
Examinations again approved.
as apparently conducible unto the advancement of Learning among the Younger,
and the preserving the same in Masters. But, I confess, the Course did not make
so deep Impression, while I barely apprehended the same, as did the solemn
Executions thereof, while it was let in at mine Eyes and Ears, being the last
Week present with Mr. Vice Chancellor, and other Heads at that Exercise. The
Eminency of the Places for the Vice Chancellor and Proctors at the upper end,
and the like on each side for the Examiners and the Examined, make the Exercise
passing solemn, and cannot but beget an extraordinary Care in the Actors on
both sides, to fit themselves unto this awful Trial. For my own part, upon
fuller Consideration, I take it to be the most absolute Course that ever was
devised, for the honoring of the University: This single Course giving Life to
the private Pains of Tutors, and the public Pains of Readers, making the
Auditors diligent, if they come, which is for their Advantage. And if not so,
but that the Private and Public be slack, it puts them upon a diligent
search otherwise to enable themselves, as Men concerned, either to give a good
Account, or to be left to public Shame and Obloquy. Your Grace in this one
Course has completed all that the Founders of Colleges and Lectures intended.
They intended the means to make Men Scholars; Your Grace applies this Means,
and effects it; I doubt not but Your Grace fully comprehended this, and have
had the like Expressions formerly presented unto you. Yet I trust the
Repetition hereof will not be ungrateful, in as much as this my late
Apprehension of this singular Benefit may infer, that the sight and hearing of
this Exercise, may in like manner work upon Men in succeeding times, and cause
them deservedly to bless your Memory, who have so completely provided for this
University, in this very particular, as that it may for ever carry the Face and
Credit of an University.

Oxford, Feb. 17. (...). Ri. Baylie.


THE two great Days after Ash Wednesday are always left out of The Examinations
and the Effect of them upon Proceeders.
Form for Curates, Schoolmasters, and such like, to answer upon, and much the
Collectors have heretofore been pressed with their Importunities, which
occasioned the Horse-Fair (as we term it) on those Days for the quicker
riddance of them, but no such matter this Year. On Friday last there answered
but one in all, such a strange Alteration have our Examinations wrought. Of the
Two hundred Batchellors, that proceed, I dare say, that One hundred and eighty
are Residents in the University. Whereas heretofore we were wont to have a
third part at the least out of the Country. Thus it is with us now at Lent: And
I expect by so much a greater change at the Act; by how much such Outliers, as
should pretend then, will have been longer absent from the University.

Oxford, Feb. 24. (...). A. Frewen.


Right Honorable and my singular good Lord,
IT was objected unto me at my late being in London, by Persons Tavern haunting
and overmuch Drinking again complained of.
of good Quality, That our Universities of England were grown to that
Corruption, especially of excessive Drinking, that many did Miscarry by the
Liberty and ill Example which was given them there. Insomuch, that many to
avoid the Danger, did send their Sons beyond Seas for their Education.
Whereunto I made answer, That the Humors of Men are such in this Age, that
Innocence and Perfection it self, being in Authority, could hardly avoid
Calumny. That the Times are much better than heretofore they were; And that the
Fault (if there were any) did much proceed from the Parents themselves, who
think it a great Disparagement to their Sons, that they should be kept within
the Limits of Discipline.

Notwithstanding all which, and what else may justly be replied, the serious
Consideration of what was objected, has caused me so much to forget mine own
Unworthiness, as by my own Pen to intimate unto Your Grace, (what I have long
time wished that some other would have done,) That the Liberty of resorting to
Taverns, and other Drinking-Houses, and the Excess committed there is such, as
may give some occasion of Scandal, being dangerous to Youth, and shameful in
others, who ought to be Examples of Sobriety and Virtue. Having upon this
occasion enquired into Times past, since the happy Reformation of this
University, I understand by credible Information, that Dr. Pinck by his
personal visiting of suspected Places, left the University, in this respect, in
better state than it is at this present. For me to write how dangerous the
Relapse into so loathsome and general a Disease may prove, were to forget my
self, and my principal Intention, which was only to make known unto You this
Defect, and thereby to do Service to this Place, and in part to express my
Thankfulness to Your self for the much Favor vouchsafed unto me.

From Oxford, Feb. 24. (...).

This Information I had from a Master of Art in Oxford, whom I dare trust, but
will not name: Whereupon I writ to the Vice Chancellor as follows.

I Received a Letter this Week from Oxford, from an ordinary plain To the
Vice-Chancel. (...) the ^.
Man, but a good Scholar, and very honest. And it troubles me more than any
Letter I have received many a day. It Is true, I have heard of late from some
Men of Quality here above, that the University was Relapsing into a Drinking
Humor, to its great Dishonor. But, I confess, I believed it not, because I
had no Intimation of it from you. But this Letter comes from a Man that can
have no Ends but Honesty, and the good of that Place. And because you shall see
what he writes, I send you here a Copy of his Letter, and do earnestly beg of
you, That you will forthwith set your self to punish all haunting of Taverns
and Alehouses with all the strictness that may be, that the University, now
advancing in Learning, may not sink in Manners, which will shame and destroy
all.

I am informed too from a very good, but another, Hand, That Care to be taken
of the well Ordering and Educating Young Noblemen.
there is extreme Liberty given and taken by Young Noblemen and Gentlemen of
the better Sort in the University: That Tutors in most Colleges do only bestow
a little Pains in Reading to them, if they will come at them, but use no Power
of Government over them, or any restraint; as if they had nothing to do but
only to Read to them. Besides, almost all of them are suffered to keep Horses.
And by that means, when they are restrained from Taverns, and ill Company
within the University, they ride forth to the Neighboring Places, both to
Drink and perhaps to do worse. I know you cannot be blamed for the Neglect of
Tutors in private Colleges: But, I pray, at your next meeting with the Heads,
let them know what I have here written, and desire their Care for Amendment, if
this Report be true. But true or false, I took it my Duty to let you know what
is come to my Ears from some, who are perhaps too nearly interressed in it.

Lambeth, 28th. of Feb. (...). W. Cant.


IN the Business of the Examinations, you write thus: The Vice-Chancellor's To
Dr. Baylie, about the Abuse and Letter aforesaid.
Successors cannot be so wanting to themselves, and the common Good, as not to
pursue so fair an Example. It Is true, it is a very fair Example: But can it not
therefore choose but be pursued by the Successors? I pray tell me! Was not Dr.
Pinck's Care for suppressing the Scholars haunting of Taverns and Alehouses a
very fair Example? Were not you and Dr. Frewen his Successors? And have you two
pursued his fair Example? I have this Reason to believe you have not. I have at
this present received a Letter from Oxford, from a very private, but a very
honest Hand; and with an Expression full of Grief, that the University is
fallen again into that Drunken Relapse, in which it swam before Dr. Pinck's
Vice-Chancellorship. And I assure you, it troubles me very much, because this
very Week I have heard also, That some Persons of Honor and Credit have lately
spoken very much concerning this Relapse: Which yet I confess I did not believe
till I received this Letter, which I cannot distrust, knowing the Man which
writ to be without Spleen or Ends. And I pray God send you Governors there to
take better Care, or else all my Care will be lost.

Lambeth, Feb. 28. (...). W. Cant.


THE Information given up to Your Grace against me, has The Vice-Chancellor's
Reply concerning the Abuse.
been long expected; yet never less than at this time. For strange it is to me,
That an increase of Drunkards should follow upon a decrease of Alehouses. Had
the Informer (who ever he be) been with me in my dirty Night Walks this Winter,
and sped as ill as I have done, his Eyes would not serve him so well to espy
Faults where none are boldly; I dare say it, there seldom passes one Night in a
whole Week, in which one of the Proctors, or my self, do not walk the Round.
And diverse times I have gone (as my Servants can witness) from one end of the
Town to the other, after Christ-Church Bell has tolled, and not found one
Scholar, either in the Streets, or in any of the Four Taverns. Few Hours before
the Receipt One of Trinity College committed.
of Your Grace's Letters, I committed one of Trinity College to Prison for
Disorder in the Night; but beside him, I have not, I protest, of late met with
any. -- Yet, not to justify our That their drunken good Fellowship, beaten by
the Vice Chancellor out of Taverns and Alehouses, is crept into private
Colleges.
selves too far, there is, I confess, too much good Fellowship amongst us; but
the Informer mislays it: It Is driven out of Town (as others besides my self
observe) into our Private Colleges and Halls. There they can, and do debauch
themselves more securely, being out of the reach of the Public Magistrate:
Yea, and of their own Governors too in some Houses, the more the pity. There
have indeed (for which I am heartily sorry) one or two Disasters lately
happened here (for seldom they come A young Kinsman of mine, Mr. (...). Web,
serving the Bishop of Oxon, was the Week before-barbarously abused by this
Hull, upon little or no Provocation, to the endangering of his Life. The other
Disaster was the Young Earl of Downe's Quarrel with Dr. (...) his Son, and
other Captains.
single;) but that the Actors were in their Drink I cannot say, much less that
they fetched it out of the Town; for as yet I cannot trace them in any
Alehouse. Hull is in the Castle; (for as I told the Dean) I know him to be a
very Disorderly Man. Others suspected to have had a hand in that Barbarous
Assault are upon Bail, and so shall continue a while; though a Messenger from
my Lord of Oxon yesterday brought me word, that the Party hurt is in the
Judgment of his Chirurgions now past danger.

Oxford, March 2. (...). A. Frewen.


SIR,
HAVING received such a Letter, as I did the former Week, I What Course to be
held for present Remedy of this Abuse in Colleges.
could not but send you a Copy of it; and I am heartily glad it has produced
such an Answer from you: For now I see clearly, that you are not in the fault,
and yet that he had cause to write the Letter. For though Drunkenness and open
good Fellowship be not in Taverns and Alehouses; yet it seems, since your
Vigilance has driven them thence, they are crept into Colleges and Halls;
where, by your own Acknowledgment, they do more privately, and more securely
debauch one another. So the Place is changed, but not the Disorder. And the
University will be undone in Reputation, if private Colleges be made the Sinks
of Disorder. In this case I know not whether to turn my self; And therefore I
pray let the Heads know at your next Meeting, That if they do not look to this
very strictly, I must betake my self to them for these home Disorders. And if
there be not present Remedy by their Care, I will my self (...) the King and
the State with these foul Sufferances, and not stay till Great Men (who of late
begin to open their Mouths apace) complain first of these great Enormities. For
my own part I have done my utmost: And I do very well understand, what hurt
this may bring to the University in such Times as these. But better some hurt,
than that they should be quite undone. And I pray let the Heads know how
sensible I am of these foul Disorders in private, and how the Public comes to
suffer by them.

I thank you heartily for making the disorderly Fellow of Trinity-College Hull
to be Punished.
an Example. And for Hull, if my Kisman miscarry, I shall then expect what the
Law will do to him; but if he escape, yet I hope, the Fact being so barbarous,
and (for ought I yet hear) without Provocation, you will take order, when he
comes out of the Castle, to send him out of the University too by Bannition. As
for those which, you say, are suspected to have a hand in this foul Business,
and are now under Bail, I leave you to do to them as proof shall rise against
them. But, I confess, I never heard of more than Hull in the Business, till I
read it in your Letters: And the more were in it, the worse the Business, for
then (it seems) the Outrage was plotted.

I perceive that the Complaint which I received, concerning the Care to be
taken of the Young Earl of Down, and other Young Noblemen.
Young Earl of Down, was not causless: And how strangely soever Dr. Fulham
look upon the Business, I think it had been well some restraint had been put
upon all the Quarrellers, so far forth, as they had appeared Guilty. For Young
Noblemen, when they are in the University, must be kept to a University Life in
some measure, or else their Example will spoil the rest.

Lambeth, March 6. (...). W. Cant.


MR. Justice Jones gave the Vice Chancellor Thanks openly on Judge Jones's
approbation of the Reformation of the Alehouses.
the Bench at the last Assizes, for his Care and Pains in Reforming the
Alehouses.

Sir Francis Windebanke and Sir John Danvers, were on Monday Burgesses for the
Parliament.
March 9th. Sworn Burgesses of the Parliament for the University, with an
unanimous Consent of the whole House.

Our Nobility here are not kept in such awe (the more is the pity) The
Misgovernment of Noblemens (...) in Oxford.
as those bred up at Cambridge.

And here is one Causield, an Irish Lord's Son, who both Disorders Young
Caufield of Exeter College.
himself, and misleads others: I think it would be a good Office done to the
University, to have him removed hence.

Oxford, March 9. (...). A. Frewen.


I Am sorry to hear that the Noblemens Sons, which are with you, My Charge
concerning this.
are not kept in so good Order as they should be. And more, that it should be
confessed by you, that they are not kept in so good awe, as they are at
Cambridge; for, I am sure, your Statutes are perfecter than theirs, and, I dare
say, you have as much careful Assistance from me in all things, as Cambridge
has from their Chancellor. And this being undeniably true, the fault must
needs be among your selves: And I protest unto you, I knew nothing of any of
their Liberty misgiven or misused, till about a Fortnight since, that I writ to
you about the Young Earl of Down, and that now you write to me about Caufield,
the Son of an Irish Lord. These are therefore to pray This Message of mine was
delivered by the Vice Chancellor.
and require you, at your next meeting with the Heads, to let them know, that I
am very much scandalized at the Liberty which is given to these Young Men; and
to require of them in whose Colleges or Halls any Noblemens Sons are, First,
That they be as carefully held to all manner of Exercise, which they are able
to perform, as any other whatsoever: And, Secondly, That they be kept in
Obedience to all the Statutes within the several Houses respectively, as I hope
your self will take care for their Observation of the Statutes of the
University. It Is true, I would have a difference put between Noblemens Sons and
others of meaner Condition; but that should be in an Honorable Usage of them,
not in giving them any Liberty at their own hurt, and the Dishonor of the
University. Now whether you will send for all these Young Men to the meeting of
the Heads, that they may know what Charge I have given concerning them, I leave
to your self, and that which you shall judge fittest upon the place. But I
would have Young Caufield called, and his Tutour, and there let it be told unto
them, and the Head of the House in which he is, that if he mend not his
Manners, he shall not stay there to corrupt others. And I do hereby require of
you and them, That either they keep him in better Order, or presently send him
away to his Friends: I have written to the Dean by this days Carrier.
And if they do not do the one or the other, either you shall banish him the
University, or I will. And to this end, I pray, send me up the Form of a
Bannition to lie by me, and Caufield's Christian Name, that I may begin with
him, if there be cause. And for the Young The Young Earl has left the
University.
Earl of Down, I have written to Dr. Fell to look better to him, or I will
make him an Example also, let his Friends take it as they please.

Lambeth, March 13. (...). W. Cant.


MR. Sympson, a Senior Fellow of Trinity College, is by the Statutes The Degree
of Doctorship denied to Mr. Sympson of Trinity Colleges
of that House urged to proceed Doctor; or to resign. Their Visitor (as Doctor
Potter tells me) has herein been consulted, who finds only this way to relieve
him, by having his Grace denied him in the University, their being a Clause in
their Statute to that purpurpose, which I have seen. Hereupon they beg a
Repulse of me, and shall grant it, if Your Grace think well of it. The Party is
I gave way to the (...).
poor, and so likely to draw more Disrepute on the Degree, than it can bring
Honor to him.

March 23. (...). A. Frewen.


SIR,
I Am informed there is an express Mulct set down in the Statute for The
Proctors yearly to Account for the (...) due to the University; from such
Regents as neglect the Duties of their Regency.
each Regent to pay, that has forfeited his Cautions in not fulfilling the
Duties belonging to his Regency, which are creating Generals, moderating
Quodlibets, examining of Candidates, and the like. These Mulcts (as far as I
remember) are to be gathered by the Proctors, and all or some part of them to
be accounted for by them to your self and the Delegates at the end of their
Office. I do not remember that these Duties have been so well accounted for to
the University as they ought to be; which as it is some Loss to that Body, so
it is a great Encouragement to the Regents to be slack and careless in the
Performance of all those Duties which belong unto them. Whereas, were they
strictly called to an Account for them, you should have a far greater
performance of all Duties than now there is. These are therefore to pray and
require you forthwith to acquaint the Proctors with what I have here written;
and to require The (...) were startled at this Message, not looking for such an
after-Reckoning. Dr. Frewen, March 30.
them in my Name, That at their Accounts they present unto you before the
Delegates a List subscribed by their Hands, of all such as have forfeited to
the University any part of their Cautions, in not fulfilling the Duties
aforesaid of their Regency. And farther, I think it fit, that you acquaint the
Heads with this Business at your next Meeting, because I do not intend to lay
this as a burden upon the present Proctors only, (whose Diligence perhaps may
have been as great as others before them) but do require that notice be taken,
That I will have a strict Account of these things given up by all Proctors
successively at the end of their Year. And you shall do well to let the
succeeding Proctors know so much at the beginning of theirs. And I pray fail
not to give me an Account of this Business.

Lambeth, March 27. 1640. W. Cant.


OUR Lent-Disputations are now (God be thanked) happily Lent-Dispntations
passed quietly. The Examinations the cause of it.
ended, without any the least Tumult or Disorder at any time. And this I cannot
but impute principally to our Examinations, as one of the many good Fruits that
spring from them. No Dunce can now invade the Degree; and about such heretofore
our School Quarrels ever began.

March 30. 1640 A. Frewen.


BEING to begin my Journey this Day, last Night I walked round No Scholars
found stirring in the Night, or at Taverns.
the Town; when (though in the Streets the best part of the Night) though in
all Quarters of the Town, at all Taverns, and many other Tippling-Houses
besides, yet not in all that time, nor in any of these Places, did I meet with
one Scholar, but returned home again with loss of my Labor, whereof I was
heartily glad. The truth hereof I protest upon the Word of a Priest. Nor do I
write this to boast of my own Diligence, but to furnish Your Grace with what to
Answer, Procuratores, Mr. Allibond, e (...). Lincoln; Mr. Greaves, e Coll. Om.
Animarum.
if need require, in this busy and inquisitive Time.

Oxford, April 20. 1640. A. Frewen.


THE Vice Chancellor having occasion of a Fortnight's Absence The Examinations
at a dead stand revived:
from the University, found at his coming home the Examinations at a dead
stand, but he presently revived them again. And I sent him word, that by this
it appeared to me that that great Business would quickly fall to nothing, if
the Vice-Chancellors for the future did not take that prudent and vigilant
Care, with which the present Vice Chancellor had settled it.

Lambeth, May 14. 1640. W. Cant.


I Am sorry that the Order of the Regents has been any way disturbed
Concerning the Examinations.
in relation to the Examinations; and I pray set it as right again as you can,
before you leave your Office, that your Successors, by your Example and
Instructions, may go on the next Year with the more Cheerfulness and better
Success.

Lambeth, May 22. 1640. W. Cant.


FOR Dr. Jackson's Sermons, if they offend against His Majesty's Dr. Jackson's
Sermons, if they offend against his Majesty's Declaration, etc:
Declaration, you must contrive the handsomest way you can for some delay: For
certainly this is no time to Publish any thing that may give Offense, as that
will certainly do, if it be so expressly against His Majesty's Declaration as
you write. And you cannot but see what snatching there is at my self, and that
University. And if Dr. Jackson be not satisfied with such Excuses as you can
make, then you shall do well to tell him, that I have lately written to you,
that both in regard of the Duty which we owe to His Majesty, and the Peace of
the Church, no Man should presume to Print any thing there which might break
the Rule given in His Majesty's Declaration one way or other. And this I pray
be very careful to observe, not only in the Person of Dr. Jackson, but of all
Men else.

Lambeth, May 22. 1640. W. Cant.


WE have an Inn in the High Street, called the Miter, which is Green, a (...)
Innkeeper at the Miter in Oxford.
the general Rendezvous of all the Recusants, not in this Shire only, but in
the whole Kingdom, that have any Business to Oxford. Seldom are they there
without some Scholars in their Company, upon pretense either of Alliance or
Acquaintance, which have ever passed for warrantable Excuses at seasonable
Hours. What they do there I cannot say; but yet the Concourse thither being
great, and the Host a professed Papist, I somewhat doubt that the University
may both hear ill for it, and suffer by it in the perversion of some of our
Youth, if there be not some Course taken for prevention. Green, the Host, is
not of our Body, but a Townsman, and Licensed by them to keep an Inn: And his
House has a Back Gate toward Lincoln-College, where most of the Guests
privately enter, and is near Neighboured by many Recusants; there being, as I
am informed, more of them in that little Parish of Allhallows (where his House
stands) than in any two besides. I only give Your Grace the naked Relation,
leaving it wholly to Your Wisdom to do what You shall think fittest.

Oxon, June 1. 1640. A. Frewen.


I Do not remember that ever I heard of Green your Innkeeper by My Answer to
the foresaid Passage.
Allhallows-Church, either that he was a Recusant, or that there is such resort
of Recusants to his House, not only out of that Shire, but from other Shires
also, that have any Business to Oxford. And I like it much the worse, because
there is such a private Back Way to the Inn as you mention; and were the Town
as careful as they ought to be, they would not have Licensed such a Man to be
an Innkeeper there. But since they take so little Care, I Will take the more. In
my power it is not to discharge him from his Inn, but for the better Discharge
of my own Duty, I have complained to the Lords about him. And I hope there will
a Letter go from the Board to the Town to call for an Account of the whole
Business. You need not take any notice of this, neither shall the Letters go as
if you had given the Information: But I purpose to follow it close till all be
done which may be done by Law.

Lambeth, June 8. 1640. W. Cant.


THE Dean of Christ-Church sent me word that Hull was turned Hull expelled.
out of his Student's Place, and another admitted in, for his barbarous Usage
of Young (...).

June 8. 1640. Samuel Fell.


THE Disputations in Quodlibets were, I confess, somewhat disordered
Disputations in Quodlibets.
the last Term, by reason of that Beadle's absence, to whom by Statute it
solely belongs to warn the Regents in their Course. But now all goes on
methodically again, according to Your Grace's desire.

Oxon, June 8. 1640. A. Frewen.


ON Monday last I convented the two Carriers before the Heads: The Oxford
Carriers not to Travel with above six Horses, etc.
And there to prevent future Clamor from the Country, enjoined them not to
Travel with above Six Horses in a Wagon, and to begin on this day Seven Night.

W. Cant.


I Like the Course very well which you have begun with your Carriers, to
prevent the Clamor of the Country; for indeed the use of Carts with four
Wheels cannot make such a spoil of the Highway as is made usually, if they do
not overload them. And the extreme overloading of them is ventured on, because
they may use as many Horses as they please.

I am sorry to hear so many Soldiers take Oxford in their way; but Soldiers
passing through the Town, and mutinying in their Drink.
glad withal that you keep the Scholars so well from them, that all Disorders
may be prevented, as you write they have hitherto been.

Lambeth, June 19. 1640. W. Cant.


NOtwithstanding the Accident which fell out upon Tuesday June The Scholars
were free in this also.
16th. between the Commanders and the Soldiers, which was a very mutinous
Quarrel in their Drink, and cost some Blood.

Oxford, June 22. 1640. A. Frewen.


ON Friday June 19th. a Bachelor of Arts of Magdalen-Hall was Mr. Davis of
Magdalen-Hall found drowned by New-Parks.
found drowned in the River by New-Parks. His wide-sleev'd Gown, Hat and Band
lay on the Bank, but the rest of his Clothes were upon him, which makes us much
suspect that he wilfully cast away himself. The Crowners Inquest has found him
not Mentis compotem. And I hear from good Hands that he was much troubled in
Mind, for which reason at the opening of his Study I mean to observe what Books
he used most,

Oxford, June 22. 1640. A. Frewen.


ON June the 25th. 1640. I sent by Dr. Baylie, Dean of Sarum, The
Arabick-Lecture settled for ever.
and President of St. John Baptist's-College, the Conveyances for the perpetual
Settling of the Arabic Lecture in Oxford, and the Statutes which I made for
the due reading of it, and desired that those Statutes might by the
Vice-Chancellor's care be transcribed into the Original Statute-Book, and the
Conveyances also, according as he finds done with other Lectures given by other
Benefactors to the University. As also for the transcribing of these Statutes
into all other Statute-Books of the University respectively, that those which
are bound to be Auditors, may know both their Times and their Duties. These
Directions I sent by Dr. Baylie, but sent no Letter at this time to the the
University, because of the have which I made to have the Business done, and to
he out of my Hands in these broken Times, which gave me no leisure at all from
more Public Affairs to write unto them. As for the Evidences which belong to
this Land, they are all in the Custody of the Town of Redding; to which Town I
gave all my Land lying in Bray in Berkshire, of which this to the Arabic
Lecture is not a full fifth part, and could not dismember the Evidences; and
therefore thought it fittest to leave them there, where (...) part of the Land
was settled to other charitable Uses. (...) I have made the Vice Chancellor for
the time being, with some (...) Heads of Colleges, perpetual Visitors of that
which I have done (...) (...): A Counterpart whereof remains in the Custody of
the (...) and Fellows of St. John Baptist's College, of all which I gave (...)
present Vice Chancellor an Account:

June 25th. 1640. W. Cant.


Right Honorable,
YOUR Letters of the Seventh of this June with all Humility The Mayor of
Oxford's Letter to the Lords about Greene's Inn, with a Complaint against the
University, for invading the Town Privileges.
we have received: And according to Your Lordships Commands therein, we have
diligently enquired and informed our selves, and do find that some Guests,
being Recusants, do resort to the Inn called the Miter, and that Green named
in Your Lordship's Letter, was presented at the last Sessions for a Popish
Recusant; but not many Years since he was one of our Sergeants, and did then
frequent the Church: And we finding that he Marrying the late Inn-holder's
Widow of the said Inn, became Owner thereof during the Minority of his
Son-in-Law; and by that means, it being an ancient Inn of the Inheritance of
Lincoln-College, he keeps the same Inn. And touching the Authority and
Licensing the said Green so to do, His Majesty's Letters were lately procured
and sent to us, that we should not meddle in the Licensing of any Person to
keep Alehouses, or Victualling-Houses, but that we should leave the same to
the Vice Chancellor and the Justices that were Members of the University. And
under pretense of that Letter, when we in Obedience to His Majesty's
Proclamation, and his Highness's Writ directed to us for the observing of Lent,
at the beginning of the last Lent did by Warrant Summon the Victuallers of our
own Body only to become bound to His Majesty according to the said
Proclamation, the Vice Chancellor sent his Beadles to the Mayor, to tell him
that the binding of Victuallers did belong to the Vice Chancellor, and not to
the Mayor: And thereupon the Vice Chancellor presently made a Warrant to call
all the Victuallers before him at another Place, one Hour before the time
appointed in the Mayor's Warrant. And amongst others did take a Recognizance of
the said Green, but never certified the same Recognizance, not any other
Recognizances to the Sessions according to the Law. And we make bold to
certify Your Lordships. That we have only the Name of Mayor and Magistrates,
but the Vice Chancellor, Doctors, and Proctors do interpose in the Town
Affairs: That all our Liberties and Privileges are much lessened; that of late
we had much ado to get Mayor and Bailiffs (there being so many that paid their
Fines to refuse) that the City was at last forced to refuse their Fines, and to
compel them to take upon them the same Offices. Whereas heretofore when we
enjoyed our Liberties and Privileges, the same Places were much desired. And so
hoping that, the Premises considered, Your Lordships will not conceive us so
careless therein, as in Your Lordships Letters is expressed, we humbly take
leave, resting at Your Lordships Service.

Oxon, 15 Junii, 1640. John Smith, Mayor.
William Potter, Aldermen.
John Sare, Aldermen.
Henry Southam, Aldermen.
Thomas Cooper, Aldermen.


May it please Your good Lordship,
ACcording to the Statute of Winchester, in the Thirteenth Year of The Mayor of
Oxford's Letter to the Earl of Berks, their Steward, to show to the Lords
touching their Night Watch.
the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the First, and according to
certain Orders and Directions published by the Body of his Highness
Privy Council, 1630. A Watch was set by Mr. Mayor and his Brethren, with the
Consent of the Vice Chancellor (these Rebellious times requiring the same) part
of which Watch, by reason of diverse Inrodes and Inlets (besides the Gates of
the City) were appointed by Mr. Mayor to walk about their several Wards and
Liberties for the Safety thereof, and good Order; by which Watch straggling
Soldiers and others have been taken, and we have been safe. But Mr. Proctors
question the said Watch, and exact of them 40 s. a time for such their walking:
And for Non-payment thereof threaten to sue them in the Vice-chancellor's
Court, and send for these Watchmen very often to their Chambers, and make them
attend them there, and have imprisoned some of the Constables, and have laid
hold of the Watchmen, and taken some of them to the Prison Gates with an
intent to Imprison them; and do say, that Mr. Mayor cannot give them Power to
go from the Gates of the said City. And for these Causes Mr. Mayor is forced to
discharge the Watch; but the Watch in St. Thomas Parish (being the Entrance
from Farrington, where the late Rebellion was) he did not discharge, and the
last Night Proctor Allibond Imprisoned the Constable for setting the same
Watch. All this we will prove to be true upon Oath, if it be denied: And
therefore our humble Suit to Your Lordship is, That by Your good furtherance we
may receive the Opinion of the Honorable Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
what shall be done in the Premises; And whether Mr. Mayor shall be freed of
all Danger for not setting a Watch in these troublesome Times or not. And so
craving Pardon for our so often troubling You, we remember our Humble Service
to Your Lordship, and render many Thanks, always remaining

Oxon, June 24. 1640. Your Lordship's to be commanded, John Smith, Mayor.
William Potter,
John Nixon,
Thomas Smith,
Leo. Bowman,
John Sare,
William Charles,
Humphrey Whistler,
Henry Southam,
Martin Wright,
Roger Griffin.
Walter Cave, Bailiffs.
William Poole, Bailiffs.


SIR,
THE Mayor of Oxford has lately sent these two Letters above My Letters to the
Vice Chancellor, touching these two Letters of the Mayor.
written, one to the Lords of the Council, and the other to the Earl of Berks,
to show to the Lords. And I here send you the Copies of them both. The Letter
to the Lords is most concerning Green and his Inn; in which I do desire you to
make a clear and distinct Answer to these Particulars following. As First,
Whether this Inn be the Inheritance of Lincoln-College; and whether Green is
possessed of it by the Marriage of the Widow in the Right of his Sonin-Law. And
this the rather, because your first Information said, That the Town authorized
him to keep this Inn. Secondly, You may see by this how angry they are about
their Victuallers, where they directly charge you, That amongst others you took
a Recognizance of the said Green, but never certified the said Recognizance
nor any other to the Sessions according to the Law: To which also it will be
fit you give Answer. Thirdly, They say they have only the Name of Mayor and
Magistrates; and speak in all the rest of their Letter, as if all the Town
Privileges were invaded by the University. And here I would have you answer two
things. The one, That they offer to invade the University Privileges, which I
conceive is true. And the other, Whether so many as they mention did refuse the
Offices of Mayor and Bailiffs this last Year.

Their second Letter is only concerning their Night-Watch; in which I think
there is a manifest invading of the University Privilege: And Proctor Allibond
is challenged by Name. But they have taken a very cunning rise for their
Business; for they put it all upon their Care for a Watch, by reason of the
Seditious Tumult at Farrington. There is great reason that Mr. Mayor should be
freed from all Danger about setting of a Watch, save only such as is his Duty
to set; but the Lords will not give me their Opinion, till they have an Answer
from the University how the Mayor's Watch and the University Privileges stand
together. I pray therefore send a full Answer to this Particular especially.
But I pray send your whole Answer in such fair Terms, as that I may show it
whole and entire to the Lords; but let the matter be as full home as you can.

Lambeth, July 3. 1640. W. Cant.


Most Reverend,
IN the Name of the whole University, as well as in my own, I return The
Vice-Chancellor's Answer to the two Letters of the Mayor of Oxford.
Your Grace humble Thanks for the Notice which by Your last Letter You have
been pleased to give me of a late Information preferred by this Town unto the
Lords of the Council against us. To the several Branches whereof I will make
bold to return a brief Answer, that it may the more fully appear unto Your
Grace, how false in some, and groundless in all Particulars, the Complaint is.

It Is true, That Green's House belongs to Lincoln-College, and that he now
enjoys it by the Right of his Wife: But this makes it not to be an Inn, that
must be done by License, which he must either have from the Town (as all other
Inns as yet have) or else he has none. For, confident I am that he has not
any from the University. By Virtue of His Majesty's late gracious Grant unto
us, we License Ale-House-Keepers and Victuallers. Above which Rank (until
better informed now by the Town) we conceived Inn-holders to be, and therefore
meddled not with them. If Green came in the throng at the beginning of Lent to
be bound by me from dressing of Flesh (the which I remember not) he came not
called. For by my Warrant I then Summoned none but Privileged Persons, and such
only of the Town as by the Power given the University by His Majesty had been
allowed by us.

The Recognizance of those (...) Licensed, I confess, I returned not to the
Quarter Sessions, and that for this Reason: His Majesty by the forementioned
Letter was pleased to grant us the same Authority over Alehouses and
Victuallers, which the University of Cambridge has. No Recognizances are
returned there: (whereof I am certain, for I sent thither purposely in November
last to enquire.) And therefore none by us. The University there keeps them in
its own Power, and so do we. The Town Clerk (who Penned the Letter) does, I
grant, by this means lose some petty Fees, which (the Poor Men now save in
their Purses) he formerly had, whilst the power of Licensing was in them. But
this is a very weak Plea in a Business of such Consequence. Nor indeed are
those Fees now considerable, we having already reduced those Alehouses to Five
Score, which before were Three Hundred. A great number: And yet not to be
marvelled at, when one Man, this Mayor's Father-in-Law, Bosworth a Brewer and
Justice of the Town, was (as I have credibly been informed) in a very short
time, the means of Licensing an Hundred for his part; upon Conditions (which
tied them faster than their Recognizance to the King) that they should take all
their Beer of him; nor did he stand single: Others they have who trod after him
in the very same steps; which makes me wonder with what Face they can complain
of the Loss of a Power which they so grossly abused.

And yet more, I marvel at their Complaint against us for invading their
Liberties, when themselves are so notoriously guilty of daily Attempts upon
ours, without any color at all of Right for their so doing. Witness their
Intrusion into the Office of Clerk of the Market: Their Enquiries at their
Leets touching the Cleansing and Paving of the Streets: Their refusing to be
regulated by the Vice Chancellor (as heretofore) touching the Price of their
Candles: Arresting and Suing of Privileged Persons in their City Court: Taking
of Felons Goods, and interrupting our Proctors in their Night Walk. Nor can I
amongst these Grievances omit their present multiplying of Cottages, and
Inmates in all Parts of the Town, in despite of the Inhibition to the contrary
sent unto them by Letters from the Lords of the Council; whereof they have in a
friendly manner been put in mind by the University, both at their Public
Sessions, and at other times.

If the Mayors of Oxford have now (as is pretended) only the Title, not the
Authority of the Place, they are the more to be blamed for being so ambitious
of it: I presume Your Grace has heard of the violent and drunken Competition
that was between a Brewer and Baker at Michaelmas was Twelve Month; how many
Days, and how much Beer was spent in the Canvass, to the no small Scandal of
this Place, and disparagement of the Office, which was to be procured by such
unworthy Means. In the issue the Brewer prevailed, and his Beer wrought so well
with the Commoners the whole Year after, that by the strength thereof his
Brother (the present Mayor) came to succeed him in the Place; That none either
then or since have Fined for refusing the Office, either of Mayor or Bailiffs,
though in their Letter they seem to pretend the contrary.

The Mayor pretending the Statute of Edward the First for his Night-Watch, I
did not oppose it; though I saw little use of it here, and knew this Place to
be exempt by an Act Eliz. 13. which confirms all our Charters unto us,
notwithstanding any Acts of Parliament whatsoever. That Statute appoints the
Watch to stand at the Gates; where had they kept themselves, the Proctors had
not questioned them. But when they took the boldness to walk the Streets to
examine Scholars of all Conditions, to enter Houses, and search what Company
there, then they thought it high time to appear, and stand up in defense of
their own Authority, and the Privilege of the University. Your Grace, having
been Proctor long since, cannot but know that the Night Watch has of old
belonged to the University, and was so confirmed unto us, as our Right by the
Lords, at an hearing before them 'twixt the University and Town, 1612. Jacobi
Decimo. Nor since then have the Townsmen disturbed it at any time before now,
when our unwillingness to trouble either Your Grace or the Lords of the Council
with petty Complaints in these busy Times, has so heartned them, that nothing
will now satisfy them, unless they may trample our Charters under their Feet,
and give Laws to them by whom they live. For the particular Passage 'twixt one
of the Proctors and the Constable of St. Thomas Parish I am a Stranger, and
therefore have sent Your Grace the sum of it under the Proctor's own Hand.

A second Reason (omitted before through have) for my not bringing to the
Quarter Sessions the Recognizances which I have taken of Victuallers and
Alehouses, is this; because His Majesty has by our Charter given to the
University all the Fines, Amercements and Profits that accrue from them. Since
I began to write, Green has been asked, and he makes Answer, That he keeps
his Inn by virtue of a License from the Town; but an ancient one it is.

Oxon, July 6. 1640. A. Frewen.


WHereas it has been suggested by Mr. Mayor of Oxon to the Proctor Allibond's
Answer to that which concerns him in the Mayor of Oxon's Letter.
Lord's of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, That I committed the
Constable of St. Thomas Parish for setting his Watch, it is my humble Suit that
the Honorable Board will be pleased to take notice, that he was committed for
these Reasons following:

First, For taking upon him (to the great Prejudice of the Privivileges of the
University) the Search of Houses. A thing not belonging to the Officers of the
Town, but in Cases of Treason and Felony.

Secondly, For an Outrage committed by his Watch upon one Wallis in his own
Lodging; he himself being at the same time at the Door.

Thirdly, For doing and suffering these things beyond the bound of his Walk.

For these Reasons above specified, I committed him to the Castle, yet so as a
Delinquent, not as a Constable, I not being able to know his Office by his bare
word without his Mace.

Oxon, July 6. 1640. Peter Allibond, Proctor of the University of Oxon.


Reverendissime Cancellarie,
INTER ardua and elamosa Reipublisae negotia, inter bellorum strepitus Thanks
from the University for settling my Arabic Lecture for perpetuity.
and populi fromitus, etiam nunc tibi vacat animus, detineri minoribus
Academiae curis? Siccine acer es in exequendo proposito, ut benefaciendi horam
ne tantillum differas, quin eam celeri manu prehensam e flammis arripias?
Circumquaque dum sonant arma, togique sumus in manibus quid nobis interim cum
Orientalium linguis? nisi forsan Musarum armatura sit penitus verbosa. Stylo
quidem utimur, sed incruento; calamum stringimus, sed sine (...). Ideoque
provide curavit Munificentia vestra, ne ullo careamus apparatu, qui vim aut
splendorem afferat qualicunque hinc belli Scholastici Disciplinae and castris
fulminatis linguae. Gazophylacium Bodleio -- Laudanum mirifice ditasti
apportando Arabiam in Oxonium: At postquam ab Orient spoliato huc appulit
Literaria supellex, missa solis in libris Lingua substitit adhuc muta utpote
ignotis characteribus impedita; mox ubi accessit salarii clavis, and nimis
doctam reseraturus Barbariem praelecto; soluta est lingua. Verum and nondum
facta est immortalis, (...) ex unico vestro (quod tamen infinitum optamus)
penderet filo. Huic demum succurrit incommodo Munificentiae vestrae, quae
nunquam deficit, quam caepti in eductabilis nunquam paenitet, manus ultima, and
pensionem annuam consolidavit in Glebam Hereditariam. Nunc omnes Arabum
divitias unum hoc vestrum Linguae Arabicae Patrimonium long superat. Dominos
enim privatos perumtant fortunae, nunc hunc, nunc illum accipiunt; at Lingua
publica gaudet firmo inseparabilis praedii sustentaculo. Vt aeternam nos doceat
gratitudinem, aeternamque tibi gloriam refundat. (...) hanc muniunt
prudentissimae; quas etiam sanxisti, leges: Nihil enim languldum, nihil
moriturum largiris; sed beneficiis vestris omnino subest anima, quae and nobis
utendi facultatem suppeditat, and sibi vitam conservat. Necesse est itaque, cum
ante facti simus hoc modo Arabici, vel soelices nos esse vel petrosos; foelices
quidem, si mandatis vestris pie obsequamur, sui minus, misere petrosos and
ingratos. O amabiles angustias! quae probitatem nostram, and eruditionem tam
arcte catenant, ut in Progressu Literario nutiquam possimus esse foelices, nisi
genio vestro morigerl. Tales itaque futuri sumus (quod enim utilius?) religiose
tales, tam vestri causa, ne pereat Monumentum Amplissimi Conditoris, tum
nostra, ne pereamus nos, Tui altera Monumenta, quibus illud conditur.

E Domo nostrae Convocationis, Julii 6. 1640. Sanctitatis vestrae Cultrix
humillima, Academ. (...).


THERE was a Warrant respectively sent to the Vice Chancellor The Council's
Warrant for the Vice Chancellor and the Mayor.
and the Mayor of Oxford, dated July the 10th. to require both of them, and the
Proctor Allibond, to appear before the Lords of the Council the 22th. of this
present July, to make Proof of what was alleged on either side against each
other in the former Letters.

Berkshire Soldiers, who were upon their March as far as Brackley, Berkshire
Soldiers.
recoyled back upon us yesterday, and were last Night our unwelcome Guests.
Their Captains have been with me for Assistance according to the Proclamation,
and are now busy in calling their scattered Forces together again.

Oxford, Wednesday the 15th. of July, 1640. A. Frewen.


At Whitehall the 22th. of July, 1640. The Order of the Council concerning the
difference between the Vice Chancellor and the Mayor.
PRESENT The KING's MAJESTY.
Lord Archbishop of Cant.

Lord Keeper,

Lord Treasurer,

Lord Privy Seal,

Lord Duke of Lenox.

Lord Marquis Hamilton.

Lord Admiral,

Earl of Berks,

Earl of Holland,

Earl of Traquare,

Lord Goring,

Lord Cottington,

Mr. Treasurer,

Mr. Secretary Windebanke,

Sir Tho. Row.

WHereas His Majesty (being present at the Board) did this day hear the
Complaints of the Mayor, Recorder, and others of the City of Oxford expressed
in two Letters, the one of the 15th of June to the Board, the other of the 4th.
of June to the Earl of Berks, a Member of the Board, concerning their
Liberties, in the Presence of the Vice Chancellor, and other Doctors of the
University, and Mr. Allibond, one of the Proctors, whom the said Complaint did
concern.

After mature Debate it was ordered, That the University of Oxford, according
to his Majesty's Gracious Letter, shall have the sole Licensing of
Victualling-Houses in that City and Suburbs, in like manner as the University
of Cambridge has in the Town of Cambridge: And for that purpose it is ordered
by His Majesty, with advice of the Board, That the Commission for the Peace in
Oxford shall be renewed, and the Vice Chancellor only made of the Quorum.
Secondly, for the Complaint of the Building of Cottages, it is ordered, That
the Vice Chancellor and the Mayor shall make several Certificates of all the
new Cottages built within Twenty Years, and shall distinguish which of them
have been built by Privileged Persons upon College Lands, and which by
Townsmen, and which by Privileged Persons upon the Town Wast by their leave:
Upon return of which Cerficates their Lordships will give such farther Order
therein as shall be fit. Thirdly, it was ordered, That his Majesty's Attorney
and Sollicitor-General shall examine how the Orders, set down by Mr. Justice
Jones for preventing of Disputes and Controversies between the University and
City of Oxford, have been observed, and by whom there has been any defailer
therein admitted. Upon Certificate whereof their Lordships will take such Order
as shall be fit for the due Observance of the same. Fourthly, it was ordered,
That according to the Statute of Winchester, those to whom it belongs ought
to set Watches at the Gates of the City, according to the said Statute; and
that the said Watch continue there, without walking of the Streets, or moving
from their Station, except it be for the suppressing of any sudden Tumult, or
other Malefactors, whereof there is not time to give notice to the
Vice Chancellor and the Proctors of the said University. Lastly, it is ordered,
That the Constable committed to Prison shall be delivered, but not without
paying of Fees.

After my hearty Commendations,
DR. Frewen has now born the troublesome Office of the Vice-Chancellorship Dr.
Potter chosen my Vice Chancellor.
of that University for the space of two whole Years, which is the time now
usually given to execute that Office: And is certainly weight enough for any
Man to bear so long. In the discharge of this Office he has through the whole
course of his time carried himself with great Care, Moderation and Prudence;
and that as well in all Businesses which relate to the Town, as in those which
look more immediately upon the University. And among other great Services
performed by him, I cannot forbear to single out one, and here publicly to
give him Thanks for it, even above the rest: And that is the great Pains he
has taken, and the singular Dexterity which he has used in bringing the
Statutes concerning the Examinations into Use and Settlement. Which Statute, I
dare be bold to say, being continued and kept up in the same Vigor to which it
is now raised by his Care and Providence, will be of such singular use as that,
for my part, I cannot easily tell whether it will be greater Honor or Benefit
to that University; but sure I am, it will be the one by the other, if it be
kept up to the Life, as I hope it shall be.

Dr. Frewen's time being thus happily spent both for his own Honor, and the
University's Good, the Care now lies upon me to name another, to take up that
Burden which he lays down, and to go in those steps which he has trod out
before him. And I thank God for it, there is such Choice of able Men in that
Place for this Service, that I cannot be to seek whom to name unto it. But I
have for the present thought upon Dr. Potter, Dean of Worcester, and Provost of
Queen's-College, as a Man whom I know to be of great Integrity and Sufficiency
for that Place, and of whose Care and Industry therein I am very confident. To
him, together with the Office, I do more especially recommend the Care of the
Examinations in point of Learning, and a most strict Watchfulness and
Observance against all haunting of Taverns or any other Meetings, private or
public, which may any way help to suppress the base Sin of Drunkenness, the
Mother or the Nurse of almost all other Distempers, which may bring Obloquy
upon that Place. These are therefore to let you know, that I do hereby nominate
and choose Dr. Potter to be my Vice Chancellor for this Year ensuing: And do
hereby pray and require you to allow of this my Choice, and to give him all due
Respect and Assistance in all things necessary for that Government, and more
especially in the two Particulars abovenamed; that so Sobriety and good
Manners as well as Learning may flourish in that Place. And thus not doubting
of your readiness and willing Obedience herein, I leave both him and you to the
Grace of God, and rest

Lambeth, July 24. 1640. Your Loving Friend and Chancellor, W. Cant.


AND for the future, I pray, let not the Town so much as begin Concerning
Cottages.
to lay the Foundation of any Cottage or any other House whatsoever in any
Place, but send me word of it presently, that I may acquaint the Lords with it,
and command a stay.

August 3. 1640. W. Cant.


UPON a late Warrant from the Deputy Lieutenants the Mayor Another Breach of
the Town's upon the University's Privilege, by taxing Coat and Conduct-Money
upon Privileged Persons, yea and upon some Doctors of Physic.
has freshly pressed and set out ten new Soldiers. Coat and Conduct-Money for
these in their several Parishes was taxed upon all Privileged Persons, not only
Stationers, Apothecaries, that trade and use Merchandise (who are more liable)
but upon Doctors, Clayton, Sanders, Bambridge, and all Physicians, upon Mr.
Cross our Beadle, on our Butlers, Manciples, Cooks, who are our immediate
Servants, and deal not with any Trade. All profess themselves very willing to
advance His Majesty's Service, especially in these base and broken Times. Yet
they hope, by your Grace's Favor, to enjoy the benefit of that Privilege
which, being anciently granted to our University, was of late confirmed by His
Majesty's Charter, and is enjoyed by the other University. At my entreaty all
of them in a manner have paid; but their humble Suit unto Your Grace is, That
hereafter their now Readiness may not prejudice them, nor be drawn into
Consequence.

Oxford, Aug. 4. 1640. Chr. Potter.


UPON the Death of Young Devall, whom I made Toll-gatherer James Pen
nominated Toll-gatherer in Oxford, Sept. 4.
in Oxford after his Father, I nominated James Pen, Manciple of St. John
Baptist College to succeed him. This I did by the Advice of the Vice Chancellor
and some Heads, who thought him a very fit Person for that Place. And I farther
ordered, That out of the Profits of the Place he should allow the Poor Widow of
old Devall Yearly Ten Pounds.

September 4. 1640. W. Cant.


UPON Sunday last being Sept. 6. there were two Seditious Sermons Two Seditious
Sermons by Mr. Johnson and Mr. Wilkinson.
Preached at St. Mary's: The one in the Morning by Mr. Johnson of
Magdalen-College, which was concerning Universal Grace, and contrary to His
Majesty's Declaration in that behalf. The other in the Afternoon in a very
bitter way against some Ceremonies of the Church, by Mr. (...) of
Magdalen-Hall. The Vice Chancellor gave me notice of these by his Letters of
September 7th. with a Promise, that he would see them both Censured; and I writ
back unto him that he should not fail to see it done, according to either of
their Faults respectively.

Sept. 11. 1640. W. Cant.


THE Vice Chancellor sends me farther word in his Letters of September 14th,
That Wilkinson's Sermon was very Base and Factious, and merely intended to make
a Party for the Scots.

Sept. 14. 1640. W. Cant.


THE Vice Chancellor according to this my Direction convented The Recantation
enjoined to Mr. Johnson.
both the Delinquents before the Heads; and, with their Consent, enjoined them
to submit, and make the Retractations following, viz.

Whereas I John Johnson, Fellow of Magdalen College, preaching at St. Mary's
upon Sunday September 6th in the Forenoon, did unadvisedly throughout my Sermon
insist upon the Proof of Universal Redemption and Universal Grace, not without
some bitterness against the contrary Opinions, hereby disobeying the
Declaration and Command of His Majesty, to the Disturbance of the Peace of the
Church and of the University, I do hereby acknowledge my Offense, and my Sorrow
for it, humbly desiring, that this my Acknowledgment may be accepted: And I do
promise for the time to come to conform my self in all humble Obedience to his
His Majesty's said Declaration, and always to prefer the public Quiet and
Peace of the Church before any doubtful and disputable Opinion of mine own.

Whereas I Henry Wilkinson, of Magdalen-Hall, preaching at Mr. Wilkinson's
Recantation refused.
St. Mary's upon Sunday September 6th in the Afternoon, did in several Passages
of my Sermon uncharitably and indiscreetly glance at my Superiors, and other
conformable Members of the Church of England, as at Men lukewarm and wanting
Zeal, and inclining to favor Romish Superstitions and ancient Heresies; and
also did indirectly accuse the present Condition of this Church, as if it never
fared worse with good Men, and as if Goodness were discountenanced,
discouraged, and punished, etc. I do hereby unfeignedly confess my Error, and
my Sorrow for it: And I do also promise ever hereafter, both in my Sermons and
Discourses in public and in private, to carry my self with all Obedience and
Conformity to the Public Government, being careful to give no just Offense or
Scandal to the Church, or my Superiors.

Upon the tender of these two Submissions Johnson recanted according Wilkinson
suspended.
to the Form, and so was dismissed; but Wilkinson obstinately refused, and so
was suspended from all execution of this Priestly Function within the
University and Precincts thereof, according to the Statute, (Coram Praefectis)
September 4th.

I am not willing by an over-strictness to fasten discouragement up-Desert; A
Son of Dr. Fell's dispensed with for one Term to proceed Bachelor of Arts.
and yet I cannot but fear on the other side what a loose hand may work, by
giving an easy way to Dispensations: Therefore in this Case if the Young Youth
of Christ-Church, whom you mention, be of such known Desert, and that he wants
but one Term, I shall leave him to your self and the Heads: Yet with my earnest
and hearty desire, That you be very careful in all Dispensations. And I pray,
now Term is beginning, be as careful for the upholding of all Exercises, and
all Discipline there; and especially the Examinations and the Manners of the
Younger Sort. For if any thing prove to be amiss in these broken Times, both
you and I shall be sure to hear of it, and perhaps where we would not.

Lambeth, October 7. 1640. W. Cant.


SIR,
IN the end of Dr. Frewen's second Year, he had observed how in Examinations to
prevent Collusion in them. A Branch of my Letters to the Vice Chancellor.
the great and useful Business of the Examinations of Proceeders, there might
be a Collusion; (though as yet he thought it was never practiced:) He sent me
word of it, and withal proposed this way of Remedy. The Collusion, which he
feared might be, was by plotting beforehand between the Examinants and the
Candidates, which by which should be examined, and consequently each Candidate
might easily know upon what Questions he should be examined, and provide
accordingly. The Remedy which he proposed against this was, (and he practiced
it the last Term of his Office,) That the Candidates should be examined in such
Order as the Prector should rank them in a Paper to be set up over the Seat
(where the Examinants sit in the School) every day immediately before the
Exercise begins. By this means the Candidates being uncertain where they should
pitch, must either tamper with all three Examiners, or run a very great hazard
of missing their end, if they should apply themselves but to one only. This
Remedy I did then approve, and your Predecessor put it in practice. And I
desire you heartily to speak with him about it, and to pursue it with all Care
and Diligence; and not to suffer that Exercise, which will bring so much
present Honor to the University, and so much future Benefit to the Church,
either to (...) or to be abused by any Collusion whatsoever.

Lambeth, October 16. 1640. W. Cant.


THE last Week I was present, and both the Proctors, at both the The
Vicechancellor's Answer to this Passage about the Examinations.
Days of Examinations. The School was full; and the Invention will be of
singular use for the encouragement of Studies, the honor of Learning, and the
discountenancing of Ignorance. So that now the Church is more like to flourish
with Peace, as well as Learning, when it shall be freed from those ignorant
bold Bayerds, which first break into it by Symony, and after disorder it by
Faction. I will therefore have an especial Eye to the Exercise, and either my
self or the Proctors be usually there.

October. 19. 1640. Chr. Potter, Vice-Chan.


THE Outer Room before the Convocation-House is now handsomely The Room before
the Convocation-house fitted for Courts, etc.
fitted both for our Courts, and for the Meeting of the Heads, with a general
Approbation and small Charge.

October. 26. 1640. Chr. Potter.


I Have already gathered a pretty Purse of Mulcts from Taverns and such Places
in my Night and Day Walks, and mean to continue the Course: Though I doubt not
that some of our back Friends in Parliament will give us but little Thanks:
Some there, perhaps many, rather desiring we should be guilty, that they might
with more color use us as they did the Monasteries. God preserve this
miserable Nation from Sacrilege and Atheism: To which I say Amen.

I hanged up last Week this fair and short Monition following at the Door of
the Congregation; and it has already brought in many Miniver-Hoods, and will
in short time prevail (I hope) with all, without any word or murmur of
Contradiction.

Vetustissima hujus Vniversitatis Consuetudo est, ut Magistri Regentes, toto
Regentiae suae tempore in omni Conventu Academico, praecipue vero in
Congregationibus and Convocationibus, Caputiis ex Minuto-vario (vulgo Miniver)
and non sericis, induti intersint. Atque ideo D. Vicecancellarius monet omnes
and singulos Magistros Regentes, and insuper Collegiorum Aularumque Decanos,
seu Praesentatores, ut hujus Consuetudinis and Juramenti sui memores in
posterum Caputio Ordini suo and huic Domui competente, huc semper accedant: Sub
poena in Statutis praescripta.

October. 26. 1640. Chapter Potter.


NON datur scribendi otium; hoc tamen quale quale est arripio lubens, My
Letters to the University the fourth time, when I sent the Manuscripts.
ut (...) ad vos transmittam: Adhuc (florentes Academici) Tempora adsunt
plusquam difficillima, nec Negotia, quae undique urgent, faciliora sunt. Quin
and quo locores Ecclesiae sint, nemo non videt. Horum Malorum (...) non unus
est: Vnus tamen inter alios furor est eorum, qui sanam Doctrinam non
sustinentes (quod olim observavit S. Hilarious) corruptam desiderant. Inter eos,
qui hoc aestro perciti sunt, quam difficile sit vivere mihi plus satis
innotescit, eui (Deo gratias) idem est vivere and (...) facere.

Sed mittenda haec sunt. Nec enim, quo (...) ducant, datur scire, nec mitiora
redduntur tempora, aut tutiora querimoniis. Interim velim sciatis me omnia
Vobis fausta and foelicia precari, quo tuti sitis foelicesque, dum hic inter
Sphaeras superiores Stella (...) magnitudinis, vix motum suum tenent, aut prae
nubium crassitie debile lumen emittunt.

Dum sic fluctnant omnia, statui apud me in tuto (id est, apud vos spero)
Manuscripta quaedam temporum priorum monumenta deponere. Pauca sunt, sed
prioribus similia, si non aequalia. Et talia, quae, non obstantibus temporum
difficultatibus, in usum vestrum parare, non destiti -- Sunt vero inter hoec
Hebraica sex, Graeca undecim, Arabica triginta quatuor, Latina viginti and
unum, Italica duo, Anglicana totidem, Persica quinque quorum unum, folio
digestum ampliori, Historiam continent ab orb condito ad finem Imperii
Sarracenici, and est proculdubio magni valoris. Haec per vos in Bibliothecam
Bodleianam (nomen veneror, nec superstiose) reponenda, and caeteris olim (...)
apponenda cupio, and sub iisdem legibus, quibus and priora dedi. Non opus est
multis donum hoc nostrum nimis exile ornare, nec id in votis me is unquam fuit.
Hoc obnixe and quotidie a Deo. O. M. summis votis peto, (...) Academia semper
floreat, in (...) Religio, and Pietas, and quicquid Doctrinam decorare potest,
in altum crescat, ut tempestatibus, quae nunc omnia perstant, sedatis, tuto
possitis and vobis and studiis, prae omnibus Deo frui: Quae vota semper erunt,

Dat. ex AEdibus nostris Lambeth. Nov. 6. 1640. Fidelissimi and amantissimi
Cancellarii vestri, W. Cant.


AEternum Reverendissime (...),
QVaenam haec lucta indefessa virtutis and prementium Angustiarum? Dum nutat
orbis, nictantque Stellae, Academiam firmare cogitas, unicam illustrare
Academiam; securus tui, de nobis sollicitus. Prioribus Manuscriptis, ingenti
labor and pretio comparatis novam (...) messem; Pari linguarum varietate,
argumentorum pondere, and exemplarium raritate spectabilem, numero quidem
octoginta and unum Volumina, quae Pari fide and gratitudine sancte custodiemus,
cast versabimus. Occurrit hos libros intuentibus vox plurimum diversa, unus
tamen hic sensus, Te musis esse musam, and almae Academiae Altorem inexhaustum.
Fuere haec temporis ante acti monumenta, sederunt Tui. Thesaurum historicum
nobis nunc transmittendo, meruisti Historiam; duplicat enim eximii hujus
beneficii charitatem tumultuosa rerum praesentium difficultas; quae cum aegre
permittat scribendi otium aut legendi, loquendi otium aut tacendi insuperabili
vestrae benefaciendi solertiae locum and consilii spatium relinquit. Quicquid
in sinum Academiae congeris, in tuto collocatum existimas; opinamur and nos
extra fortunam id esse positum; non quia nobis datur, sed quia datur, quia
merces tantorum operum immortali cista reconditur. Nos interim quia in spem
Ecclesiae nutrimur, ejusdem fato convoluimur: Seminario non parcet manus, quae
odit hortum, and minatur Hortulano. Si in lubrico stet ille, venerandissimus
ille, quo rectior non stat regula, quo prior est corrigenda Religio, number ulla
erit nobis sub umbra tua latentibus fiducia? Cerie sine Ecclesia, sine Te,
salutem sperare non possumus: Solatium nolumus, non tenet nos incolumitatis
nostrae tam turpis avaritia, tam pusillanimis complacentia. Eia lubentiores
pereamus omnes, quam vivamus hanc mortem, ex arbitrio pendere furentium.
Postquam supervenit infoelix ille dies, quando nihil erit invisius fidelissimis
Dei Ministris, nihil periculosius innocentia, and vitio vertetur nimia
integritas, nimium viximus. Malum istud, quod piget ominari, long avertat
Deus, and popularem compescat furorem qui sedat fluctus marinos. Nobis ad latus
tibi claudendum stipante satellitio prompt a sunt men's ac membra: Sed men's per
omnia intervalla praesentior. Hac ergo validissima superiorum agmina, densasque
votorum Phalangas ordinabimus, exercebimus, Praelio committemus; in Coelum
acriter figentes oculum, tendentes manum, de genu pugnantes; ut una cum
reliquis Dono-datis, perfruamur hoc dono maximo, Te Datroc.

E Domo nostrae Convocationis, November. 10. 1640. Sanctitatis vestrae
devotissima Cultrix, Academ. Oxon.


WIthin the Precincts of the University I cannot hear of any one A Search for
Arms in Recusants Houses.
Convicted Recusant: Yet I am resolved to morrow to desire the Mayor to go
along with me to view and search all Recusants Houses, what Munition or Arms
they have.

November 23. 1640. Chapter Potter.


I Am very glad to hear from you, that you know of no Convicted Recusant in
Oxford: Yet you shall do very well to make the Search which you mention. It
will be a very good Justification both of your self and the Place.

November 27. 1640. W. Cant.


IN our Visit (Mr. Mayor's and mine on Tuesday last) of our Recusants Houses,
we found nothing that was like to Arms, only in Mr. Napper's of Holy-Well,
Furniture for one Light Horse, with which he is charged. In other Houses, (most
of them poor, mean Persons, seven or eight in all) here a Pistol, and there a
Sword rusty, and elsewhere a Birding-Piece; so we are safe enough from them.
God keep us from the Scots. In that View I found two Convicted: One here below
Eastgate, a sorry laboring Mason. The other, one Mr. Hunt, by the Castle, a
Stranger; staying here only a while in a House of his own, till he can find
some Brewer to take it, being fit for that purpose, and standing void.

November ult. 1640. Chapter Potter.


I Thank you for your Pains in your Search for Arms among Recusants, and am
glad you find all so safe, and them so unfurnished. As for Mr. Hunt, if he be a
Stranger, the sooner the Town is rid of him, the better.

For the Confirmation of your Endowments upon your Professors and Confirmation
of the Lecturers Endowments by Parliament.
Orators, you shall do well when the great Businesses are more over, (for till
then it will not be intended) to move for Confirmation in Parliament. And in
the mean time it may be very for you fit to prepare a Bill by some good
Council, which may contain them all in one, if it may be.

It is true, you write that most Colleges have upon Christmas Day a
Christmas-day's Morning Sermon put to the Afternoon.
Sermon and a Communion in their private Chapels, and by that means cannot come
to the public Sermon of the University at Christ-Church. And whereas you write
farther, that some have wished, that in regard of this the Morning Sermon for
the University might be put off This was concluded by a general consent of the
Heads, December. 7th. 1640.
to the Afternoon (as it is upon Easter Day for the like occasion) I for my
part think the motion very good, it being a day of Solemn Observation. Yet I
would have it proposed to the Heads, and then that which you shall do by
public Consent shall very well satisfy me.

Lambeth, Dec. 4. 1640. W. Cant.


MR. Wilkinson complained in Parliament against the Vice Chancellor, The
Censure of Mr. (...) Sermon complained of in Parliament.
for Censuring of his Sermon. The Vice Chancellor, according to the Command of
the Committee for Religion in the House of Commons, sent up the Copy of
Wilkinson's Sermon, and his Exceptions against it upon Tuesday December 8th,
the time appointed for the Committee. But the Carrier's late coming in hindered
the delivery for that time; but it was delivered the next Morning by Dr. Baylie.

W. Cant.


WHereas upon Enquiry made by Dr. Frewen, late Vice Chancellor No
University-Man suspected of Popery.
of Oxford, in two several Assemblies of the Heads of Houses there, none of
them could inform him of any University-Man, whom he knew or probably suspected
to be a Papist, or Popishly affected: Notwithstanding which Care of the
Governors, and clearness of the University, it could not be avoided but some
Persons suggestions should be put up to the High Court of Parliament, as if
Mass were ordinarily said in the University, and frequented by Vniversity-Men
without any Control of the Governors there.

We therefore the present Vice Chancellor and the Heads of Houses, for the
better clearing of our University from such foul Imputations, have thought fit
under our Hands to testify, That we are so far from conniving at the
Celebration of Mass here, or knowing of any such Matter, that we neither know,
nor can probably suspect any Member of our University to be a Papist, or
Popishly addicted.

In witness whereof we have Subscribed, December. 4. 1640.

Christo. Potter, Vice-Chancel. Oxon.

Not. Brent, Prefect. Coll. Mert.

To. Kettle, President of Trin. Coll.

Jo. Prideaux, Rector Coll. Oxon and S. T. P. Regius.

Jo. Wilkinson, Aul. Magd. Princ.

Samuel Radclif, Coll. AEr. Nas. Princ.

Jo. Tolson, Coll. Oriel. Praepos.

Paul Hood, Rector Coll. Lincoln.

A. Frewen, Pres. Coll. Magd.

Rich. Baylie, Praesid. S. John.

Tho. Clayton, Coll. Pembr. Magr. Med. Prof. Reg.

Tho. Lawrence, Magist. Coll. Bal.

Fran. Mansel, Coll. Jesu Princ.

Tho Walker, Universit. Mr.

Gilbert Sheldon, Ward. of All Souls Coll.

Daniel Escott, Ward. of Wadh. Coll.

Guil. Strode, Eccl. Christ. Subdec.

Adam Airay, Princip. of Edmond-Hall.

To. Newlin, Praes. Coll. Corp. Christ.

Rich. Zouch, Aul. All. Princip.

Philip. Parsons, Aul. Cervin. Princip.

John Saunders, Aul. Mur. Princ.

Degory Wheare, Princ. Glouc. Hall.

P. Allibond, Proct. Sen.

N. Greaves, Proct. Jun.

The other Headsof Houses were not in Town when this was Subscribed.

MY Present Condition is not unknown to the whole World, yet by Resignation of
the Chancellorship, in a Letter to the University.
few pitied or deplored; The righteous God best knows the Justice of my
sufferings, on whom both in life and death I will ever depend: the last of
which shall be unto me most welcome, in that my life is now burdensome unto me,
my mind attended with variety of sad and grievous thoughts, my soul continually
vexed with anxieties and troubles, groaning under the burden of a displeased
Parliament, my name aspersed and grossly abused by the multiplicity of Libellous
Pamphlets, and my self debarred from wonted access to the best of Princes, and
it is Vox Populi that I am Popishly affected. How earnest I have been in my
Disputations, Exhortations, and otherwise to quench such sparks, lest they
should become Coals, I hope after my death you will all acknowledge; yet in the
midst of all my afflictions there is nothing more has so nearly touched me as
the remembrance of your free and joyful acceptance of me to be your Chancellor,
and that I am now shut up from being able to do you that Service which you
might justly expect from me. When I first received this honor I intended to
have carried it with me to my Grave; neither were my hopes any less, since the
Parliament (called by his Majesty's Royal Command) committed me to this Royal
Prison. But since (by reason of matters of greater consequence yet in hand) the
Parliament is pleased to procrastinate my Trial, I do hereby as thankfully
resign my Office of being Chancellor, as ever I received that Dignity,
entreating you to Elect some Honorable Person, who upon all occasions may be
ready to serve you; and I beseech God send you such an one as may do all things
for his glory, and the furtherance of your most famous University. This is the
continual Prayer of,

Tower, June 28. 1641. Your dejected Friend and Chancellor, Being the last time
I shall write so, W. Cant.


FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO THE SPEECH OF The Right HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord Viscount Say and
Seal, etc. SPOKEN IN PARLIAMENT, Upon the BILL about BISHOPS POWER in CIVIL
AFFAIRS, AND COURTS of JUDICATURE, Anno 1641. By the Most Reverend WILLIAM LAUD
Archbishop of Canterbury, Then Prisoner in the TOWER. Non apposui ultimam
manum, W. CANT.
Archbishop LAVD's ANSWER TO THE Lord Says SPEECH Against the BISHOPS.
THIS Speech is said to have done the Bishops, their Calling, and their present
Cause a great deal of harm, among the Gentry, and diverse sober-minded Men: and
therefore I did much wonder that so many learned Bishops, present in the House
to hear it, should not, (some of them) being free and among their Books, so
soon as it was printed, give it Answer, and stop the venom which it spits from
poisoning, so many at least, as it is said to have done; especially that Bishop
who stands named in the Margin, and against whom in particular the Speech was
in part directed, should (as I conceive) to vindicate himself, as well as the
Cause, have taken this task upon him. But since I see all Men silent, and the
Speech go away in triumph, as if it were unanswerable truth, though the Bill be
now past, and the Bishops with their Votes cast out of the House, and from all
Civil Employment, yet I thought it fit, if not necessary, to call this Speech
to an account in every passage, and with all due respect approve what is just,
and give the rest such an Answer as it deserves. And though you may think this
Answer comes too late, as indeed it does to remedy the present Evil, yet I have
thought fit to go on with these my Endeavors, that if these miserable
distracted times have an end (which I have no hope to live to see) the Errors
of this Speech may appear, and the Bishops perhaps recover their ancient
Rights. If not (as I confess it is very hard in England) that yet the World may
see how unjustly they suffered, and with what misguided Zeal this Lord has
fallen upon the Church, as indeed he has done in all kinds. And I pray God
something fall not therefore upon Him and His. The Speech then begins thus:

My Lords,

I shall not need to begin as high as Adam in answer to what has been drawn
down from thence by a The Bishop of Lincoln.
Bishop concerning this Question, for that which is pertinent to it, will only
be what concerns Bishops, as they are Ministers of the Gospel: What was before,
being of another Nature, can give no Rule to this.

Whether this Reverend Bishop, now Lord Archbishop of York, did begin his
Speech as high as Adam, I cannot tell, nor what proof he made after such
beginning; for I was committed long before this Speech was made: but if he did
bring it down from Adam, I think there may be good Reason for it. For it will
appear, for the two thousand years before the Law, and for two thousand years
more under the Law of Moses, that the Priests, especially the High and Chief
Priests, did meddle in all the great Temporal Affairs, which fell out in their
times.

And first for the time before the Law, it is manifest, and received by all Men,
that the Sacerdotium (...) ante Legem, apud Colentes Deum, secundum humanam
determinationem, qui hanc dignitatem Primogenitis attribuebant. Tho. 1. 2. q.
103. (...) 1. ad 3. Ante tempus veteris Legis non erant determinati Ministri
(...) cultus, sed dicitur, quod Primogeniti erant Sacerdotes, qui duplicem
portionem accipiebant. Tho. 2.2. q. 87. a 1. ad 3. And it is irresragably
manifest by the Lord's Commands to Moses, that he should take the Levites
instead of the Firstborn, Numb. 3. 45. Why instead of the Firstborn, if the
Firstborn did not perform the Public Service of the Lord before that time?
Primogenitus, the Firstborn was Priest, and the Firstborn in the Prime and
Leading Families, were as the Chief-Priests in their several Generations: and
it is more than absurd to think that all these Prime Men in their several
Families first, and Tribes after, being Priests, should be estranged from all
their Civil and Temporal Affairs, and leave them in the hands of Younger and
Weaker Men. And as before the Law there is no express Text for this their
forbearance to help to manage Civil Affairs, so neither can there any
sufficient Reason be given why they should abstain. Neither did they. For
instance, Abraham was a Priest, and a great one, for he was a Patriarch, Heb.
7. 4. And his Priesthood appears in that he was the first Minister of the
Sacrament of Circumcision. Genesis 17. 23. and yet he managed his Family, and
trained up his Servants in that which is most opposite to the Priestly
Function, even for War. Nay took them, and went in Person against five Kings,
and redeemed his Kinsman Lot by the Sword, Genesis 14. 14, 16. And Melchisedeck,
who is expressly called the Priest of the high God, was King of Salem also: a
Genesis 14. 18. Heb. 7. 1.
King and a Priest too, so both capable by one Person. And as he received
Tithes as a Priest, so no doubt can be made but he ordered and governed Civil
Affairs as a King. Before these Noah was a Priest, and offered Sacrifice, Genesis
8. 20. and yet all the great care and trouble of building the Ark, and managing
the preservation of the whole World, was committed to him by God himself, and
undertook by him, Genesis 6.

Under the Law the Case comes under fuller and clearer Proof. And in the first
entrance Moses himself was Saccrdos Sacerdotum, the Man that consecrated Aaron,
Exodus 40. 13. and after reckoned with (...) Levit. 8. 1.
among the Priests of God, Psalm. 99.6. and yet the whole Princely Jurisdiction
resided in him all his days. But God commanded him to settle the Priesthood
upon Aaron, to teach the World that few Men's Abilities were fit for the
Height of both those Places, since Moses himself was ordered to ordain Aaron,
and divide the Burden. After this division the High Priest did meddle in Civil
Affairs, even the greatest, as well as Moses continued his Care of the
Synagogue. In the numbering of the People for War, a thing of sole Imperial
Cognizance, if any, Aaron was joined in Commission with Moses by God himself,
to number them by their Armies; and they did it, Numb. 1. 3. 17. 44. In the
ordering of the Standards and Ensigns of the Children of Israel in their
removes from place to place, God's own Command came alike to Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 2. 1, 2. the Silver Trumpets to call the Assemblies of the People
together did belong to Moses, the People had nothing to do with them; nor might
they tumultuously assemble, but orderly, as the Sound of the Trumpets directed
them; but the Priests, the Sons of Aaron were to sound them, Number. 10. 8, 9,11.
And this Duty lay upon them as well when they went to War, as when they
sacrificed. In the Survey of the Land of Promise Aaron was interessed as well
as Moses: And this appears plainly, First, in that when the Spies (all save
Joshua and Caleb) had brought up an evil Report upon the Land, the People fall
into a Murmuring, and were as mad against Aaron as against Moses, Numb. 14. 2,
5. Secondly, because when the Land of Promise came to be divided among the
Tribes, no Spiritual business was it, and yet in the Commission which Moses
gave for the solemn Division of the Land, both to Reuben, Gad, and the half
Tribe of Manasses on the one side of Jordan, and on the other side to the other
Tribes, and to all the Princes of the several Tribes of Israel, Eleazar the
Priest was first and principal, Numb. 32. 2, 28. and 34.17. even before Joshua
himself: and that not only here during Moses his life, but even after, at the
actual Division of the Land to every Tribe, though Joshua was then the Leader
of the People, Josh. 19. 51. In the great Murmuring of the People at Kadesh,
for want of Water, which was like enough to break out into an Insurrection, the
Commission which God himself gave out to gather the Assembly together, and to
satisfy the People with Water out of the Rock (a harder thing for Moses to do
when he looks upon the People, than for God when he looks upon the Rock) went
jointly to Moses and Aaron, Numb. 20. and they performed it accordingly.

Thus far it went, and in all these great Particulars in Aaron's Life time; as
if God would give a pattern in the first High Priest under the Law, what his
Successors in some Cases might, and in some must do in great and Civil
Affairs. And not so only, but to instruct the Successors of Moses also what
value they should put upon Aaron and his Successors, if they will follow the
way which God himself prescribed, and which has been taken up and followed in
all well governed Kingdoms, as well Christian as Heathen, till this very time
that this ignorant boisterous Faction has labored to bear sway, as a They
would have Clergymen not admitted, or very sparingly to Matters of State,
contrary to the practice of all well governed Commonwealths and of our own
till these late Years. Geo. Cranmer, Epist. to Mr. Hooker. p. 13.
learned Countryman of ours has observed. And therefore though God set the
pattern in Aaron, yet he continued it farther, to show (as I conceive) that his
Will was it should continue. For no sooner was Aaron dead, but his Son Eleazar
succeeded in all those great Civil employments, as well as in the Priesthood.
For when the People of Israel were come into the plain of Moab near Jerico, and
were ready to enter into the Land of Promise, God himself joined Eleazar with
Moses for the numbering of all the People that were found fit for War, which
they were to expect at their entrance into Canaan, Numb. 26. 1, 3. In the
difficult point of Inheritance for the Daughters of Zelophehad, when they came
and demanded right of Moses, their demand was made to him and Eleazar, and the
Princes of the Congregation, Numb. 27. 2. which they would not have done had
not Eleazar had a Vote in that Judicature with Moses and the Princes. And no
less than God himself commanded Moses to declare Joshua to be his Successor in
the presence of the Congregation, Josh. 17. 4. And orders farther that Joshua
shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, and that Eleazar shall ask Counsel for
him after the Judgment of Vrim before the Lord. Numb. 27. 18, 19, 23. Now I
would fain know of this Lord, whether Eleazar might give Joshua the Counsel
which he asked of God for him. If he might not, why did God appoint him to ask
it for Joshua? If he might, then he might give Counsel in Temporal Affairs, for
so runs the Text about the War to be had with the Canaanites. At Eleazar's word
they should go out, and at his word they should come in, both Joshua and all
the Children of Israel.

Phineas the Son of Eleazar, but Priest too, though not High Priest till after
his Father's Death, was employed by Moses in the War against the Midianites,
Numb. 31. 6. and the Trumpets put into his Hands. After the Victory over them,
the Captains and the Spoil were brought to Moses, Eleazar, and the chief
Fathers of the Congregation to divide them, v. 12, 26. and an express Law
ordained, that if there be a matter too hard for them in Judgment, (I pray mark
it, it is between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between stroke and
stroke; these are no Ecclesiastical Matters, I trow,) that they should go unto
the Priests, the Levites, and to the Judges that shall be in those days, Deuteronomy.
17. 8, 9. and he that will not hearken unto the Priest and Judge shall die, v.
12. Was the Priest here excluded from all Temporal affairs? Nay, was he
excluded from any, when his Judgment was required between Blood and Blood? Nay,
the Geneva Note adds here, Annot. in Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
that the Judge was to give Sentence as the Priests counsel him by the Law of
God; which gives the Priest a greater power than the Judge, since he was to
follow the Priest's Direction, and Confer. with Heart, c. 6. Divis. 2. p. 203.
Dr. Raynolds tells us very learnedly, that this Law was made to establish the
highest Court of Judgment among that People, in which all harder Causes both
Ecclesiastical and Civil should be determined without farther Appeal. When the
People made War and came nigh unto the Battle, the Priest was to approach and
speak unto them; and when he had done, the Officers were to speak to them
likewise; which must needs imply that the Priests which were present were not
strangers to some at least of the Counsels of the War, Deuteronomy. 20. 2, 5. and the
whole Law, the Judicial as well as the rest, was delivered by Moses, after he
had written it, unto the Priests the Sons of Levi, and unto all the Elders of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. so was the Priest trusted with the Custody and in the
discussing of the Law, and (as is before mentioned.) Eleazar had his Hand in
distributing the Land of Canaan to the several Tribes, as well as Joshua, and
the other Elders of Israel, Josh. 14. 1.

Nay though this were not ordinary and usual; yet Eli was so far trusted with
and employed in Temporal Affairs, as that being High Priest, he was also Judge
over Israel forty Years, 1 Samuel 4. 18. and after him Samuel a Levite Judged
Israel, and no Man better. Yea, and after the Captivity of Babylon also, for
well near five Hundred Years, the Priesthood had the greatest Stroke in the
Government; as under the Maccabees, and they did all that belonged unto them
very worthily, and it pleased God to make that Family very victorious. After
Samuel, when that People had Kings to Govern them, in that great and most
unnatural Conspiracy of Absalom against his Father David, in that great
distress, Hushai was ordered by David to return and mix himself with the
Counsels of Absalom, and to impart all things to Zadoc and Abiathar the
Priests, that by them and their Sons, David might come to know what was useful
or necessary for him to do, 1 Samuel 15. 27. 32. 35. and Hushai's making no
scruple nor reply to this, makes it clear that Zadoc and Abiathar were formerly
trusted with David's Counsels, and that Hushai had observed them to be prudent
and secret. And when David was old, he called a kind of Parliament for the
settling his Son Solomon in the Kingdom. To that great Assembly he gathered
together all the Princes of Israel, with the Priests and the Levites, 1 Chronicles.
23. 1, 2. so far was he from turning their Votes out of the House of that great
Consultation, that Six Thousand of them were by the Wisdom of that Senate made
Officers and Judges throughout the Kingdom, v. 4. and this was done on both
sides of Jordan in all businesses of the Lord, and in the Service of the King,
1 Chronicles. 26. 30, 32. In the beginning of Solomon's Reign, Abiathar the High
Priest was in all the great Counsels of that State, but falling into the
Treason of Adonijah, he was deprived by Solomon, and Zadock made High Priest in
his Room, 1 King. 2. 27, 35. And when Jehosaphat repaired the decays of that
State, he set the Priests and the Levites in their right places again,
according to that Law in Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. and restored to them that Power in
Judicature which was by God's appointment settled in them, 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. And
that he had relation to that Law is manifest, because he pitches almost upon
the same words, v. 10. as Conf. with Heart, c. 6. Divis. 2. p. 203.
Dr. Raynolds has observed before me. And Jehoiada the High Priest was the
preserver of Joash, the right Heir of the Crown, against the Usurpations of
Athaliah; and when he had settled him in his Kingdom, though not without Force
of Arms, and they also ordered by Jehoiada, 2 Chronicles. 23. 8. he was inward in
his Counsels, and was ruled by him in his Marriage, 2 Chronicles. 24. 2. and he died
with this Testimony, that this young King did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, all the days wherein Jehoiada instructed him, 2 King. 12. But
after his Death you may read what befell Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24. In all the Conduct
of this People out of Egypt, in which many Temporal Businesses did occur, Aaron
was joined with Moses in and through all. Thou leadest thy People like sheep
(says the Prophet, Psalm. 77.) by or in the Hand of Moses and Aaron. The
Prophet David was a great Shepherd himself, and knew very well what belonged to
leading the People; and you see he is so far from separating Aaron from Moses
in the great work of leading the People, that though they be two Persons, and
have two distinct Powers, yet in regard the one is subordinate and subservient
to the other, they are reputed to have but one Hand in this great Work. And
therefore in the Original, and in all the Translations which render it, it is
said in Manu, not in Manibus, in the Hand, not in the Hands, of Moses and
Aaron. So necessary did God in his Wisdom think it, that Aaron should be near
about Moses in the Government of his People. And as the Priests and Levites
were great Men in the great Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, so were two of them ever in
all the lesser Sanhedrims in the several Cities of every Tribe, for so
Oppidatim praesint septem viri probatae virtutis and justitiae cultores: (...)
Magistratibus attribuantur duo Ministri de Tribu Levitica. Joseph. l. 4. Antiq.
c. 8.
Josephus witnesses expressly, that two of them were ever allotted to each
Magistracy. Jeroboam's Sin it was, and a great one, to make the lowest of the
People Priests, 1 King. 12. 13. and I pray God it be not the Sin of this Age to
make the Priests the lowest of the People.

So by this I think it appears, that nothing of like Antiquity can well be more
clear, than that four thousand years before and under the Law, the Priests,
especially the chief Priests did meddle in, and help manage the greatest
Temporal Affairs. And this, as this Honorable Person cannot but know, so I
presume he was willing warily to avoid. For he tells you he shall not need to
begin so high. Not need? And why so? Why, it is because (says he) the Question
is only what concerns Bishops as they are Ministers of the Gospel, and that
which was before being of another Nature can give no Rule to this. No Man
doubts but this Question in Parliament belongs only to Bishops as they are
Ministers of the Gospel, nay more particularly than so, as they are Ministers
of the Gospel in the Church of England only. For either this must be said, or
else granted it must be by this Honorable Lord, that the Parliament of England
takes upon them to limit Episcopacy through all the Christian World, and to
teach all States therein, what they are to do with their Bishops. And this were
as bold a part for the English Parliament to do, as it is for a private
Englishman to censure the Parliament. And truly, for my own part, I cannot
tell how to excuse the Parliament in this. For though in the Act Feb. 15.
1641/2.
now past there be nothing enacted but that which concerns Bishops, and such as
are in Holy Orders here, because their Power stretches no farther than this
Kingdom, yet their Aim and their Judgment is general. And this appears by the
Preface of that Act, which runs thus. Whereas Bishops, and other Persons in
Holy Orders, ought not to be entangled with Secular Jurisdiction, etc. Ought
not: Therefore in their Judgment it is Malum per se, a thing in it felf unlawful
for any Man in Holy Orders to meddle in, or help manage Temporal Affairs. For
though their words be, Ought not to be entangled (which as that word entangled
bears sense in English, and stands for an absolute hindering of them from the
works of their own Calling, I grant as well as they) yet the Act proceeds
generally to divest them of all Power and Jurisdiction in Civil Affairs,
whether they be entangled with them or not.

But be it so, that this Question belongs to Bishops only as they are Ministers
of the Gospel, yet why may not the Ancient Usage before the Law, and the Law of
God Himself give a Rule to this? For sure, if they can give no Rule in this,
then can they give no Rule to any thing else under the Gospel, that is not
simply Moral in it self, as well as none to Prelates, and their assisting in
Temporal Affairs. Which Opinion how many things it will disjoynt both in Church
and State is not hard to see. First then, I shall endeavor to make it appear,
that the practice of pious Men before the Law, and the Precept of the Law, can
give a Rule to many things under the Gospel; and then I will examine how, and
how far those things may be said to be of another Nature, which is the Reason
given why they can give no Rule in this.

For the First, that they can give a Rule, I hope it will appear very plainly.
For in things that are Typical, the Type must praefigure the Antitype, and give
a kind of Rule to make the Antitype known: Therefore in Typical things no
Question is or can be made, but that the things which were under the Law can
give a Rule to us Christians. Though this bold Proposition runs universally,
without excepting things Typical or any other. Besides, the Priests had a hand
in all Temporal Affairs, and in matters which were no way Typical, but merely
belonging to Order and Government, as appears by the Proofs before made. And
therefore the Jews may be Precedents for Christians, which could not possibly
be if they could give us no Rule. Nor is this any new Doctrine. For that
ancient Commentary under the Name of St S. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 14.30. Traditio
Synagogae est quam nos vult sectari.
Ambrose tells us expressly, that that which is mentioned by St. Paul, 1 Cor.
14. 30. is a Custom of the Synagogue which he would have us to follow. And as
this Doctrine is not new, so neither is it refused by later Writers, and some
of them as Learned almost as this Lord. For that which was ordered, 1 Chronicles.
23. 30. that they should stand every Morning and Evening to thank and praise
the Lord, is precedent enough to presume that the like is not against the Law
of God. And Calv. in Act. 3. 1.
Calvin speaks it out expressly. In regard (says he) that God himself
instituted that they should offer Sacrifice Morning and Evening, inde
colligitur, it is thence collected plainly, that the Church cannot want a
certain Discipline. So here the Jews Discipline gives an express Rule to us.
And it is very learnedly and truly observed by a late Writer Her. Thorn. dike,
Epistle to the Reader before his Tract of Religious Assemblies.
of Ours. That there is no such Light to the true meaning of Scripture, as the
Practice of matters contained in it under the Synagogue, and in the Church
afterward. Now what Light can we possibly receive from the Synagogue, if those
things which were before can give no Rule to us? Besides, for ought I know of
this Lord's Religion, he may brand all the Old Testament as deeply as the
Manichees did of old, or go very near it, if it can give no Rule, and so be of
no use to Christians. S. Aug. contra Faustum.
St. Augustine was of another Mind through all his Books against Faustus the
Manichee. And S. Aug. lib. 6. Confess. c. 4. Vetera Scripta Legis and
Prophetarum, tanquam Regulam dillgentissime commendavit Ambrosius in
popularibus Sermonibus.
St. Ambrose most expressly, and very frequently recommended this, tanquam
Regulam, as a Rule to the People. And in this very Case of Episcopacy, Clem.
Ep. ad Corinth. p. 52, 53.
Clemens Romanus tells us, There is a kind of Parallel between Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, in the one, and High Priests, Priests and Levites in
the other Church. And Quod Aaron and filii (...), atque (...) in Templo
fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri atque Diaconi vendicant in Ecclesia. S.
Hier. Ep. ad Evagr.
St. Jerome speaks it out, that such as Aaron and his Sons, and the Tribe of
Levi were in the Temple, the same are Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in the
Church of Christ. And this they might justly challenge to themselves, and make
it a Rule.

But it is time to proceed to other Particulars. In the Case of Tithes we find
that they were due Jure Divino, by Divine Right, to the Priests under the Law,
and some were paid before the Law, no Man doubts; but many will not grant that
there is any Divine Right, commanding or ordering them to be paid to the
Priests under the Gospel. Yet this is undeniable that Tithes have been paid to
the Ministers under the Gospel, in all or most parts of Christendom, for many
Hundreds of Years together; and God be thanked the Payment continues yet in
some Places. What was it then, if not Divine Right, that gave the Rule to
Christians for this kind of Payment, but the Practice before the Law and the
Precept under it? Shall we say here, as this Lord does, That what was before
can give no Rule to this. Now God forbid. The whole Christian World thought
otherwise.

And whatsoever becomes of the Controversy about Tithes, yet this is certain,
that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to have a liberal and free Maintenance.
Men, whom they serve in and for Christ, must not open their Mouths too often to
preach, and muzzle them whom they should feed. And the Rule for this is given
by the Law, for it is written in the Law of Moses. Thou shall not muzzle the
Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen, or says
he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, 1 Cor.
9. 9. And yet how many of these Oxen are poorly shuted, and in a manner
muzzel'd, is evident enough. How comes this to pass? How? Why surely, the
Apostle St. Paul was utterly deceived here, ask my Lord else; for he proves
this point of their Maintenance, because it is so written in the Law of Moses,
whereas that Law which was before can give no Rule to this.

Again, The Lord himself has ordained (so says St. Paul, v. 14.) that they
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Not starve by the Gospel,
but live upon it; live plentifully and decently. But by what Rule did the Lord
himself proceed in this? If his Will had been his Rule, no Rule so strait, it
could not but have been just. But St. Paul tells us there, v. 13. that God
himself proceeded by another Rule, Do ye not know (says he) that they which
minister about Holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they which
wait on the Altar are partakers with the Altar? (...), -- even so has the Lord
ordained. Just so: That as the Priests and Levites under the Law, did wait on
the Altar and live by it, so must they who preach the Gospel, by the Gospel.
Just so: Why then, how did the Priest under the Law live? It Is set down at
large, Deuteronomy. 18. 1. Numb. 10. 9. and a very full Portion they had, so full as
that they might have no Inheritance amongst their Brethren, the Lord's Portion
which was made theirs was so great, yet (...), so the Lord ordained for the
Ministers of the Gospel. Press this a little farther and 'twill come to the
quick. The Priests and Levites under the Law, besides their partaking with the
Altar, had the Tithes of all duly paid them. Will not (...) reach to this too?
If so, then it is clear in the Text, that the Lord himself ordained payment of
Tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel. For the ordained that the Ministers of
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, (...), just as the Priests under the Law
did of the Altar. I will not be peremtory in this sense of the Text, yet I
would have it well considered. And howsoever, that a free and plentiful Certain
Maintenance is the Ordinance of the Lord himself, is by this Text as clear as
the Sun. Now this Lord should do well to tell St. Paul, that either he mistook
the Lord's Ordinance, or if he did not, that then the Lord himself was mistaken
in so ordaining for the Ministers of the Gospel, because what was before can
give no Rule to this.

Farther yet, you may see the Vanity, the Nothing of this bold Assertion in
other particulars beside the Case of Tything. For if neither the State of Man
before the Law, nor the Law it self can give any Rule in things of this kind,
to us that live under the Gospel, then there is nothing in God's Law that can
give a Rule to us, but that a Man may remove his Neighbor's Landmark, he may
lead the Blind out of the way, he may smite his Neighbor so it be secretly, he
may marry in many Degrees of Consanguinity, and what may he not? For all these
and many things more are prohibited only in the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. Levit. 18. But
that going before can give no Rule to these. Now the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
10. 6, 11. That those things were our Examples, and written for our admonition.
And he speaks of things before and under the Law. And more generally, Romans 15.
4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning.
Now, learn well and certainly we cannot, but by Rule; and therefore most
manifest it is, that those things which were before, can give us Rules,
whatsoever is here said to the contrary.

Two things there are which work much with me, why this Lord should say that
the things which were before and under the Law can give no Rule in this: And if
not in this, then not in things like to this. The one is the Power which Kings
have in their several Dominions over the external Government and Polity of the
Church. The Apostle's Rule goes in the general only, Let every Soul be subject.
Romans 13. 1. But the Rule drawn down to particulars is from the the commended
Practice of the Kings of Juda under the Law. Now if these can give us no Rule,
then we have none at all brought down to particulars, wherein that Power
consists. And here this Lord being a known Separatist from the Church of
England (as appears most manifestly by another Speech of his Lordship's in
Parliament, and printed with this) separates, I doubt, from her Doctrine too,
and will not, (could he speak out with safety) allow Kings any Power at all in
Church Affairs, more than to be the Executioners to see the Orders of their
Assemblyes executed, in such things as they need the Civil Sword. And therefore
he does wisely in his generation, to say, That the things which were before can
give no Rule in this.

The other is, that there is of late a Name of Scorn fastened upon the Brethren
of the Separation, and they are commonly called Roundheads, from their Fashion
of cutting close and rounding of their Hair: A Fashion used in It is (...) the
Graecians did wear long Hair, and therefore Homer calls them (...), Capite
(...) Achivos, L. 2. Iliad. And Eustathius, (...) upon that place, says, they
wear it long at other times, but cut it in the time of Sorrow. And Achilles and
his Company. cut off their Hair, and cast it upon the dead Body of Patroclus to
cover it. Homer. l. 23. Il. And at the Funerals of Achilles, the Graecians are
said to shed warm Tears (...) -- and to have cut their Hair. Homer. l. 24. Od.
That the Romans wore their Hair long, is evident by Varro, who says that
Barbers were not known in Italy before the year 454, post U. C. About that time
Ticinius Menas brought them in. Varro, L. 2. de Re Rust. c. ult. And that they
did cut their Hair at Funerals, is plain in Andreas Tiraquel. -- Romani in
aliis luctibus quam funerum Capillum Barbantque promittebant. Annot. in Alex.
ab Alex. l. 3. c. 7. But then they cut them. And when this rounding went (...),
indeed it came somewhat near Baldness; which the Jews were likewise forbidden
to make upon themselves for the Dead, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. and Jerem. 16. 6. And as
this Rounding of the Head was sometimes a sign of superstitious sorrowing, so
was it (with some difference) used as an esseminate and luxurious Fashion. And
therefore Ganimedes were said (...), circumtondere. Dio. Chrysoft. Orat. 2. de
Regno. And Harlots. After which manner they say Harlots were cut, (...). And
that it was a kind of rounding the Head, (...) in Lexico, verbo (...). Which
kind of rounding the Hair Tertullian mentions L. de Cultu Foeminatum, c. 8. and
L. de Pallio, c. 4. he objects the use of it to his Carthaginians. And in some
places, this rounding of the Head was a mark of Servitude and Vassallage, as
among the ancient French, where the King only and the Heir apparent had Jus
Capilitii, in token of his (...), and the rest were Circumtonsi. Seldom,
Praefat. to his Titles of Honor, Ex Cedreno. But whether our Roundheads do it
for Superstition, or for Luxury, or out of any Base and Servile Condition, I
cannot tell; though I think there need be little Question, but that many of
them are guilty of all three, their (...) being not a Robe large enough to hide
all of them; and some of their Conventicles have of late (...).
Paganism in the times of their Mournings, and sad occurrences, as these seem
to do, putting on in outward show at least a sour Look and a more severe
Carriage than other Men. This Fashion of Rounding the Head, God himself forbids
his People to practice, the more to withdraw from the Superstitions of the
Gentiles. Ye shall not round the Corners of your Heads, Lev. 19. 27. This
express Text of Scripture troubled the Brownists and the rest extremely; and
therefore this Lord being a great favourer of theirs, if not one himself, has
thought upon this way to ease their minds, and his own. For it is no matter for
this Text, nor for their resembling Heathen Idolaters; they may round their
Heads safely, since those things which were before can give no Rule in this.
And I do not doubt but that if this World go on, the dear Sisters of these
Rattle-heads will no longer keep silence in their Churches, or Conventicles,
since the Apostle surely is deceived, where he says that Women are not
permitted to speak in the Churches, because they are to be under Obedience, as
also says the Law, 1 Cor. 14. For the Law and those things which were before
can give no Rule in this; and therefore they shall not need to go as high as
Adam to answer this. They shall not need in this, nor we in that of Episcopacy,
go so high as Adam. But yet we may if we will, for so high the Apostle goes in
this place.

And I thank this Lord for that Liberty (if he means so well) that though we
need not go so high, yet we may if we list. And this is most certain, that any
State Christian may receive all or as much of the Judicial Law of Moses as they
please, and find fit for them; and as much of the Ceremonial as detracts not
from Christ come in the Flesh. And since all Law is a Rule, this could not be
done if those Laws being before could be no Rule to us.

This is proof enough (as I conceive) that these things which were before, can
give a Rule to us now under the Gospel. My Lord thinks not so, for this Reason,
Because they are of another Nature. Secondly, therefore the Reason comes to be
examined. Wherein I shall weigh two things. First, Whether the Law of Moses and
the Gospel of Christ are things of another Nature, and how far? And Secondly,
Whether this be universally true, that among things of another Nature one
cannot give a Rule to another.

1. For the first, I shall easily acknowledge a great deal of difference
between the Law and the Gospel. They differ in the Strictness of the Covenant
made under either: They differ in the Sacraments and Sacramentals used in
either: They differ in the Extent and Continuance of either: They differ in the
Way and Power of justifying a Sinner; and perhaps in more things than these.
And in these things in which they thus differ, and qua, as they so differ, the
Law can give no Rule to Christians; but whether these differences do make the
Law and the Gospel things of quite another Nature, (which are the words here
used) I cannot but doubt a little. First, because more or less strictness does
not vary the Covenant in Nature though it does in Grace; And so Arist. persues
it. Imperare and parere, non differunt secundum Magis and Minus, quia differunt
specie. Arist. L. 2. Polit. c. 8.
for Magis and Minus non variant speciem, More or Less in any thing does not
make a specifical Difference, and therefore not in Nature. And use of different
Sacraments do not make things to be of another Nature, where Res Sacramenti,
the Substance of the Sacrament is one and the same. And so it is here. For one
and the same Christ is the Substance of Circumcision and the Pascal Lamb, as
well as of Baptism and the Eucharist. For our Fathers under the Law, did all
cat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink; for
they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: And that Rock was Christ,
1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. And much less, can Extent or Continuance vary Nature: Not
Extent; for Fire contained in a Chimny and spread miserably over a City, is one
and the same in Nature. Not Continuance; for then a Father and his Son should
not be of the same Nature, if the one live longer than the other. And as for
the way and Power of Justification, they difference the Law and the Gospel, not
so much in their Nature as in their Relation to Christ, who alone is our
Justification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and was theirs also who lived under the Law, for
both they and we, were and are justified by the same Faith in the same Christ.

And this seems to me very plain in Scripture. For to this day (says the
Apostle) the Vail remains upon the Jews in the reading of the Old Testament,
which Vail is done away in Christ, but we all with open Face behold as in a
glass the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 14, 18. So one and the same Christ is in
the Old Testament as well as in the New. Not so plainly; but there, though
under a Vail. Now a Vail on and a Vail off, a dimmer and a clearer sight in and
by the one than by the other, do in no case make the things of another Nature.

Again; We find it expressly written Gal. 3. 24. That the Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. Our
Schoolmaster; therefore it must needs be able to give Rules unto us, or else
it can never teach us. And the Rules it gives, are very good too, or else they
can never bring us unto Christ, that we may be justified by Faith; which to do,
St. Paul here tells us is the End of the Law's Instruction. And this
Instruction it could not so fully give, if this Schoolmaster were so of
another Nature as that it could not give us a Rule in this.

Besides, the Type and the Antitype, the Shadow and the Substance, howsoever
they may be of another Nature if you look upon their Entity, yet in their
Relative Nature, as Type and Antitype, Shadow and Substance, they are of the
same Nature, and have mutual dependence either upon other, and give Rules
mutually either to other, and a Proof one of another. For a Man may take the
measure of the Body by the Shadow, and of the Shadow by the Body. And so it is
between the Law and the Gospel; the Sacrifices in the One, and Christ in the
other. For the Law had but the Shadow of good things to come, and not the very
Image of the things themselves, and therefore with those Sacrifices could make
nothing perfect, Heb. 10. 1. But Christ is the Body it self, Col. 2. 17. And
when he came into the World, he says, Sacrifice and burnt Offering thou
would not have, but a Body have thou given me, Heb. 10. 4. How shall this
appear? How? Why, by the very Rules given in the Law. For so the Prophet tells
us in the Person of Christ. In the volume of the Book it is written of me,
Psalm. 40. 7. Nay, so says Christ himself, St. Joh. 5. 46. Had ye believed Moses
ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me. And to bring all home close to
the present business; Christ, as God, of another Nature quite from Melchisedek,
yet in Relation to the Priesthood, as Type and Antitype, not so; for Christ was
Man also, and the one gave a kind of Rule to the other. For Christ was made a
Priest after the order of Milchisedek, (...): Or as Mont. reads in the Margin
Secundum Morem, according to the Form, Manner or Rule of Melchisedek's
Priesthood. And as Melchisedek and Christ are Type and Antitype in their
Priesthood, For those Priests served but to the Example, and to the Shadow,
etc. But how has he obtained a more excellent Ministry. Heb. 8. 5, 6.
so the Priesthood of Aaron under the Law, was but a shadow of the Priesthood
of Christ under the Gospel. And therefore the Priestood which is now, ought in
all Privileges to exceed that under the Law, in as much as the Antitype and the
Body is of more worth than the Type and the Shadow. I say, in all Privileges
which are not appropiated by God himself to the Priesthood of the Law.

2. Secondly, It may be considered too, whether this be universally true; that
among things which are of another Nature, one cannot give a Rule to another.
For my own part, I doubt there is not Truth in the Rule, but instead of Truth a
great deal of danger. And surely, if this be generally true, that that which
was before (being of another Nature) can give no Rule to this; that is, if that
which was both before and under the Law concerning Priesthood can give no Rule,
none at all, to the Ministry under the Gospel, then can it give no Rule in any
thing else: Because the Law is as much of another Nature, in regard of other
things, as of this. Nay, this very thing, the Priesthood, makes the Law to be
of another Nature more than any thing else. And so the Apostle plainly, Heb. 7.
12. For the Priesthood being changed, made of Necessity a change also of the
Law. But be this change, this other Nature what it will, if the Law can give no
Rule at all in this (which again is directly contrary to the Apostle 1. Cor. 9.
9, 13.) then can it no give Rule in any thing else pertaining to the Gospel.
For the Reason if it be good, holds alike, it is of another Nature.

Nay, yet farther, if this Reason be true, universally true, (as it is here
given) then it reaches to, and thorough the whole Law. No part of it can give
any Rule to Men, or things under the Gopsel. For if no Rule to things, then
none to Men, who must do or leave undone; and if so, then the Moral Law can
give no Rule to Men under the Gospel, more than the Ceremonial or the Judicial
Law. For the whole Law was before the Gospel, and here said, without any
distinction, to be of another Nature, and so unable to give a Rule. And for
ought I know this zealous Lord may be of this Opinion. For this lewd Doctrine
has been somewhat common of late among his Favorites, that Moral Honesty is
an Enemy to the Grace of Christ; that Harlots and debauched Persons are nearer
to the Kingdom of God, than they which labor to show themselves Moral Men, and
the like. As if they went to teach the People to live lewdly, and to do evil
that good may come thereof, whose Damnation the Apostle tells us is just, Romans
3. 8. Whereas Christ came not to take away the Law, but to fulfill it for us,
Mat. 5. 17. and in some measure to enable us to keep it also. And in the
Gospel, when the Scribe told our Savior, that to love God with all the Heart,
and his Neighbor as himself, (upon which Commandments hang the whole Law, S.
Mat. 22. 40.) was more than all burnt Sacrifices, our Savior did not tell him
that Harlots were nearer the Kingdom of God than he, or that this Law being of
another Nature, could give him no Rule for his Life. But quite contrary, he
told him for his Comfort, and the Comfort of Obedience, that he was not far
from the Kingdom of God, S. Mar. 12. 34. And though this be bad enough, and
will prove a fruitful Mother of all Libertinism and Profaneness, yet there is a
greater danger behind. For if the Grace of Christ under the Gospel, be a
discharge of the Moral Law, and disenable it to give a Rule, as being of
another Nature, what shall become of God the Lawgiver himself in all kinds?
For he is quite of another Nature, eminently and infinitely exceeding us, and
whatsoever is, or can be naturally in us; yea or supernaturally either. And
what now? Shall not God himself being of another Nature give us any Rule in
this or any thing else. I know this Lord will say, this is not his meaning. No
truly, I hope it is not. But then this Lord if he will needs be writing and
printing, should so express himself, as that he may not expose his words to
such unsavory Consequences as (for ought I know) may justly be gathered from
them. And let me tell him in the mean time, it is a dangerous thing to be so
busy with the Law of God; and so without distinction, as he is, lest he
entrench upon the Lawgiver before he be aware.

Howsoever, in this Proposition of his, that that which is before being of
another Nature, can give no Rule to this, leaves him at a loss which way soever
to turn himself. For since it is manifest by the Apostle in the places 1 Cor. 9.
9. 13, 14. Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10. (...) 11.
before cited, that the Law of Moses which was before, does give a Rule to
diverse things under the Gospel; this Lord of the Separation is at a loss every
way. For if the Law and that which was before be not of another Nature from
this, then his Reason is false, which says it can give no Rule because it is of
another Nature, and so he is at a loss in that. And if it be of another Nature,
yet it appears by the Apostle's practice, that for all that it can give a Rule
in this. For that which can give the Apostle a Rule, can give a Rule to us: And
so he is at a loss in the whole Proposition. For whether that which was before,
be or be not of another Nature, yet it can give a Rule.

I have been long upon this Passage, because I conceive the main Controversy
hangs and turns upon this hinge. And if any Reader think it long or tedious, or
be of this Lord's Mind, that he need not go so high for Proof, yet let him
pardon me, who in this am quite of another Judgment. And for the pardon, I
shall gratify him, by being as brief as possibly I can in all that follows.
Thus then this Lord proceeds: The Question which will lie before your Honors
in passing this Bill, is not, Whether Episcopacy (I mean this Hierarchical
Episcopacy which the World now holds forth to us) shall be taken away Root and
Branch; but, Whether those exuberant and superfluous Branches, which draw away
the Sapp from the Tree, and divert it from the right and proper use, whereby it
becomes unfruitful, shall be cut off, as they use to pluck up Suckers from the
Root.



After this Lord had told us we need not go so high for the business, he comes
now to state the present Question. Where he tells us what himself means by
Episcopacy. Namely, Hierarchical Episcopacy, such as is properly and now
commonly so called in the World. And this his Lordship adds because of that
distinction made by Beza in his Tract de Triplici Episcopatu, Divino scilicet,
Humano and Satanico. In which, what part Beza plays I will forbear to speak,
but leave him and his Gall of bitterness to the Censure of the Learned. Sir
Edw. Deering in his printed Speeches tells us, that others in milder (...). 16.
p. 122.
Language keep the same sense, and say there is Episcopus, Pastor, Praeses and
Princeps. So in his account Episcopus, Princeps and Satanicus, is all one in
milder terms. But the Truth is, that in the most learned and flourishing Ages
of the Church, the Bishops were, and were called Principes, Chief and Prime,
and Prince, if you will, in Church Affairs. For so Apices and Principes omnium.
Optat. L. adv. Parm. Princeps Ecclesiae. S. Hilar. L. 8. de Trin. Prin. Greg.
Nazianz. ascribit (...), Principatum, ad Regimen Animarum Episcopo. Orat. 17.
and 20. Quid aliud est Episcopus quam is qui omni Principatu and Potestate
superior est? in materia and gradu Religionis. Ignat. Ep. ad Trall. Principes
Ecclesiae fiunt, etc. Opus imperf. in S. Matthew. (...). 35. Principes futuros
Ecclesiae Episcopos nominavit. S. Hier. in Esai. 6. 60.
Optatus calls them the Chief, and Princes. And so likewise did diverse others
of the Fathers, even the best learned and most devout. And this Title is given
to Diocesan or Hierarchical Bishops, which doubtless these Fathers would
neither have given nor taken, had Episcopus, Princeps and Satanicus been all
one. Nor would Qued autem singulae Provinciae unum habebant inter (...)
Archiepiscopum, quod item in Nicena Synodo constituti sunt Patriarchae, qui
essent Ordine. and Dignitate Archiepiscopis Superiores, id ad Disciplinae
conservationem pertinebat. Calv. 4 Inst. E. 4.4.
Calvin have taught us, that the Primitive Church had in every Province among
their Bishops one Archbishop, and that in the Council of Nice Patriarchs were
appointed which should be in order and dignity above Bishops, had he thought
either such Bishops or Archbishops to have been Satanical: And had Beza lived
in those times, he would have been taught another Lesson. And the Truth is,
Beza, when he wrote that Tract, had in that Argument either little Learning or
no Honesty. But for this Lord, whether he means by Hierarchical Episcopacy, the
same which Beza, I will not determine. He uses a Proper word and a Civil, and I
will not purpose to force him into a worse meaning than he has, or make him a
worse Enemy to the Church (if worse he may be) than he is already. Though I
cannot but doubt he is bathed in the same Tub.

Having told us what he means by Episcopacy, he states the business thus: That
the Question is not whether this Hierarchical Episcopacy shall be taken away
Root and Branch. So then I hope this Lord will leave a Hierarchy (such as it
shall be) in the Church. We shall not have it all laid level. We shall not have
that Curse of Root and Branch ( Job. 18, 16.
for less it is not) laid upon us: Or at least not yet. But what shall follow
in time, when this Bill has used its edge, I know not. Well, if not Root and
Branch taken away, what then? What? why, it is but whether those exuberant and
superfluous Branches, which draw away the Sapp from the Tree, and divert it
from the right and proper use, whereby it becomes unfruitful, shall be cut off,
as they use to pluck up Suckers from the Root. This Lord seems to be a good
Husbandman, but what he will prove in the Orchard or Garden of the Lord, I know
not: For most true it is, that Suckers are to be plucked from the Root; and as
true, that in the prime and great Vine, there are some Branches which bear no
fruit, and our Savior himself tells us, that they which are such, are to be
taken away, St. Joh. 15. 2. And therefore I can easily believe it that in
Episcopacy, which is a far lower Vine, under and in the Service of Christ, and
especially in the husbanding of it, there may be some such Branches as this
Lord speaks of, which draw away Sapp and divert it, and make the Vine less
fruitful; and no doubt but such Branches are to be cut off. So far I agree, and
God forbid but I should. But then there are diverse other Questions to be made
and answered before this sharp Lord fall to cutting. As first, What Branches
they be which are Exuberant and Superfluous (as this Lord is pleased to call
them) What time is fittest to cut them off? Whether they be not such as with
Pruning may be made fruitful? If not, then how near to the Body they are to be
cut off? Whether this Lord may not be mistaken in the Branches which he thinks
divert the Sapp? Whether a Company of Laymen without any Order or Ordinance
from Christ, without any Example from the days of Christ, may, without the
Church, take upon them to prune and order this Vine? For, whatever this Lord
thinks in the over abundance of his own Sense, the Lord has appointed
Husbandmen to order and prune this Vine, and all the Branches of it, in his
Church, without his Usurpation of their Office: And while he uses a Bill (which
is too boisterous a Weapon for a Vine) instead of a Pruning-hook, the Church it
self which is the Vine, which bears Episcopacy, may bleed to death in this
Kingdom, before Men be aware of it. And I am in great fear, if things go on as
they are projected, that Religion is upon taking its leave of this Kingdom. But
this Lord has not quite done stating the Question, for he tells us next, That,
The Question will be no more but this, Whether Bishops shall be reduced to what
they were in their first advancement over the Presbyters (which although it
were but a Humane device for the Remedy of Schism, yet were they in those times
least offensive) or continue still with the addition of such things as their
own Ambition, and the Ignorance and Superstition of succeeding times did add
thereunto, and which are now continued for several Political Ends; things
Heterogeneal and Inconsistent with their Calling and Function as they are
Ministers of the Gospel, and thereupon such as ever have been, and ever will be
hurtful to themselves, and make them hurtful to others in the times and places
where they are continued.



Here my Lord states the Question again. He did it before under the Metaphor of
a Tree and the Branches. Here, that Men of narrow Comprehensions may not
mistake him, he lays it down in plain Terms, and tells us, the Question is no
more but this, Whether Bishops shall be reduced to what they were in their
first advancement over the Presbyters? And you may be sure they shall be
reduced if they once fall into the Hands of this Zealous Lord. Reduced out of
doubt every way, if he may have his will, saving to that which they were in the
Original, which his Lordship calls their first advancement over the Presbyters.
For my own part, if it be thought fit to reduce the Christian Church to her
first Beginnings, give us the same power, and use us with the same Reverence
for our Works sake, as then our Predecessors were used, and reduce us in God's
name when you will. But this Lord's Zeal burns quite another way. He tells us
indeed, that the Question is no more, but whether Bishops shall be reduced to
what they were in their first Advancement over the Presbyters; but he means
nothing less than their reducement thither: and this is manifest out of his own
next Words. For there he says, their first advancement was but a Humane Device
for avoiding of Schism. But a Humane Device? Why first, our Savior himself
chose twelve Apostles out of the whole number of his Disciples, and made them
Bishops, and advanced over the Presbyters, and all other believing Christians,
and gave them the Name of Bishops as well as of Apostles; as appears, since
that Name was given even to Judas also, as well as to the other Apostles, and
to the other Apostles as well as to Judas, since Matthias was chosen by God
himself, both into the Bishopric and Apostleship of Judas, Acts 1. 20, 24, 25.
Now that Christ himself did ordain the Apostles over the ordinary Disciples,
Presbyters or others, is evident also in the very Text; for he chose them out
of his S. Luke, 6. 13. (...).
Disciples, S. Luke 6. And to what end was this choosing out, if after this
choice they remained no more than they were before? Nay, he chose them out with
a special Ordination to a higher Function; as appears S. Mar. 3. where it is
said, He ordained twelve that they should be with him; that is, in a higher and
nearer Relation than the rest were. Nay more than so, the Word there used by S.
Mark is (...), he made them; he made them somewhat which before that making
they were not; that is, Apostles and Bishops. Had they been such before, it
could not have been said that he made them then. And our last Translation
renders it very well, He Ordained them: so belike this Making was a new
Ordination of them. And this appears farther by the choice of Matthias into the
Apostleship of Judas: For Eusebius. L. 1. Hist. c. 12. and L. 2. c. 1.
Matthias was one of the Seventy when he was chosen; and then this choice
needed not, if the LXX had been before of equal Place and Calling with the
Apostles. For as S. Jerome speaks, S. Hieron. Ep. ad Occan.
he that is preferred, is preferred de Minori ad Majus, from a less and a
lower, to a greater and a higher Degree. Now it is Traditio Vniversalis, the
constant and universal Tradition of the whole Church of Christ, which is of
greatest Authority next to Scripture it self, that Apud nos Apostolorum locum
tenent Episcopi; apud eos (i. e. Moutani Sectatores) Episcopus tertius est. S.
Hier. Ep. ad Marcel. adv. Montan. Patres missi sunt Apostoli, pro Apostolis
filii nati sunt, ibi constituti sunt Episcopi. S. Aug. in Psalm. 44. Sicut autem
duodecim Apostolos forman Episcoporum praemonstrare nemo est qui dubiter, sic
and hos LXXII figuram Presbyterorum, i. e. secundi Ordinis Sacerdotium
egessisse sciendum est. Beda in Luc. 10. Apostoli cognoverunt contentionem de
Nomine Episcopatus oboriturum, and ideo constituerunt praedictos, and cum
consensu Universae Ecclesiae. Clem. Ep. 1. ad Corinth. p. 57. But I am
prevented here by a Chaplain of mine, (...) Jer. Tailor, in his Book entitled
Episcopacy Asserted;. 10.
Bishops are Successors of the Apostles, and Presbyters made in resemblance of
the LXX Disciples. And so the Institution of Christ himself (for so by this
Lord's leave I shall ever take Episcopacy to be) is made but a Humane Device to
avoid Schism. But there has been so much written of late to prove Episcopacy
no Humane Device, that I will not trouble the Reader with any more of it here:
only we are thus far beholding to this Lord, that he thinks Bishops were in
those times least offensive; so belike in the Apostles times they were
offensive, though less. And this makes me doubt, he thinks as much of the
Apostles themselves, since they were so ambitious as to take on them
Superiority over their Brethren, which this great Lord of the Separation, (for
so he is) cannot endure, as being Antichristian, and therefore certainly (if he
may have his Will) will reduce the Bishops farther yet, till they be of his
Marring and not of Christ's Making.

The other part of the Question stated by this Lord, is, Or whether the Bishops
shall continue still with the additon of such things as their own Ambition, and
the Ignorance and Superstition of succeeding times, did add unto them. I would
my Lord had been pleased to tell us what those things are, which he says are
thus added unto them. I should much the better have seen what his Lordship aims
at, and been able to come up the closer to him. Now I must be forced to answer
him in general. That there are many things of Honor and Profit, which
Emperors and great Kings have conferred upon Bishops to the better Settlement
of their Calling, and the great advancement of Christianity; and for which
Bishops in all times and places, in which they have lived, have been both
thankful and very serviceable. And I could give many instances in this Kingdom
of such Services done by them, as this Lord and all his Posterity will never
equal. But what things their own Ambition or the Ignorance and Superstition of
succeeding times have added to them, I may know when this busy Lord is at
leisure to tell me. In the mean time I doubt the Piety and Devotion of these
times is here miscalled Ignorance and Superstition, while the Knowledge of
these times, in too many, is a running headlong into Sacrilege, as the best way
to cure Superstition.

But these things, what ever they be, his Lordship tells us, are now continued
for several politic Ends. Yea, and with his Lordship's favor, for several and
great Religious Ends too. But if they were continued for Politic Ends only, so
the Policyes be good and befitting Christians, I know no Reason why they may
not be continued. For, as for that which is here given by this Lord, it is
either weak or false. He says these things are Heterogeneal to their Function,
that is weak. For, it is not possible for any Priest, that is not Cloistered, to
live so in the World, as to meddle with nothing that is Heterogeneal to their
Function. And he says farther, that these things are inconsistent with their
Function; and that is false. For if these things were simply inconsistent with
Priesthood, God himself would never have made Ely both Priest and Judge in
Israel: Nor should Bertram de Polit. Jud. c. 6.
Six of each Tribe have been of the Sanhedrim, and so by Consequence Six of the
Tribe of Levi; and so the High Priest might be always one, and a chief in that
great Court, which had Cognizance of all things in that Government: And their
Functions, as they are Ministers of the Gospel, is no more inconsistent with
these things than the Levitical Preisthood was. For beside their Sacrificing,
they were to read and expound the Law, as well as we the Gospel. For so it is
expressly set down, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. They (that is, the Tribe of Levi,) shall teach
Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Laws. So that meddling with Temporal Affairs
was as great a Distraction to them from their Calling, as from ours; and as
inconsistent with it, and so as hurtful to their Consciences and their Credits.
And would God put all this upon them, which this Lord thinks so unlawful for
us, if it were so indeed? But this Lord goes yet farther, and tells us, that
these things are such as have ever been, and will ever be hurtful to
themselves, and make them hurtful to others in the times and places where they
are continued. Good God! what fools we poor Bishops are, as were also our
Predecessors for many hundred years together, that neither they nor we could
see and discern, what was and is hurtful to our selves, nor what then did, or
yet does make us hurtful to others, in times and places where they are
continued to us? And surely, if my Lord means by this our meddling in Civil
Affairs, when our Prince calls us to it (as I believe he does) I doubt his
Lordship is much deceived. For certainly, if herein the Bishops do their
Duties, as very many of them in several Kingdoms have plentifully done, they
cannot hurt themselves by it; and to others, and the very Public it self, it
has occasioned much good both in Church and State. But now my Lord will not
only tell us what these things are, but he will prove it also that they are
hurtful to us.

And these things alone ( says my Lord) this Bill takes away; that is, their
Offices and Places in Courts of Judicature, and their Employment by Obligation
of Office in Civil Affairs. I shall insist upon this to show, First, how these
things hurt themselves, and Secondly, how they have made and ever will make
them hurtful to others.

These things then you see which are so hurtful and dangerous to Bishops
themselves, and make them as hurtful to others, are their Offices, and Places
in Courts of Judicature, and their Employment by Obligation of Office in Civil
Affairs. Where, First, for Offices; I know no Bishop since the Reformation that
has been troubled with any, but only Dr. Juxon, when Bishop of London, was
Lord High Treasurer of England, for about Five Years. And he was made when the
King's Affairs were in a great strait; and, to my knowledge, he carried so,
that if he might have been left to himself, the King might have been preserved
from most of those Difficulties, into which he after fell for want of Money. As
all Kings shall be hazarded, more or less, in some time or other of their
Reign, and much the more if their Purses be empty, and they forced to seek Aid
from their Subjects. And this, as it is every where true, yet it is most true in
England.

As for Places in Courts of Judicature, the Bishops of England have ever sat
all of them in Parliament, the highest Court, ever since Parliaments were in
England. And whatsoever is now thought of them, they have in their several
Generations done great Services there: And, as I conceive, it is not only fit
but necessary they should have Votes in that great Court; howsoever the late
Act has shut them out; and that Act must in time be repealed, or it shall
undoubtedly be worse for this Kingdom than yet it is. The Bishops sat in no
other Courts, but the Star Chamber, and the High Commission. And of these the
High Commission was most proper for them to sit, and see Sin punished: For no
Causes were handled there but Ecclesiastical, and those such as were very
heinous, either for the Crime it self, or the Persons which committed it, being
too great or too wilful to be ruled by the inferior Jurisdictions. As for the
Star Chamber, there were ordinarily but two Bishops present, and it was fit
some should be there: For that Court was a mixed Court of Law, Equity, Honor
and Conscience, and was composed of Persons accordingly from the very Original
of that Court. For there were to be there two Judges to take care of the Laws,
and two Bishops to look to the Conscience, and the rest Men of great Offices or
Birth, or both, to preserve the Honor, and all of them together to maintain
the Equity of the Court. So here were but two Bishops employed, and those only
twice a Week in Term time. As for the Council Table that was never accounted a
Court, yet as Matters Civil were heard and often ended there, so were some
Ecclesiastical too. But the Bishops were little honored with this Trouble
since the Reformation: For many times no Bishop was of the Council Table, and
usually not above two. Once in King James's time I knew Three, and once Four,
and that was was the highest, and but for a short time. And certainly the fewer
the better, if this Lord can prove (that which he says he will insist upon)
that those things are hurtful to themselves, and make them hurtful to others.
And to do this he proceeds; They themselves art hurt thereby in their
Conscience and in their Credits. In their Conscience, by seeking and admitting
things which are inconsistent with that Function and Office which God has set
them apart unto.



His Lordship begins with this, That the Bishops are hereby hurt both in their
Consciences and their Credits. Two great hurts indeed, if by these things they
be wounded in their Consciences toward God, and in their Credits before Men.
But I am willing to hope these are not real but imaginary hurts, and that this
Lord shall not be able to prove it otherwise: Yet I see he is resolved to
labor it as much as he can. And first, he would prove that these things, and
not the ambitious seeking of them only, but the very admitting of them, though
offered, or in a manner laid upon some of them by the Supreme Power, are
hurtful to their Consciences, because they are inconsistent with the Function
to which God has set them apart. But I have proved already, that they are not
inconsistent with that Function, and so there is an end of this Argument. For
Bishops, without neglect of their Calling, may spend those few Hours required
of them, in giving their assistance in and to the forenamed Civil Affairs. And
it is well known that S. Augustine did both in great Perfection, so high up in
the Primitive Church, and in that Great and Learned Age: For he S. Aug. Ep. 110.
complains that he had nor Fore-noon, nor Afternoon free, he was so held to
it, Occupationibus Hominum, by the Businesses which Men brought to him; and he
desires that he may ease himself in part upon him that was at his desire
designed his Successor; to which the People expressed their great liking, by
their Acclamation. And these Businesses he dispatched with that great Dexterity
to most Men's content, Et (...) quidam causas suas saeculares apud nos finire
(...), etc. S. Aug. Epist. 147. and Amb. L. 5. Epist. 33.
that Men did not only bring their Secular Causes before him, but were very
desirous to have him determine them. Non (...) quaetere ab eo poteram quod
volebam ficut volebam, secludentibus me ab ejus Aure and Ore Catervis
Negotiorum hominum, quorum infirmitatibus serviebat. S. Aug. L. 6. Confess. c.
3. Similiter Zozomen. refert de Epiphanio, L. 6. Hist. c. 3. Et de Jacobo
quodam, Theod. L. 2. Hist. c. 30. Et de Chrysostomo, Socrat. L. 7. Hist. c. 8.
Et Constantinus communicabat cum Episcopis Consilia de Expeditione sua contra
Persas. Eusebius. L. 1. de Vita Constant. c. 35.
And S. Ambrose was in greater Employment for Secular Affairs than S. Augustine
was, for he was Bishop and Governor of Milan both at once; and was so full of
this Employment, that S. Augustine, being then upon the Point of his Conversion,
complains he could not find him at so much leisure as he would. And this,
besides many Bishops and Clergymen of great Note, who have been employed in
great Embassics, and great Offices under Emperors and Kings, and discharged
them with great Fidelity and Advantage to the Public, and without detriment to
the Church. And surely they would never have taken this Burden upon them, had
their Conscience been hurt by it, or had it been inconsistent with their
Function, or absolutely against the ancient Canons of the Church, of which they
were so conscientious and strict Observers. My Lord goes on to another Argument
and tells us; They are separated unto a special Work, and Men must take heed
how they mis-employ things dedicated, and set apart to the Service of God. They
are called to Preach the Gospel, and set apart to the Work of the Ministry;
and the Apostle says, Who is sufficient for these things? Showing that this
requires the Whole Man: and all is too little. Therefore for them to seek or
take other Offices, which shall require and tie them to employ their Time and
Studies in the Affairs of this World, will draw a Guilt upon them, as being
inconsistent with that which God does call them, and set them apart unto.



This is my Lord's next Argument: And truly I like the beginning of it very
well, and I pray God this Lord may be mindful of it when time may serve. For
surely Men ought to take heed how they mis-employ Things dedicated and set
apart to the Service of God. And therefore, as Ministers must not mis-employ
their Persons or their Times, which are dedicated to God and his Service; no
more must Laymen take away and mis-employ the Church Revenues devoutly given,
dedicated and set apart to maintain and hold up the Service of God, and to
refresh Christ in his poor Members upon Earth. And if ever a Scambling time
come for the Church Lands (as these Times hereafter must) I hope his Lordship
will remember this Argument of his, and help to hold back the Violence from
committing more Sacrilege, whereas too much lies heavy on the Kingdom already.

The rest of the Argument will abide some Examination. First then, most true it
is, that Bishops are called to Preach the Gospel, and set apart to that Work;
but whether they be so set apart, as that what Necessity soever requires it,
they may do nothing else but Study and Preach, is no great Question. For
certainly, they may in Times of Persecution labor many ways for their
Perservation, and in Times of Want for their Sustenance, and at all Times (if
they be called to it) give their best Counsel and Advice for the public Safety
of the State as well as their own.

Nor does that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Who is sufficient for these
things? hinder this at all. For though this great Calling and Charge requires
the whole Man, though all that the ablest Man can do in it, be too little (all
things simply and exactly considered) yet he that says here, None are
sufficient for these things, (for so much the Question implies) says also in
the very next Chapter, that God has made him and others able Ministers of the
New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and if able, then doubtless sufficient. And the
Greek word is the same, (...), sufficient in the one place, and (...), made us
sufficient in the other: Besides, it may be the sense of the Places will bear
it; that no Man is sufficient for the Dignity of the Office, which brings with
it the savor of Life or Death to all Men, and yet that many Men are made
sufficient by God's Grace to perform this Office; that is, to bring both the
one and the other. But howsoever, be the Office as high as it is, and be the
Men never so sufficient, yet the Function is such as cannot be daily performed
by the Priest for the Preaching part, nor attended by the People for their
other necessary Employments of Life, which made the Wisdom of God himself
command a Sabbath under the Law, and the Church to settle the Lord's Day, and
other Holy Days under the Gospel, for the Public Service and Worship of God,
and the Instruction of the People. I say, in regard of this, a Bishop or a
Priest who shall be judged fit for that Public Service, may give Counsel in
any Civil Affairs, and take upon him (if not seek) any Office temporal, that
may help and assist him in his Calling, and give him Credit and Countenance to
do the more good among his People, but not to the desertion of his Spiritual
Work. And this Lord is much deceived if he thinks all Offices do require and
tie them to employ their Time and Studies in the Affairs of this World. If they
be such Offices as do, I grant with him, that to take them (unless it be upon
some urgent Necessity) may draw a Guilt upon them: But if they be such as
Clergymen may easily execute in their empty Hours, without any great hindrance
to their Calling, and perhaps with great Advantage to it, then, out of doubt,
it can draw no Guilt upon them which take them. And this Lord in this Passage
is very cunning: For, instead of speaking of Bishops having any thing to do in
Civil Affairs, he speaks of nothing but taking of Offices. Now a Clergyman may
many ways have to do in Temporal Affairs, without taking any set Office upon
him, which shall not tie up his Time or his Studies to the Affairs of this
World, as it seems this Lord would persuade the the World all do.

Now that a Bishop or other Clergyman may lawfully meddle with some Temporal
Affairs (always provided that he (...), implicatur.
entangle not himself with them; for that indeed no Man does that Wars for
Christ as he ought, 2 Timothy 2. 4.) is, I think, very evident, not only by that
which the Priests did, and might do under the Law; but also by that which was
done after Christ, in the Apostle's time, and by some of them. To Study and
Practice Physic is as much inconsistent with the Function of a Minister of the
Gospel, as to Sit, Consult, and give Counsel in Civil Affairs: But St. Luke,
though an Evangelist, continued his Profession, as appears Colos. 4. 14. where
St. Paul says thus, Luke the beloved Physician greets you; where St. Paul would
never have called him a Physician had he left off that Calling to attend the
Gospel only. And S. Paul himself, when he might have lived on the Gospel by the
Lord's own Ordinance, 1 Cor. 9. would never have betaken himself to live by
making of Tents, Acts 18. only for a Convenience (as I conceive) that he might
work the more upon the People while he charged them not, if in so doing he had
found it a hindrance to his Preaching the Gospel: And this Lord and others, who
would not have Ministers meddle with Civil Affairs, are content, not only to
the Disgrace of the Ministry, but even of Religion it self, to hear
Felt-makers, and Iron-mongers, and Gardiners, and Brewers, Clerks, and Coachmen
preach God knows what Stuff, and countenance them in this Sacrilegious
Presumption. Nay, and are never troubled that these Men have all their time
taken up in the Affairs of the World, but rather say their Gifts are the
greater, that they are able to do both. Out of doubt they hope that their
Coachmen-Preachers shall hurry them to Heaven in some Fiery Chariot; and I my
self in time might be brought to believe it too, did I not see Phaeton setting
the Christian World on fire, but no Elias there. Nor yet will S. Paul's Example
any whit advantage them: For he was no ignorant Tradesman, but a learned
Pharisee brought up under Gamaliel, Acts 22. And it was the Custom of their
Doctors (as it is at this Day in Turkey, and many other places in the East.) to
breed up their Scholars to a Trade as well as to the Knowledge of their Law;
both that they might know the better how to spend their empty Hours honestly,
and be able to get their Living should Necessity overtake them. Now let these
bold Men show under what Gamaliel they were bred, and how they profited under
him; or that they have S. Paul's Revelation as well as his Trade, and then I Will
say more to them. But this Lord is very full in this Theme, and falls upon
another Argument.

In this respect ( says he) our Savior has expressly prohibited it, telling
his Apostles that they should not Lord it over their Brethren, nor Exercise
Jurisdiction over them, as was used in Civil Governments among the Heathen.
They were called Gracious Lords, and exercised Jurisdiction, as Lords, over
others; and sure they might lawfully do so. But to the Ministers of the Gospel
our Savior gives this Rule, It shall not be so done to you; if you strive for
Greatness, he shall be Greatest that is the greatest Servant to the rest.
Therefore in another place he says, He that puts his hand to the Plough,
and looks back to the things of this World, is not fit for the Kingdom of
God; that is, the Preaching of the Gospel, as it is usually called.

This Argument will be somewhat indeed, if it proves such as this Lord says it
is. For he says that our Savior has expressly prohibited it: and if it be so,
there is an end of the Controversy. No Question but it is utterly unlawful if
our Savior prohibited it. But where is it that he has done so? Where? Why
it is where he tells his Apostles, that they should not Lord it over their
Brethren. Not Lord it over their Brethren? that is true: Nor exercise
Jurisdiction over them? that is false, if the Proposition be general; for then
there can be no Order, no Government among Churchmen. And if it be particular,
no such Jurisdiction as was used in Civil Government among the (...), then it is
fit to weigh this place through and throughout. Well then! the Mother of
Zebedee's Children desired of Christ for her two Sons, that the one might sit
at his right hand, and the other at his left hand in his Kingdom, S. Matthew. 20.
21. Where first it appears plainly, that this was not only a piece of Feminine
Ambition, for her Sons made the suit as well as she; so S. Mark 10. 35. tells
us; and they came with her when she made it. So St. Matthew. 20. 20. And little
doubt need be made but that they set their Mother on to move it, as may appear
partly by our Savior, who says nothing to the Mother, but first puts a
Question to the Sons, which they answer, and then gives his Answer to them,
Ver. 22, 23. which (I conceive) he would not have done, had not they been in
the Business: And partly, because the other Ten Or were (...) with (...). (...);
disdained at the two Brethren for this, Ver. 24. Secondly, if it were here
meant by them, to sit at his right hand and at his left in his Kingdom in
Heaven, as may be thought not altogether improbable by the Question Christ puts
to them about his Baptism and his Cup, both preparatory to that Kingdom. And if
it be so (and so some think it is) then this Text is applied by this Lord to no
purpose, if it meddles nothing with Temporal Offices and Employments, but
relates to the Kingdom of Heaven. But if they meant by this sitting at his
right Hand and at his left, the honorable Places about him in his Earthly
Kingdom, which the Apostles sometimes fancied he should here have, as some
think, because of the other part of Christ's Answer, that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, but it shall not be so amongst you, ver.
25, 26. Then the Answer is clear, that Christ did not here forbid them the
taking of such Places upon them simply, but he forbids either an absolute
independent Power; for so (...) signifies, which takes not away Superiority
over others, so they be subject to the Prince and State. Or else the using of
such Places after the Lordly and Tyrannous Manner of some Heathens. And the
Geneva Divines in their Notes upon the Bible tell us, That the meaning of
Christ's Answer to them in these words, to sit at my right hand at my left is
not mine to give, ver. 23. is, that God the Father Annot. in St. Matthew. 20. 23.
had not given him Charge to bestow Offices of Honor here, but to be an
Example of Humility to all. So Christ came not then to give such Places; but
here is no Prohibition for the Apostles to take them at their Hands who would
give them for the good of the Church. And howsoever, if this place must be
understood of Temporal Honors and Employments, then it follows, that though
these two Apostles had not those Seats, some other of them should. For Christ
says plainly, That the sitting at his right Hand and at his left shall be given
to them for whom it is prepared by his Father. So then it shall be given to
some, and doubtless to some of the Apostles: Strangers should not be preferred
before them. And it is all one to our present Business, which of the Apostles
sat there, so some did, or were to do; and rather than yield this, his Lordship
perhaps were better grant, that this is to be understood of another Kingdom,
and that this Text meddles with no Temporal either Offices or Employments, but
that by occasion of this our Savior preaches Humility to them, yet so as still
to keep up Authority and Government in the Church, to which he applies it.

And for that other parallel Place, be ye not called Rabbi, S. Matthew. 23. 8.
that cannot prejudice all Juridiction in Men in Holy Orders; as if to meddle
with it were forbidden by Christ, or, as if it were Antichristian, as now it is
made; since it is plain that Christ there forbids neither the Title, nor the
Pre-eminence, nor the Authority, but the Vainglorious Affectation of it, ver.
5, 6. and that is a Sin indeed, no Man doubts. And it may be observed too, if
this Lord pleases, that this Precept was given to the People too, as well as to
the Disciples, ver, 1. and then, for ought I know, this Truth will come in as
strongly to pull down Temporal Lords, as Bishops; and what will his Lordship
say to that?

As for that which is added by this Lord, If ye strive for Greatness, he shall
be greatest who is the greatest Servant to the rest: Though the words differ
somewhat from the Text, yet my Lord must be content to hear, that there is a
twofold Greatness; the one in God's account, and that is Greatness indeed: And
so our Savior means it here, that he is Greatest who is the greatest Servant
to the rest, (if this Lord will needs read it so:) The other is in Man's
account, when one Man has Power and Superiority over another; and which was
that which the Apostles affected. In which case, though our Savior's Precept
be, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Servant; that is, the
more serviceable to you and the Church, the greater he is; yet these words ( it
shall not be so with you) do not deny this Authority or Greatness which one may
have over another in the Church of Christ for the necessary Government thereof,
though they neither do nor may Domineer over their Brethren. And therefore
where St. Matthew St. Matthew. 20. 26, 27.
reads it, he that will be, (...), great, and, (...), first among you; there
St. Luke has it, (...), greater, and, And St. Paul uses it for a Bishop or
Governor, Heb. 13. 1.
(...), Chief or Leader. St. Luke 22.26.
Nor does he say so as St. Matthew does, he that would be so, but, he that is,
which argues clearly, that even in our Savior's own account and Institution
too, there was then, and should be after his Ascension greater and less, such
as were to lead, and such as were to be led. No Parity, and yet no barbarous
Lording; but orderly and Christian Governing in the Church. And this must needs
be so, or else Christ lest his Church in a worse Condition, than this Lord
acknowledges the Civil Governments were among the Heathen, which he says might
lawfully govern so. For I hope he will not say that even the Heathen might
tyrannize.

If this be not sufficient, this Lord puts us in mind that our Savior says in
another place, That he which lays his hand to the Plough, and looks back to the
things of this World, is not sit for the Kingdom of God; that is, the Preaching
of the Gospel, as it is usually called, St. Luke 9. ult. Where, first, it may be
doubted whether this laying of the hand to the Plough belong to the Ministers
of the Gospel only, or to others also. For if it belongs to others as well as
to them (though perhaps not so much) then no Christian, though he be not a
Minister, may have to do with Worldly Affairs; and then we shall have a devout
wise World quickly. Secondly, it may be doubted too whether this looking back
be any kind of meddling at all with worldly Affairs, or such a meddling as
shall so entangle the Husbandman that his Plough stands still, or so bewitches
him, that he forsakes his Plough, that is, his Calling altogether. If it be no
meddling at all, no Man can live; if it be no meddling, but that which
entangles, then any Minister may meddle with Worldly Affairs, so far and so
long as he entangles not himself with them: And so far as to entangle himself,
no Christian may meddle, that will live Godly in Christ Jesus.

If this be not sufficient, this Lord will prove it ever he has done, for he
goes on.

To be thus withdrawn, by entangling themselves with the Affairs of this Life,
by the Necessity and Duty of an Office received from Men, from the Discharge of
that Office which God has called them to, brings a Woe upon them. Woe unto me
(says the Apostle) if I Preach not the Gospel. What does he mean? If I Preach
not once a Quarter, or once a Year in the King's Chapel? No. He himself
interprets it, preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season; rebuke,
exhort or instruct with all long-Suffering and Doctrine. He that has an Office
must attend on his Office, especially this of the Ministry.

I see my Lord will not mend his Terms, though they mar the Sense, and mislay
the Question. For no Man says that which this Lord so often repeats; namely,
that a Bishop or any other Clergyman may entangle himself with the Affairs of
this Life (which yet may be with Covetousness and Voluptuous Living, as much or
more than with being called to Council in Civil Affairs) by any Office received
from Man, from the discharge of that Office, which God has called them unto.
No! God forbid! this would bring a Woe upon them indeed. But since no Man says
it, this Lord fights here with his own Shadow. For all that is said is this,
that a Bishop being grown old and full of Experience, if the King, or the State
in which he lives, thinks him for his Wisdom, Experience and Fidelity fit to be
employed in Civil Councils or Affairs, be it with an Office or without, the
Bishop may lawfully undertake this, so he be able to discharge it without
deserting the Office which God and his Church have laid upon him. But if he
takes it, and be not able to discharge both; or being able, does loiter and not
discharge them; either of these is Vitium Hominis, the fault of the Person, but
the thing is lawful.

As for the place of Scripture which his Lordship adds, I doubt his Lordship
understands it not as the Apostle means it; for it is a Text very much abused by
ignorant Zeal. For when he says, Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9. 16. what does he mean? if he Preach not once a Quarter? No sure, that is
too seldom. What then? if he Preach not once a Year in the King's Chapel? No
sure, much less. For in those days there was no King in Corinth, nor any where
else, that was Christian, to have a Chapel to Preach in. So this Lord might
have let this Scorn alone, had it so pleased him. No; nor is it if a Man Prate
not three or four times a Week in one of his Lordship's Independent
Congregations, and then call it Preaching: The Apostle knew no such
Schismatical Conventicles. No sure, None of this. Why but what is this
Preaching then, the neglect whereof draws this Woe after it? This he tells you
St. Paul interprets himself, 2 Timothy 4. 2. it is to Preach the Word. It Is indeed,
and neither Schism nor Sedition, which are the common Themes of these Times.
It Is to be instant in Preaching the Word, as God gives Ability and Opportunity;
it is to be instant in season and out of season; that is, to take God's
Opportunity rather than our own, and not Preach out of season only, as some of
this Lord's great Favorites use to do; it is to rebuke, exhort and instruct
with Knowledge and Gravity, and not spend Hours in idle and empty Discourses.
And all this is to be done with all long-Suffering and Doctrine; and let the
Clergy but study hard, and provide that their Doctrine be sound and good, and I
will pass my word this Lord and his Friends shall take order they shall do it
with all the long Suffering that may be; and if they do not suffer enough, or
not long enough, it shall not be his Fault, so dearly does he love that they
should Preach the Word.

Nay, I must go farther yet. To preach the Word in this manner, is not only to
go up into the Pulpit, and thence deliver wholesome and pious Instructions, and
necessary and Christian Reproof, though this be, as the commendable, so the
ordinary way of public Preaching, that most at once may hear. For he may be
said to Preach the Gospel, that any ways declares Christ (...), and informs the
Understandings and Consciences of Men, for right Belief and true Obedience, be
it privately or publicly; be it by word of Mouth or by Writing: and a Man may
be seasonably instant this way sometimes, when in the public way of Preaching
he cannot. And if this be not so, how is it said of the Apostles, Acts 5. 42.
that in the Temple and in every House, they ceased not to teach and to preach
Jesus Christ, Acts. 20. 20. I have taught you publicly, and from House to
House. And I believe some Bishops, whom this Lord in this passage is pleased to
jeer at, have preached more and to more purpose, than any of his Lordship's
Divinity-darlings. That which follows is true, that he which has an Office,
must wait upon his Office, Romans 12. 7. and especially this of the Ministry; of
which Office there the Apostle principally treats. But this again no Man
denies. And yet by his Lordship's good leave, no Man is bound to starve by
waiting upon his Office. He must wait upon it, that is true; but he must provide
necessarys too, that he may be able to wait. Next this Lord tells us, The
Practice of the Apostles is answerable to the Direction and Doctrine of our
Savior. There never was, nor will be, Men of so great Abilities and Gifts as
they were endued withal, yet they thought it so inconsistent with their
Calling, to take Places of Judicature in Civil Matters, and Secular Affairs and
Employments upon them, that they would not admit of the Care and Distraction
that a business far more agreeable to their Callings than these would cast upon
them, and they give the Reason of it in the Sixth of the Acts, v. 2. It is not
Reason that we should leave the Word of God, and serve Tables.



There is no doubt but that the Practice of the Apostles was answerable to the
Direction and Doctrine of our Savior. And as certainly true it is, that there
never were, nor ever will be, Men of so great Abilities and Gifts, in
Supernatural and Heavenly things especially, as they were endued withal. But
how will this Lord prove, that they thought it a thing absolutely inconsistent
with their Callings to meddle with Temporal or Civil Affairs. No one of them
has in any place of Scripture expressed so much. Against entangling themselves
with the World and the Affairs of it, I confess they have, but no more. Yet
this Lord proves it thus: They would not admit of the Care and Distraction,
that a business far more agreeable to their Calling than these would cast upon
them. His Lordship means the Deacon's Office: And therefore surely they would
not take these. But this Argument by his Lordship's leave is inconsequent: For
if any Offices or Employments, how agreeable soever to their Calling, bring
with them such Care and Distraction as shall in a manner quite take them off
from Preaching the Gospel, the Apostles did not, and their Successors may not
trouble themselves with them: When as yet the Apostles might, and their
Successors may take on them other Employments, though in their Nature less
agreeable to their Calling, if they be less distractive from it. Now the
Deacon's Office (as it was then) brought more trouble upon them for the Poor
and the Widows, than any Places of Judicature or Council do upon Clergymen
now. Which may appear by the very Reason they have given, and here remembered,
that it was no Reason they should leave the Word of God and serve Tables. For
there it is not said, that they might not at all meddle with the ordering of
those Tables, but that it was not fit they should so meddle with them as (...)
-- leaving the word of God to attend them. And this to do no Man says is lawful
now. But his Lordship presses this Argument yet farther.

And again, when they had appointed them to choose Men fit for that business,
they institute an Office rather for taking Care of the Poor, than they by it
would be distracted from the principal Work of their Calling, and then show how
they ought to apply themselves: But we (say they) will give ourselves
continually unto Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word. Did the Apostles,
Men of extraordinary Gifis, think it unreasonable for them to be hindered from
giving themselves continually to preaching the Word and Prayer, by taking care
for the Tables of Poor Widows; and can Bishops now think it reasonable or
lawful for them to contend for sitting at Council Tables, to govern States, to
turn Statesmen instead of Churchmen, to sit in the highest Courts of
Judicature, and to be employed in making Laws for Civil Polities and Government?

It is true indeed that the Apostles appointed the Disciples to choose Men fit
for that business, and that they did institute the Office of Deacons to take
care of the Poor, rather than they would be distracted from the principal Work
of their Calling. But when was this done? When? Why not till the Disciples were
multiplied; not till there arose Contentions between the Greeks and the
Hebrews, that that their Widows were neglected in the daily Ministration, Acts
6. 1. Therefore till the Work grew so heavy, and the Contentions so warm, the
Apostles themselves did order those Tables, and attend them too. Therefore the
Work was not unlawful in its self for them, for then it had been Sin in them to
do it at all at any time. For that which is simply evil in, and of it self, is
ever so; therefore the most that can be made of this Example is, that it was
lawful, very lawful and and charitable too, for the Apostles to take care of
those Tables themselves; and they did it. For all the Provision for the Poor
was brought and laid at the Apostles feet, Acts 4. 35. which doubtless would
never have been done, had it been unlawful for the Apostles to order and to
distribute it. But when they found the increasing Burden too heavy for both
the one Work and the other, then, though both were lawful, yet it was more
expedient to leave the Tables than the Word of God, with which the World was
then as little acquainted, as now it is full of; (and I pray God it be not full
to a dangerous Surfeit.) Now this, as I conceive in Humility, states the
Bishops Business: For to me it seems out of Question, that it is most lawful
for Bishops to be conversant in all the Courts, Councils, and Places of
Judicature, to which they have been called since the Reformation in the Church
and State of England, till they find themselves, or be found unable to
discharge the one Duty and the other. And then indeed I grant no serving of
Tables, no nor Council Tables is to be preferred. But then you must not measure
Preaching only by a formal going up into the Pulpit: For a Bishop (and such
Occasions are often offered) may Preach the Gospel more publicly, and to far
greater Edisication in a Court of Judicature, or at a Council Table, where
great Men are met together to draw things to an Issue, than many Preachers in
their several Charges can; and therefore to far more Advancement of the Gospel,
than any one of his Lordship's Sect at a Tables end in his Lordship's Parlour,
or in a Pulpit in his Independent Congregation, wheresoever it be. And when he
has said all that he can, or any Man else, this shall be found true, that
there is not the like Necessity of Preaching the Gospel lying upon every Man in
Holy Orders, now Christianity is spread and has taken Root, as lay upon the
Apostles and Apostolical Men, when Christ and his Religion were Strangers to
the whole World. And yet I speak not this to cast a Damp or Chilness upon any
Man's Zeal or Diligence in that Work: No, God forbid! For, though I conceive
there is not the same Necessity, yet a great Necessity there is still, and ever
will be, to hold (...) both the Verity and Devotion which attend Religion; and
-- Non (...) est Virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. So there may be as great
Virtue in the Action, though perhaps not equal Necessity of it.

Besides, Deacons were not Lay Men, but Men in Holy Orders, though inferior to
the Apostles; as appears by Stephen's undertaking Acts (...). (...). Acts 8. 5.
(...). Acts 6. 6.
the Libertines and Cyrenians in the Cause of Christ; and Philip's Preaching of
Christ in Samaria, and Baptizing. And if they were of the Seventy (as
Epiphanius thinks they were, Haer.) then they were Presbyters before they had
this Temporary Office (if such it were) put upon them. Therefore, if to meddle
with these things were simply unlawful in themselves, or for Men in Holy
Orders: Or, if all meddling with them were such a Distraction, as must needs
make them leave the Preaching of the Gospel, then these Seventy might not
discharge the Office to which they were chosen; and if this be so, then this
Lord must needs infer that the Apostles, and all which chose them, did sin in
Instituting such Men to take care of the Tables, and to distract them from
Preaching of the Word; which they thought unfit for themselves to do. And yet,
I hope, my Lord will not say this in his privatest Conventicle. Nay, yet more;
though this Care was delivered over to the Deacons in ordinary, yet Calvin
tells us plainly, that in things of moment they Calvin in Acts 21.
could do nothing -- Nec quicquam -- without the Authority of the Presbyters.
So they meddled still.

Next this Lord shows, since the Apostles did not think fit to distract
themselves with Business about these Tables, how they ought to apply
themselves. And this he sets down in the Apostle's Words, Acts 6. 4. But we
will give our selves continually to Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word. And
yet I hope this Lord does not think the Apostles by this word continually,
meant to do nothing else but Pray and Preach: For if they did one of these two
continually without any intermission, then they could do nothing else, which is
most apparently false. And indeed (which it seems this learned Lord considered
not) this word continually is not in the Text. For in the Greek the word is
(...), we will be constant and instant in Prayer and Ministration of the Word;
which may and ought to be done, though neither of them continually; and which
many of God's Servants have done, and yet meddled some way or other with
temporal or worldly Affairs.

The Argument is over: The rest of this Passage is this Lord's Rhetoric, which
I shall answer as I repeat it. Did the Apostles (says his Lordship) Men of
extraordinary Gifts, think it unreasonable for them to be hindered from giving
themselves continually to Preaching the Word and Prayer, by taking care of the
Tables of the poor Widows? No; sure they they did not think it unreasonable;
that is this Lord's word to make the present business of the Bishops more
Odious, as if it were against common Reason. But there is no such word in the
Text. The word is, (...), it is not meet. Now many things may not be meet or
comely, which yet are not altogether unreasonable: Nay, which at some times,
and upon some occasions, may be meet and comely enough; nay, perhaps necessary
for the very Gospel it self, and therefore no way unreasonable; howsoever at
this time unfit for the Apostles, and worthily refused by them.

Well; the Rhetoric goes on. Did the Apostles thus, and can the Bishops now
think it reasonable or lawful for them? Yes, the Times and Circumstances being
varied, and many things become fit which in some former Times were not, they
can think it both reasonable and lawful, nay, necessary for some of them. What?
To contend for sitting at Council Tables? No; God forbid, perhaps not to sue
for sitting there, but certainly not to contend for it; but to sit there being
called unto it, and to give their best Advice there, never unlawful, and
oft-times necessary: And here let me tell this Lord by the way, that the Bishop
which he has sufficiently hated, was so far from contending for this, that
though he had that Honor given him by His Majesty to sit there many Years, yet
I do here take it upon my Christianity and Truth, that he did never move His
Majesty directly or indirectly for that Honor, and was surprised with it as
altogether unlooked for, when His Majesty's Resolution therein was made known
unto him. Nor ever did that Bishop take so much upon him, as a Justiceship of
the Peace, or meddle with any Lay-Employment, save what the Laws and Customs of
this Realm laid upon him in the High Commission and the Star Chamber, while
those Courts were in being; and continued Preaching till he was Threescore and
four, and then was taken off by Writing of his Book against Fisher the Jesuit,
being then not able at those Years to continue both. And soon after the World
knows what trouble befell him, and in time they will know why too, I hope.
Besides, the Care of Government, which is another part of a Bishop's Office,
and a necessary one too, lay heavy upon him, in these Factious and broken Times
especially. And whatsoever this Lord thinks of it, certainly, though Preaching
may be more necessary for the first planting of a Church, yet Government is
more noble and necessary too, where a Church is planted; as being that which
must keep Preaching and all things else in order. And Preaching (as it is now
used) has as much need to be kept in order as any, even the greatest
Extravagance that I know. Nor is this out of Christ's Commission, Pasce Oves,
John 21. 15. for the feeding of his Sheep. For a Shepherd must guide, govern,
and defend his Sheep in the Pasture, as well as drive them to it. And he must
see that their Pasture be not tainted too, or else they will not thrive upon
it. And then he may be answerable for the Rot that falls among them.

The Rhetoric goes farther yet. To contend for sitting at Council Tables to
govern States. No, but yet to assist them being called by them. To have
Statesmen instead of Churchmen. No, but doing the Duty of Churchmen, to
mingle pious Counsels with States-Mens Wisdom. To sit in the highest Courts of
Judicature: And why not, in a Kingdom where the Laws and Customs require it?
Not to be employed in making Laws for Civil Polities and Government. And I
conceive there is great Reason for this in the Kingdom of England, and greater
since the Reformation than before. Great Reason, because the Bishops of England
have been accounted, and truly been, grave and experienced Men, and far fitter
to have Votes in Parliaments for the making of Laws, than many young Youths
which are in either House: And because it is most fit in the making of Laws for
a Kingdom, that some Divines should have Vote and Interest to see (as much as
in them lies) that no Law pass, which may perhaps, though unseen to others,
entrench upon Religion it self, or the Church. And I make no doubt but that
these and the like Considerations settled it so in England, where Bishops have
had their Votes in Parliaments, and in making Laws, ever since there were
Parliaments; yea, or any thing that resembled them in this Kingdom. And for my
part, were I able to give no Reason at all why Bishops should have Votes in
Parliament, yet I should in all Humility think that there was and is still some
great Reason for it, since the Wisdom of the State has successively in so many
Ages thought it fit. And as there is great Reason they should have Votes in
making Laws, so is there greater Reason for it since the Reformation than
before. For before that time Clergymen were governed by the Church Canons and
Constitutions, and the Common Laws of England had but little Power over them.
Then in the Year 1532. the Clergy submitted; and an Act of Parliament was made
upon it: So that ever since the Clergy of England, from the Highest to the
Lowest, are as much subject to the Temporal Laws as any other Men, and
therefore ought to have as free a Vote and Consent to the Laws which bind them,
as other Subjects have. Yet so it is, that all Clergymen are and have long
since been excluded from being Members of the House of Commons, and now the
Bishops and their Votes, by this last Act, are cast out of the Lord's House. By
which it is at this Day come to pass, that by the Justice of England, as now it
stands, no Clergyman has a Consent, by himself or his Proxy, to those Laws to
which all of them are bound.

In the mean time, before I pass from this Point, this Lord must give me leave
to put him in mind of that which was openly spoken in both Houses; that the
Reason why there was such a Clamor against the Bishops Votes was, because all
or most of them Voted for the King, so that the potent Faction could not carry
what they pleased, especially in the Upper House. And when some saw they could
not have their Will to cast out their Votes fairly, the Rabble must come down
again, and Clamor against their Votes; not without danger to some of their
Persons. And come they did in Multitudes. But who procured their coming I know
not, unless it were this Lord and his Followers. And notwithstanding this is as
clear as the Sun, and was openly spoken in the House, that this was the true
Cause only why they were so angry with the Bishops Votes; yet this most Godly
and Religious Lord pretends here a far better Cause than this; namely, that
they may, as they ought, carefully attend to the Preaching of the Word, and not
be distracted from that great Work, by being troubled with these Worldly
Affairs. And I make no doubt, but that the same Zeal will carry the same Men to
the devout taking away the Bishops and the Church Lands, and perhaps the
Parsons Tithes too, and put them to such Stipends as they shall think fit, that
so they may Preach the Gospel freely, and not be drawn away with these Worldly
Affairs from the principal Work of that Function, Well! my Lord must give me
leave here to Prophecy a little: and it is but this in short, Either the
Bishops shall in few Years recover of this Hoarseness, and have their Honor
and their Votes in Parliament again; or, before many Years be past, all
Baseness, Barbarity and Confusion will go near to possess both this Church and
Kingdom.

But this Lord has yet somewhat more to say; namely, that If they shall be
thought fit to sit in such Places, and will undertake such Employments, they
must not be there as ignorant Men, but must be knowing in Business of State;
and understand the Rules and Laws of Government, and thereby both their Time
and Studies must be necessarily diverted from that which God has called them
unto. And this surely is much more Unlawful for them to admit of, than that
which the Apostles rejected as a distraction unreasonable for them to be
interrupted by.



Why but yet if they shall be thought fit to sit in such Places, and will
undertake such Employments, what then? Why then they must not sit there as
ignorant Men, but they must be knowing Men, and understand the Rules and Laws
of Government. This is most true; and if any Man sit in those places as an
Ignorant, it is an ill Choice that is made of him, and he does not well that
accepts them. But sure, if Bishops sit there as Ignorants, they are much to be
blamed. For if they spend their younger Studies before they meddle with
Divinity, as they may and ought, sure there is some great Defect in them, if
they be not as knowing Men in the Rules of Government as most Noblemen or
others are, who spend all their younger time in Hawking and Hunting, and
somewhat else: And this younger time of theirs, if Bishops have spent as they
ought, they may with a little Care and Observation, and without any great
Diversion of their Time and Studies from that which God has called them unto,
perform those Places with great Knowledge and much Happiness to the States in
which they serve, as has formerly in this, and does at present in other
Neighboring States appear. And for ought this Lord knows, if some Counsels had
been followed, which some Bishops gave, neither the King, nor the State, nor
the Church, had been in that ill Condition in which they now are. Nor are these
Places more Unlawful for Bishops to admit of in these Times and Conditions of
the Church, than that which the Apostles rejected as a Distraction, but not as
an unreasonable one, in those Times and Beginnings of Christianity, as is
proved before. But the Zeal of this Lord burns still, and as it has fired him
already out of the Church, and made him a Separatist; so it would now sire the
Bishops out of the State, and make them Members of Antichrist. His Lordship
goes on therefore, and as before he told us the Practice of the Apostles was
answerable to the Doctrine of Christ, so here he tells us again; The Doctrine
of the Apostles is agreeable to their Practice herein. For St. Paul, when he
instructs Timothy for the Work of the Ministry, presses this Argument from
the Example of a good Soldier: No Man that warreth entangleth himself with the
Affairs of the World.



The Doctrine of the Apostles is agreeable indeed to their Practice herein, and
in all things else; and I would to God with all my Heart this Lord's Opinions
were agreeable to either their Practice or their Doctrine; and then, I am sure,
he would be a better Soldier for Christ, than this poor Church has cause to
believe he is. But his Lordship says that Paul when he instructs Timothy for
the Work of the Ministry, presses this Argument from the Example of a good 2 Timothy 2. 4.
Soldier; That no Man that warreth, (...), entangles himself with the Affairs
of the World. The word (...) signifies involvere and permiscere se, to involve
and, as it were, thoroughly to mingle himself with that which he undertakes; to
be so busied, ut extricare se non possit, that he cannot untwist himself out of
the Employment: And I easily grant that no good Christian, much less any good
Bishop, may so entangle himself with the World, as either to Desert his
Calling, or to be so distracted from it, as not to do his Duty in it, Annot.
ibid.
But this bars not all meddling with it. For the Geneva Note upon that place
says plainly, he may not extangle himself; no, not so much as with his Household
and other ordinary Affairs. But then if he shall not meddle with, or take care
of these at all, he may beg or starve, unless he have better Means than the
Competency which this Devout Age thinks sufficient for the Ministry. Nay,
which is more, he may by so doing fall under that heavy Sentence of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 8. That if he provide not for his own, he has denied the
Faith, and is worse than are Insidels. Nay, which is yet more, if all meddling
with Temporal Affairs, all Care of the World be an Entanglement, the Clergy
must needs be in a Perplexity whatsoever they do. For if they meddle with any
Worldly Business, and entangle themselves, they do that they ought not, 2 Timothy
2. 4. And if they do not meddle with Worldly Affairs, and so do not provide for
their own; and provide they cannot without some meddling. Then, for sear of
this Lord's sour Divinity, that all meddling with is entangling in them, they
are worse than Infidels. Now a Perplexity which shall wrap a Man up in Sin
which way soever he sets himself to Action, is so contrary to Divine Justice,
as that no Law or Scripture of God can command it, nor any right Reason of Man
approve it.

But examining this Text farther I find two things more observable. The one,
that the Soldier here, whose Example is the ground of this Argument, is not
bound under Pain of any Sin, not to busy himself with the Affairs of this
Life; but he does it not (says the Text) to the end he may please him whose
Soldier he is. So then, if any Man, the better to please God, forbears this
Employment, and his Conscience and Love to his Calling be his Motives so to do,
he does well. But if another Man, who has no scruple in himself, and finds he
can do both without an Entanglement by the one to the prejudice of the other,
and thereupon be so employed (for ought I know) he does not sin. The other is,
perhaps this Lord may find that St. Paul here in this place instructs Timothy,
not so much for the Work of the Ministry (as here he affirms) as for the
general Work of Christianity. For, Ver. 1. he exhorts to Constancy and
Perseverance, that he be strong in the Grace which is in Jesus Christ. And then
this Argument falls upon other Christians as well as upon Ministers, though not
so much. And then I hope this Lord, who is so careful for our Spiritual
Warfare, will take some care of his own also; if the great care which he takes
at this present for the Militia of the Kingdom entangles him not. But his
Lordship is now come to conclude this Point.

I conclude; That which by the Commandment of our Savior, by the Practice and
Doctrine of the Apostles, and I may add by the Canons of ancient Councils
grounded thereupon, is prohibited to Ministers of the Gospel, and showed to be
such a distraction unto them from their Calling and Function, as will bring a
Woe upon them, and is not reasonable for them to admit of; if they shall
notwithstanding entangle themselves withal, and enter into, it will bring a
Guilt upon their Souls, and hurt them in respect of their Consciences.

His Lordship is now come (so he tells us) to conclude this Point; and in this
Conclusion he artificially sums up, and briefly, all his Arguments. I shall as
briefly touch at my Answers before given, and stay upon nothing, unless I find
somewhat new. This done, I shall wait upon him (for that is his desire
Clergymen should) to the next Point.

And truly, I find nothing new in the folding up this Conclusion, but that he
says, he may add that Ministers are prohibited from meddling with Wordly
Affairs, by the Canons of Ancient Councils grounded upon the Apostles Doctrine.
The Church is much beholding to this Lord that he will vouchsafe to name her
Ancient Councils: He does not use to commit this Fault often, and yet lest he
should sin too much in this kind, he does but tell you that he may add these,
but he adds them not. It may be he doubts, that if he should name those Canons,
some sufficient Answer might be given them, and yet the Truth remain firm, that
it is not only lawful, but fit and expedient in some times and cases, for
Bishops to intermeddle with, and give Counsel in Temporal Affairs; and though
this Lord names none, yet I will produce and examine such Canons and Ancient
Councils as I find, and see what they say in this business.

The first I meet withal is -- But here I find my self met with and prevented
too, by a Book entitled Episcopacy asserted, made Episcopacy asserted. 49.
by a Chaplain of mine, Mr. Jer. Tailor, who has learnedly looked into and
answered such Canons of Councils as are most quick upon Bishops or other
Clergymen for meddling much in Temporal Affairs. And therefore thither I refer
the Reader, being not willing to trouble him with saying over another Man's
Lesson; only I shall examine such Councils (if any I find) which my Chaplain
has not met with or omitted. And the last that I meet with is the Conc.
Sardicens. edit. (...) apud Bion. To. 1. par. 1. p. 431.
Council of Sardis; which though the last, is as high up in the Church as about
the Year 347. And there was a Canon to restrain Prelates from their frequent
resorts to the Court: Yet there are many Cases left at large in which they are
permitted to use their own Judgment and Freedom. So that Canon seems to bring
along with it rather Counsel than Command. And howsoever they are well left to
their Liberty (as I conceive it) because to frequent the Court, as over-loving
the place, is one thing; and to go thither, though often, when good Cause calls
for them (be that Cause Spiritual or Temporal) is far from an Offense. For if
it be Spiritual, they must go; that is their Office and Duty directly: And I see
no Reason why the Physicians should be forbid to visit the places of greatest
Sickness. This I am sure of, Eusebius. de Vita Constant. L. 1. c. 35.
Constantine the Great commanded the personal attendance of Bishops and other
Clergymen in his Court. And if it be Temporal; they may go: that is their Duty
by Consequence, especially, if they be called. For as their exemplary Piety may
move much, so do I not yet know any designs of State, which are made the worse
by Religion; or any Counsels of Princes hurt by being communicated with
Bishops, in whom does, or should reside the Care of Religion and Religious
Conversation. But perchance I have known some Counsels miscarry for want of
this.

The next is the first Conc. Carthag. 1. Can. (...)
Council at Carthage, and there the Prohibition runs thus, They which are of
the Clergy, non accedant ad Actus seu Administrationem, vel Procurationem
domorum; which forbids (as I conceive it) this only, that they should not be
Stewards of the Houses, or Bailiffs of the Lands of great Persons. And this may
be both in regard of the great trouble belonging to such Places, and the hazard
of Scandal which might arise, in case there should happen any failure in such
great Accounts. And in the Cod. Can. Eccl. Affric. Can. 16.
Code of the African Councils it is thus read, non sint Conductores and
Procuratores, nec (...) and inhonesto negotio, victum quaerant: which I think
is the truer Reading. And then this Council does not fordid all meddling in in
Secular Affairs, but such as by their dishonest gain draw Scandal upon the
Church: And there is great Reason such should be forbidden them.

A third I meet withal, and that is the Council of Episcopi, Presbyteri and
Diaconi de locis suis Negotiandi causa non diseedant, nec (...) Provincias
quaestuosas (...) sectentur. Sane ad Victum suum conquirendum, aut Filium, aut
Libertum, aut Mercenarium, aut Amicum, aut (...) mittant: and si voluerint
negotiari intra Provinciam, negotientur. Conc. Eliberit. Can. 18.
Eliberis about the Year of our Lord 306. where the Canon seems to be very
strict against Clergy-Men's going to Markets and Fairs negotiandi causa, to
make profit by negotiation; but require them to send their Son, their Friend or
their Servant to do such business for them. And yet this Prohibition as strict
as it seems, is not absolute, nor binding, farther than that they shall not
pursue those matters of Gain out of their own Provinces; but if they will and
think fit, they might for all this Canon negotiate, either for their necessary
maintenance or improvement of their Fortunes, so that they wandered not abroad
out of their own Province where they serve.

In the mean time when all these, or any other Councils are duly weighed, and
their meaning right taken, this will be the result of all; that neither Bishop
nor other Clergyman might or may, by the Canons of Holy Church, ambitiously
seek, or voluntarily of himself assume any Secular Engagement. And as they
might not ambitiously seek great Temporal Employments, so might they not
undertake any low or base ones for sordid and covetous ends. Nor might they
relinquish their own Charge to spend their Strength in the assistance of a
foreign one. But though they might not seek or voluntarily assume Secular
Employment, Aut negotijs (...) se immiscere (...) pupillorum si forte Leges
imponant in excusabilem curam, aut Civitatis Episcopus Ecclesiasticarum rerum
solicitudinem habere praecipiat, aut Orphanorum and Viduarum, eorum qui sine
(...) defensione sunt, ae personarum quae maxim indigent Ecclesiastico
adjutorio, and propter timorem Domini causa deposcat. Conc. Chalced. Act. 15.
Can. 3.
yet they might do any lawful thing imposed on them by their Superiors. And so
might the Bishop (who had no Superior in his Province) if the Prince required
his Service; or that he thought it necessary for the present State of the
Church in which he lived: Balsamon. in Council. Chalcedon. c. 3. p. 327.
For if he might transmit his Power to those of the inferior Clergy, no doubt
but he might deal himself in such Civil Affairs, as are agreeable to the
dignity of his Place and Calling: and generally the Bishop, or any other
Clergyman, may and might by the ancient Canons of the Church be employed in
any Action of Piety, though that Action be attended with Secular care and
trouble. And this is without any strain at all collected out of that great and
famous Council of Chalcedon, one of the four first General Councils, approved
of highly throughout all Christendom, and with great reverence acknowledged in
the Laws of this Kingdom. And therefore after the Canon of that Council had
laid it down in general terms, that neither Bishop, Clerk, nor Monk, should
farm Grounds, or immescere se, mix himself as it were with such Temporal
Affairs, it adds some exceptions of like Nature to those by me expressed,
especially the last of them. And some of these will expound the Canon of any
Council which I have yet seen, that speaks most against Clergy-Mens embarking
themselves in Secular Business. And therefore though this Lord would not, yet I
have laid before you whatsoever is come to my Knowledge out of the Ancient
Councils; where by this last cited and great Council, his Lordship may see,
that Bishops should meddle with and order some Temporal Affairs, as Persons in
that kind fitter to be trusted than other Men of what Rank or Condition soever;
and therefore excepts from its own general Canon the Cases of Orphans and
Widows, and the Estates of such Persons as most need Ecclesiastical help, or
where any Cause in the fear of God requires it. In which Cases the Widows and
the Fatherless have had much cause to bless God, when they have been referred
to the Conscience, Trust and Care of Bishops. But this were in a manner to make
them Masters of the Wards or Guardians to them, which I know this Lord will not
like by any means. It would come too near his Office; and then he would cry out
indeed, that this was a greater Distraction of them from their Function to
which God had called them, than that of the attending poor Widows Tables was to
the Apostles: And yet he sees what some Canons of Ancient Councils have decreed
in this Case. Besides, we cannot have a better or a clearer Evidence of the
true meaning of the Ancient Canons than from the Practice of the Ancient
Fathers of the Church, who were strict and conscientious Observers of the
Canons, and yet (as is before proved) meddled in many, and some the greatest
Givil Affairs, being employed as Ambassadors from great Emperors and Kings: And
Balsam. in Conc. Carthagprima, Can. 16. p. 328, 329.
Balsamon observes, that whenever it shall please the Prince to call any
Bishops to such Employments, they neither are to be restrained by the aforesaid
Canons, nor censured by them.

I conclude this Point then, that Bishops are not prohibited to meddle with
Civil public Affairs, either by Christ's command, or by the Apostle's either
Doctrine or Practice (though all their Practice does not give an absolute Rule
for all future Obedience as their Doctrine does) and I may add not by Canons of
Ancient Councils (rightly understood) nor are all of them such Distractions as
will bring a Woe upon Bishops or other Clergymen, though they meddle with
them: I rather believe some things will be in a woeful Case if they meddle not.
And in some Cases there is all the Reason in the World they should be not only
permitted, but some of them commanded to meddle; to the end that in all
Consultations, especially the greatest, in Parliament, and at Council Table, it
might be their care to see that Religion were kept upright in all; and that
nothing by Practice or otherwise pass, cum detrimento Religionis and Ecclesiae,
with detriment to Religion or the Church, always provided that they do not so
entangle themselves in any of these Affairs, as shall much prejudice their
Function; and this done, I know no Guilt that this meddling can bring upon
their Souls, or hurt their Consciences. But this Lord having (as he thinks)
concluded the contrary, proceeds now to the next Point, and says, that In the
next place this meddling in Temporal Affairs does (...) them, and strike them
in their Credits; so far from Truth is that Position which they desire to
possess the World withal, that unless they may have those outward Trappings, or
worldly Pomp added to the Ministry, that Calling will grow into Contempt and
be despised.



Good God! How Pious this Lord is, and what a careful Friend over the Church!
First, he takes care the Bishops Consciences may not be hurt, and now he is as
jealous over their Credits. But I doubt he is jealous over them amiss: For he
is of Opinion, that meddling in Civil Affairs strikes them in their Credit; and
he thinks farther, that the Position with which they would possess the World in
this case is far from Truth. Let Us examine this Position then, what it is, and
what it works. The Position is, (as this Lord reports it) That unless they may
have these outward Trappings, or worldly Pomp added to the Ministry, their
Calling will grow into Contempt. First, there was never any Age in any Kingdom
Christian, in which the Bishops were ridden with so much Scorn and Contempt as
they are at this day in England; and this makes this Lord, though he be a very
ordinary Horseman for any good Service, please himself with Trappings.
Secondly, for the worldly Pomp which he means and expresses, the Train of that
has been long since cut short enough in England; and he that will not look
upon the Bishops with an evil Eye must needs acknowledge it. Well, but what
then does this Position work? Why they may not have these Trappings, there will
follow Contempt upon their Calling; so he makes the Bishops say. Is this Lord
of that Opinion too? No sure; for he says, The Truth is, these things cast
Contempt upon them in the Eyes of Men. They gain them Cap and Courtesy, but
they have cast them out of the Consciences of Men; and the Reason is this,
every thing is esteemed as it is eminent in its own proper Excellency; the Eye
in seeing, not in hearing; the Ear in hearing, not in speaking. The one would
be rather monstrous than comely, the other is ever acceptable, being proper. So
is it with them: their proper Excellency is Spiritual, the denial of the World,
with the Pomps, and Preferments, and Employments thereof. This they should
teach and practice.



Well then, the question is, Whether the Honor of Bishops and their
Employments in Temporal Affairs, as they are at this day moderated, in the
Church and State of England, bring Contempt upon them and their Calling, as
this Lord says; or help to keep off Contempt, as he says the Bishops would
possess the World. First, I am clear of Opinion that Solomon was almost as wife
as this Lord thinks himself, and yet he says plainly, Eccles. 9. 16. That
though Wisdom in its self be far better than Folly, yet the poor Man's Wisdom
is despised, and his Words not heard. And we see in daily Experience, that a
poor Minister's Words are as much slighted in the Pulpit, as a poor Man's in
the Gate. And therefore these things which this Lord calls Trappings, are many
times very necessary to keep off that Contempt and Despite which the
boisterous Multitude, when their Sins are reproved, are apt to cast upon them.
And whatsoever this Lord thinks, it is a great Credit and Support to the rest of
the Clergy, and being well used, a great advantage to their Calling, that the
Bishops and other Eminent Men of the Clergy should have moderate Plenty for
Means, and enjoy Honor and external Reputation; and though it be well known
that the Church considered in Abstract, in and by its self only, is not
promoted nor advanced by such Employments, yet, as she is considered in her
Peregrination and Warfare, she gains by them great both Strength and
Encouragement.

Secondly, That which this Lord adds, that those things gain the Bishops Cap
and Courtesy, but have cast them out of the Consciences of Men. It Is well that
these things gain them that. For the Age is grown so churlish to that Calling,
that I believe they would have very little of either, were it not for these
things; as will too soon appear now this last Act of Parliament has taken away
their Trappings. As for that which follows next, that these things have cast
them out of the Consciences of Men, that is not so: For in other Kingdoms that
are Christian, and some Reformed as well as other, they have more Employment in
Civil Affairs than with us, and yet are in high esteem in the Consciences of
Men. But the Truth is, Schisin and Separation have so torn Men from Clergy and
Church, from God and Christ and all, that they have not only cast Bishops, but
Religion too out of their Consciences, and their Consciences are thrown after,
God knows whither.

Now for the Reason which this Lord gives, he is quite wide in that also. For
every thing is not esteemed as it is eminent in its own proper Excellency (as
he says it is): Indeed it ought to be so, but so it is not. For in the place
before cited, Eccles. 9. 16. Wisdom is better than Folly, and is most eminent
in its own proper Excellency, but is it always esteemed so? No sure; for the
poor Man's Wisdom is despised. There, however it ought to be esteemed for its
proper Excellency, yet if it be found in a poor Subject, it is despised and
accounted as mean and vile as he is that has it. And as for the Illustration
which his Lordship makes of this his Proposition, it is merely fallacious. For
Arguments drawn from Natural Things, which ever work constantly the same way,
to Moral Things, which depend upon voluntary and mutable Agents, will seldom or
never universally follow: And therefore though it be true, that the Eye is
esteemed for seeing, not hearing; and the Ear for hearing, not speaking; and
should it be otherwise it would be rather monstrous than comely. That Is true,
because they are Agents determined ad unum, to that one Operation, and cannot
possibly do the other; but then, by his Lordship's leave, so it is not with
Bishops; for though their proper Excellency be indeed Spiritual, yet they may
meddle with other things so long as they can observe the Apostle's Rule, 1 Cor.
7. 31. and use this World as if they used it not; that is, use it so long and
so far as may help their Service of God, and cast it off when it shall hinder
them. But this Lord thinks all use of these things, and Employments in them, to
be unlawful for our Calling. And therefore he adds, That when they, contrary
hereunto, seek after a worldly Excellency, like the great Men of the World; and
to Rule and Domineer as they do, contrary to our Savior's Precept, Vos autem
non sic, But it shall not be so amongst you: Instead of Honor and Esteem, they
have brought upon themselves, in the Hearts of the People, that Contempt and
(...) which they now lie under; and that justly and necessarily, because the
World sees that they prefer a worldly Excellency, and run after it, and contend
for it, before their own; which being Spiritual is far more excellent, and
which being proper to the Ministry, is that alone which will put a Value and
Esteem upon them that are of that Calling.



All this which follows is but matter of Ampliation, to help aggravate the
business, and to make Bishops so hateful to other Men, as they are to himself.
For I hope no Bishops of this Church do seek after worldly Excellency contrary
to their Function; at least I know none that do: And they are far from being
like the Great Men of the World. As to Ruling, it is proper enough to them, so
far as Authority is given, but Domineer they do not. This comes from this
Lord's Spleen, not from their Practice: And by that time his Lordship has sat
a while longer in the State, Men will find other manner of Domineering from
him, than they found from the Bishops. Nor do they in their meddling with Civil
Affairs in such sort as is now practiced in England, go contrary to our
Savior's Precept, Vos autem non sic, It shall not be so amongst you, as I have
proved before.

Most true indeed it is, that the poor Bishops of this Church do now instead of
Honor and Esteem lie under Contempt and Odium in the Hearts of the People. Of
some, not of all; no nor either of the greater or the better part, for all the
noise that has been raised against them; and this Lord is much deceived to say
they have brought it upon themselves. For it is but part of the Dirt which this
Lord and his fellow Sectaries have most unchristian-like cast upon them: And
this only to wrest their Votes out of Parliament, that now they are gone, they
may the better compass their ends against Church and State, which God preserve
against their Malice and Hypocrisy. But this Lord says farther, That the
Bishops have brought this Contempt upon themselves justly and necessarily. Now
God forbid that it should be either; and his Lordship proves it but by saying
the same thing over again, namely, because the World sees that they prefer a
worldly Excellency, and run after it, and contend for it before their own. And
surely if they do this, they are much to blame; but I believe the World sees it
not, unless it be such of the World as look upon them with this Lord's Eyes,
and that when they are at the worst too. And I verily persuade my self and I
think upon very good grounds, that the present Bishops of this Kingdom, all or
the most of them, are as far from any just tax in this or any other kind, as
they have been in any former Times since the Reformation. It Is true, that their
own Calling being Spiritual, is far more excellent; and I shall the better
believe it, when I see this Lord and the rest value it so. For I have told his
Lordship already, that every thing which is more excellent in its self, is not
always so esteemed by others: And though this Excellency be never so proper,
yet by his good leave, it is not that alone which will put a value and esteem
upon them and their Calling. There must be some outward helps to encourage, and
countenance, and reward them too, or else Flesh and Blood are so dull, that
little will be done. And suppose this Religious Lord, and some few like
himself, would value and esteem them for their Spiritual Calling only, yet what
are these to so many as would (...) them? And yet to speak the Truth freely, I
do not see this Lord, nor any of that Feather, put a value upon that Calling
for the Spiritual Excellency only; for then all Ministers that do their Duty
should be valued and esteemed by them, the Calling being alike Spiritual and
alike Excellent in all: whereas the World sees they neither care for nor
countenance any Ministers, but such as separate with them from the Church of
England, or are so near to it, as that they are ready to step into an
Independent Congregation, so soon as by the Artifice of this Lord and others,
it may be made ready to receive them. Now this Lord having thus belabored
these two Points, that Bishops by meddling in Civil Affairs do hurt themselves
in their Consciences and in their Credits; he proceeds to instruct us farther.
And thus, As these things hurt themselves in their Consciences and Credits, so
have they, and if they be continued, still will make them hurtful to others.
The Reason is, because they break out of their own Orb and move irregularly.
There is a Carse upon their leaving their own Place.



My Lord is now come to his second general part of his Speech, and means to
prove it if he can, that Bishops by any kind of meddling in Civil Affairs do
not only hurt themselves in Conscience and in Credit, but also, if they
continue in them, they will make them hurtful to others also. And that he may
seem to say nothing without a Reason, his Lordship tells us the Reason of this
is, because they break out of their own Orb and move irregularly. But I
conceive this Reason weak enough. For first (as is before proved) these Stars
(to follow my Lord in his Metaphor) are not so fixed to their Orb of Preaching
the Gospel, but that they may do other things also at other times, so this be
not neglected. And therefore it will not follow that all their Motions out of
this Orb are irregular. Secondly, when they do thus move, they are not
violently to break out of their Orb, but to sit still till Authority find cause
to call any of them a little aside, to attend Civil Affairs, that they may
proceed never the worse, and the Gospel the better. As for that Curse which
this Lord speaks of, which follows upon their leaving of their own Place; I
know of none, nor any leaving of their own Place. This I am sure of, whatever
this Lord says, that many extraordinary Blestings and Successes have come both
upon this Kingdom and other Nations, by Counsels given by Clergymen; and I
pray God his Counsels, such as they have been, do not bring Dishonor, and a
Curse to boot, upon this Church and Kingdom. But his Lordship goes on with his
Metaphor, and argues very strongly by Similitudes; which has but a Similitude
of Argumentation.

The Heavenly Bodies while they keep within their own Spheres give Light and
Comfort to the World, but if they should break out and (...) from their regular
and proper Motions, they would set the World on (...) So have these done. While
they kept themselves to the Work of the Ministry alone, and gave themselves to
Prayer and the Ministry of the Word, according to the Example of the Apostles,
the World received the greatest Benefits from them; they were the Light and
Life thereof. But when their Ambition cast them down like Stars from (...) to
Earth, and they did grow once to be advanced above their Brethren; I do appeal
to all who have been versed in the ancient Ecclesiastical History, or modern
Histories, whether they have not been the common Incondiaries of the Christian
World, never ceasing from Contention one with another about the Precedence of
their Sees and Churches, Excommunicating one another, drawing Princes to be
Parties with them, and thereby casting them into bloody Wars.

This Argument is grounded upon si (...) ruat, if Heaven falls we shall get
store of Larks. But Heaven cannot sall, and so it is here. The Heavenly Bodies
while they keep within their own Spheres, give Light and Comfort to the World;
but if they should break out, which is impossible, and fall from their Regular
Motions, which cannot possibly be, they would set the World on fire; or perhaps
drown it again (had not God promised the contrary) according as the Irregular
Motion bended. So have these done. Nay, not so with this Lord's leave. For
First, Clergymen are not so fixed to their Orbs as those Heavenly Bodies are,
but in themselves are free and voluntary Agents, which those Bodies are not.
And Secondly, they may and ought as occasion is offered them, do many things in
public Civil Affairs, which may much advantage the Gospel of Christ, and they
will never Fire the World by such attendance upon them; and they may and ought
give themselves to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word notwithstanding
this: and they may be the same Benefits to the World of Light and Life as
before. Yea, and I make no doubt, but that when this Lord and his Followers
will be as liberal and devout as the Primitive Christians were, who sold their
Land and (...) the Money, and laid it at the Apostles Feet, Acts 4. 37. to make
a Stock for their and the Church's Wants, the Bishops will be well content to
follow the Apostles Example, as far and as well as they can. But if the Bishops
may meddle with no Temporal Affairs, according to the Example of the Apostles;
how came the Apostles to meddle with the Receiving first, and after with the
Layings out of all this Money? For, say it was to be employed on charitable
Actions, yet some Diversion more or less it must needs be to the Preaching of
the Gospel. But since the Example and Practice of the Apostles is so often
pressed by this Lord, I would willingly his Lordship should tell me (if he will
make their Practice a Rule general and binding) why now among Christians all
should not be common, as the Apostles and other Believers had it; and that no
Man might say that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, Acts 4.
32. and then where is the Property of the Subject? And then why do we not go up
and down and Preach at large, according to the Examples of the Apostles, and
endure neither Division of Parishes nor Parish Churches? And why do we not
receive the Communion after Supper, at it is well known Christ and his Apostles.
did? Indeed, if any Bishops or other Clergymen should become falling Stars
from Heaven to Earth; especially if their Sin should be so like the Devil's as
to cast themselves down by their own Ambition: That, as it makes the Fall heavy
to them, so yet I must say to this Lord, that both Fall and Fault is the
Person's; the Episcopal Office is not the cause of it, as is here charged by
him. Nor did they become falling Stars so soon as they did once grow to be
advanced above their Brethren, as this Lord insinuates it. For among the
Apostles themselves there was a Chief in order, S. Luke 22. 26. and some were
advanced to Dignity and Power above their Brethren, even in the Apostles Days;
whom yet, I presume, this Lord will not be so ill advised as to call fallen
Stars.

As for the Appeal which he makes to all them who have been versed in Ancient
or Modern Ecclesiastical Histories; that is no great matter. For in all
Histories you shall find great Men of all sorts doing what in Honor and Duty
should not be done; and Ambition has been the cause of very much of this, and
Ambition sticks so close to Humane Nature, as that it follows it into all
Professions and Estates of Men: And I would to God Clergymen had been freer
from this Fault than Histories testify they have. But this has been but the
fault of some; many Reverend Bishops in all Ages have been clear of it, and
it is a personal Corruption in whomsoever it is, and cannot justly be charged
upon the Calling, as this Lord lays it. Neither have the worst of them (some
Popes of Rome excepted) been the common Incendiaries of the Christian World.
But Incendiaries is grown a great word of late with this Lord; and some of the
poor Bishops of England have been made Incendiaries too by him and his Party.
But might it please God to show some token upon us for good, that they which
hate us may see it, and be ashamed, Psalm 86. 17. there would be a full
discovery who have been the Incendiaries indeed in these Troubles of England;
and then I make no question but it will appear that this Lord flames as high
and as dangerously as any Man living. But behold (says God) all ye that kindle
a Fire, that compass your selves about with Sparks; walk in the light of your
own Fire, and in the Sparks which your selves have kindled. This shall ye have
of my hand, ye shall lie down in Sorrow, Isai. 50. 11.

Next I pray be pleased to consider, how unworthily, and fallaciously withal,
this Lord manages this Proof. For all this Discourse tends to prove it unlawful
for Bishops to intermeddle in Secular Affairs; that so to do is hurtful to
themselves in Conscience and in Credit, and to others also by this their
irregular Motion. And this he proves by their never ceasing from Contention one
with another, either about the Precedence of their Sees or Churches. They have
indeed some, and sometimes, contended too eagerly for their Sees and Churches;
but neither all, nor any that I know with a never-ceasing, but the Bishop of
Rome for his Supremacy. And say this were so, yet these Contentions were about
their own proper Places, not about Civil Affairs, which now should lie before
his Lordship in Proof; and therefore was no irregular Motion of theirs in
regard of the Object, but only in regard of the manner. Nor were they out of
their Orb for this, though faulty enough. The like is to be said for that which
follows, their Excommunicating one another upon these Quarrels. As for their
drawing of Princes to be Parties with them, thereby casting them into bloody
Wars; this has seldom happened, and whenever it has happened, some Church
business or other has unhappily set it on, not their meddling in Temporal
Affairs. But whatever caused it, the Crime of such misleading of Princes is
very odious, and as hateful to me as it can be to his Lordship. But the Persons
must bear their own Faults, and not the Calling; and, sure I am, this Lord
would think me very wild, if I should charge the ancient Barons Wars in
England, upon his Lordship and the Honorable Barons now living. But howsoever
by this it is plain, that this Lord would not only have the Bishops turned out
of all Civil Employments, but out of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions also:
They must have no Power nor Superiority there neither; their Sees must be laid
as level as Parity can make them. For all these Mischiefs came on (says he) as
soon as they were once advanced above their Brethren.

And one thing more I shall take occasion to say. Here Is great Clamor made
against the Bishops, and their meddling in Civil Affairs; but what if the
Presbytery do as much or more? Do they Sin too by breaking out of their Orb,
and neglecting the Work of the Ministry? No, by no means: Only the Bishops are
faulty. For do you think that Calvin would have taken on him the Umpirage, and
composing of so many Civil Causes as he did order between Neighbors, if so
great Sin had accompanied it? For he dealt in Civil Causes, and had Power to
Omnes in Carcerem conjecti sunt, etc. Calvin. Epist. ad Farellum.
inflict Civil Punishments in his Consistory. For he committed diverse to Prison
for Dancing, and those not mean ones neither; and he Calvin. Epist. ad Viretum,
fol. 373. Edit. 1575.
arbitrated diverse Causes; and in a great Controversy between the Senate of
Geneva, and a Gentleman, he tells one Frumentius who labored for a
Reconciliation, that the Church of Geneva was not so destitute, but that
Calvin. Epist. ad Farellum, sol. 384.
Fratres mei (says he) huic Provinciae subeundae pares futuri essent, some of
his Brethren might have been fit for that Work. Belike he took it ill, that in
such a Business, though merely Civil, he and his Fellow-Ministers should be
left out. And for matters in the Commonwealth he had so great Power in the
Senate, and with the People, that all things were carried as he pleased. And
himself brags of it, that the Senatum esse nostrum. Calvin. ad Farellum, fol.
72. Populum esse nostrum. Calvin. ad Viretum, fol. 73.
Senate was his and the People his. And to increase his Strength, and make it
more formidable, he brought in Fifty or more of the French his Countrymen and
Friends, and by his solicitation made them Free Denizons of the City; Calvin.
Epist. ad Viret. sol. 163.
of which and the Troubles thence arising he gave an account to Bullinger, Anno
1555.

Or can you think that Beza would have taken upon him so much Secular
Employment, had he thought it unlawful so to do? For whereas in the Form of the
Civil Government of that City, out of the Two hundred prime Men there was a
perpetual Senate chosen of Sixty, as Bodin, l. 2. de Repub. c. 6.
Bodin tells us; my worthy Predecessor Survey of the pretended Holy
Discipline, c. 26.
Archbishop Bancroft assures me, Beza was one of these Threescore. And yet
what a crying Sin is it grown in a Bishop to be honored with a Seat at the
Council Table? Besides this; when Geneva sent a solemn Embassy to Henry IV. of
France, about the razing of a Fort which was built near their City by the Duke
of Savoy, Thuan. Hist. Anno 1600. c. 125.
Beza would needs go along to commend that Spiritual Cause unto the King; and
how far he dealt, and laid Grounds for others to deal in all such Civil Causes,
as were but in Ordine ad Spiritualia, is manifest by Beza de Excommun. p. 47.
himself. And I am sure Laesus proximus may reach into the Cognizance of almost
all Civil Causes. Or can any Man imagine that so Religious a Man as Mr.
Damport, the late Parson of St. Stephen's in Coleman-street, would have done
the like to no small hindrance to Westminster Hall, had he thought that by this
meddling he had hurt both his Conscience and his Credit, whereas (good Man) he
fled into New England to preserve both. Or, if Mr. Alexander Henderson would
have come along with the Scottish Army into England, and been a Commissioner
(as he was) in that whole Treaty, wherein many of their Acts of Parliament
concerning the Civil Government of that Kingdom were deliberated upon and
confirmed; if he had thought his so doing inconsistent with his Calling? Or
that the Scots (being so Religious as they then were, even to the taking up of
Arms against their King for Religion) would have suffered him to take that
place upon him, so contrary to the command of Christ, and the Practice of the
Apostles, if it had been so indeed? Or, would they have suffered their
Preachers, which then attended their Commissioners at London, not only to
meddle with, but to preach so much temporal Stuff as little belonged to the
Purity of the Gospel, had they been of this Lord's Opinion? Surely, I cannot
think it. But let the Bishops do but half so much, yea, though they be
commanded to do that which these Men assume to themselves; and it is a venture
but it shall prove Treason against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and an
endeavoring to bring in an Arbitrary Government. Well! I Will tell you a Tale.
There Is a Minister at this day in London, of great Note among the Faction, well
esteemed by this Lord and others of this Outcry against the Bishops Votes in
Parliament, and their meddling in Civil Affairs; this Man (I Will spare his Name)
being pressed by a Friend of his, how he came to be so eager against the
Church, of which and her Government he had ever heretofore been an Upholder,
and had Subscribed unto it, made this Answer; Thou art a Fool; thou know not
what it is to be the Head of a Party. This Man is one of the great Masters of
the present Reformation; and do you not think it far more inconsistent with his
Ministerial Function to be in the Head of a turbulent Faction (to say the least
of them) than for a Bishop to meddle in Civil Affairs? Yet such is the Religion
of our Times. But it is no matter for all this; his Lordship has yet more to
say against the Ambition of the Prelates. For, Their Ambition and intermeddling
with Secular Affairs and State Business, has been the cause of shedding more
Christian Blood than any thing else in the Christian World; and this no Man can
deny that is versed in History.



This is the same over and over again; saving that the Expression contains in
it a vast Untruth. For they that are versed in History must needs say it is a
loud one, that Bishops meddling in Temporal Affairs has been the cause of
shedding more Christian Blood, than any thing else in the Christian World. What
a happiness has this Lord that his pale Meagerness cannot blush at such thing
as this. Yea, but he will prove it here at home in this Kingdom. For, says he,
We need not go out of our own Kingdom for Examples of their Insolency and
Cruelty. When they had a dependency upon the Pope, and any footing thereby out
of the Land, there were never any that carried themselves with so much Scorn
and Insolency toward the Princes of this Kingdom, as they have done. Two of
them the Bishop that last spoke has named, but instances of many more may be
given, whereof there would be no end.



It Is true indeed we need not go out of our own Kingdom for Examples of their
Insolency and Cruelty. For in so many Ages it is no wonder in any Kingdom to
find some bad Examples, be it of Insolency, Cruelty or what you will:
Especially in the midst of so much Prosperity as accompanied Clergymen in
those times. But it is true too, that there are far more Examples of their Piety
and Charity, would this Lord be pleased to remember the one with the other. As
for their bad Examples his Lordship gives a Reason why not all, but some of
them, carried themselves with so much Scorn and Insolency toward their
Princes, even with almost as much as this Lord and his Faction carry themselves
at this day toward their mild and gracious King. And the Reason is a true one;
it was their dependency upon the Pope, and their footing which thereby they had
to subsist out of the Land: which may, and I hope will be a sufficient warning
to his Majesty and his Successors, never to let in again a foreign Supreme
Power into any of his Dominions. For it is to have one State within, yet not
dependent upon the other, which can never be with Safety or Quiet in any
Kingdom: And I would have the World consider a little with what Insolency, and
perhaps Disallegiance this Lord and his Roundhead Crew would use their Kings,
if they had but half so strong a foreign dependence as the Bishops then had,
that dare use the most gracious of Kings as they do this present day. Two of
these Insolent ones (this Lord says) the Bishop that last spoke named. Lincoln
stands in the Margin, by which it appears that Dr. John Williams then Bishop of
Lincoln, and since Archbishop of York, was the Man that named two; but because
this Lord names them not, I know not who they are, and therefore can say
nothing for or against them, but leave them to that Lord which censured them.
As for that which follows, that the instances of many more may be given,
whereof there would be no end. This is a piece of this Lord's loud Rhetoric,
which can have no Truth in it, especially relating, as it does, to this Kingdom
only.

But whereas this Lord said immediately before, that their meddling in State
business has been the cause of shedding more Christian Blood, than any thing
else in the Christian World, and in the very next words falls upon the proof of
it in this Kingdom; I must put him in mind that one Parliament in England,
namely, that which most irreligiously and traitorously deposed Richard II. was
the cause of the effusion of more Christian Blood amongst us, than all the
Bishops that ever were in this Kingdom. For that base and unjust Parliament was
the cause of all the Civil Wars, those Bloody Wars which began in the Heir's
time after the Usurpation of Henry IV. and ceased not till there were slain of
the Royal Blood and of Nobles and the common People a Numberless Number: And I
heartily beg it of God, that no disloyal Parliament may ever bring this Kingdom
into the like distress. For our Neighbors are far stronger now than they were
then, and what desolation it might bring upon us, God in Heaven knows. So this
Lord may see, if he will, what a Parliament it self being misgoverned may do.
But will his Lordship think it Reason to condemn all Parliaments because this,
and some few more, have done what they should not do, as he here deals by
Bishops? Sure he would not. But having done with the Bishops dependency on the
Pope, he goes on and tells us farther, that Although the Pope be cast off, yet
now there is another Inconvenience, no less prejudicial to the Kingdom, by
their sitting in this House; and that is, they have such an absolute dependency
upon the King, that they sit not there as free Men.



I am heartily sorry to see this Lord thus far transported: The Pope is indeed
cast off from domineering over King, Church, and State. But I am sorry to hear
it from this Lord, that this other Inconvenience by Bishops sitting in the
House of Parliament, is no less prejudicial to the Kingdom. Where, first I
observe that this Lord accounts the Pope's ruling in this Kingdom, but a matter
of inconvenience; for so his words imply. For that must be one Inconvenience,
if the Bishops voting be the other; and I am sure the Laws both of this Church
and State, make it far worse than an Incovenience. Had I said thus much, I had
been a Papist out of Question. Secondly; I Will appeal to any prudent and
moderate Protestant in the Christian World, whether he can possibly think that
the Bishops having Votes in the Parliaments of England can possibly be as
great, or no less an Inconvenience, than the Pope's Supremacy here. And I
believe this Lord when he thinks better of it, will wish these words unsaid.

Well! but what then is this inconvenience that is so great? Why, my Lord tells
us, it is because they have such an absolute dependency upon the King that they
sit not there as Freemen. Where first, it is strange to me and my Reason, that
any dependency on the King, be it never so absolute, can be possibly so great
an Inconvenience to the King, as (that upon) an Independent foreign Power is;
the King being sworn to the Laws, but the Pope being free, and (as he
challenges) not only independent from, but superior to, both King and Laws.
Secondly, I conceive the Bishops dependency is no more absolute upon the King
than is the dependence of other Honorable Members of that House, and that the
Bishops sit there as absolute freemen as any others, not excepting his
Lordship. And of this Belief I must be till the contrary shall be proved; which
his Lordship goes thus about to do.

That which is requisite to Freedom is, to be void of Hopes and Fears; he that
can lay down these is a Freeman, and will be so in this House: But for the
Bishops, as the case stands with them, it is not likely they will lay aside
their Hopes; greater Bishoprics being still in expectancy; and for their Fears
they cannot lay them down, since their Places and Seats in Parliament are not
invested in them by Blood, and so hereditary; but by annexation of a Barony to
their Office, and depending upon that Office; so that they may be (...) of
their Office, and thereby of their Places at the King's pleasure.

My Lord's Philosophy is good enough; for to be void of Hopes and Fears is very
requisite to Freedom, and he that can lay these down, is a Freeman, or may be
if he will: But whether he will be so in that great House, I cannot so well
tell. For though no Man can be free that is full charged with Hopes or Fears;
yet there are some other things which collaterally work upon Men, and
consequently take off their Freedom, almost as much as Hopes and Fears can do.
Such are Consanguinity, Affinity, especially if the Wife bears any sway;
private Friendship, and above all Faction. And therefore though I cannot think
that every Man will be a Freeman in that House, that is void of Hopes and
Fears, yet I believe he may if he will. Now I conceive that in all these
collateral Stiflings of a Man's Freedom, the Lay Lords are by far less free
than the Bishops are.

Again, for the main bars of Freedom, Hopes and Fears, into which all the rest
do some way or other fall, I do not yet see but that Bishops, even as the case
stands with them, may be as free, and I hope are, in their Voting as Temporal
Lords. For their Hopes, this Lord tells us it is not likely they will lay them
aside, greater Bishoprics being still in expectancy. Truly, I do not know why
a deserving Bishop may not in due time hope for a better Bishopric; and yet
retain that Freedom which becomes him in Parliament, as well as any Nobleman
may be Noble and Free in that great Court, and yet have moderated Hopes of
being called to some great Office, or to the Council Table, or some honorable
and profitable Embassage, or some Knighthood of the Garter; of all, or some of
which, there is still expectancy. Lay your Hand on your Heart, my Lord, and
examine your self.

As for Fears, his Lordship tells us roundly the Bishops cannot lay them down.
Cannot? Are all the Bishops such poor Spirits; But why can they not? Why,
because their Places in Parliament are not hereditary, but by annexation of a
Barony to their Office, and depending upon it; so that they may be deprived of
their Office, and thereby of their Place at the King's pleasure. First; I
believe the Bishops gave their Votes in Parliament as freely to their
Conscience and Judgment as this Lord or any other. Secondly; If any of them for
Fear or any other motive have given their Votes unworthily; I doubt not but
many Honorable Lords have at some time or other forgot themselves and born the
Bishops company: though in this I commend neither. Thirdly; I know some Bishops
who had rather lose not their Baronies only, but their Bishoprics also, than
Vote so unworthily as this Lord would make the World believe they have done.
Lastly, it is true their Seat in Parliament depends on their Barony, their
Barony on their Office; and if they be deprived of their Office, both Barony
and Seat in Parliament are gone. But I hope my Lord will not say we live under
a Tyrant; and then I will say Bishops are not deprivable of their Office, and
consequently not of the rest, at the Kings Pleasure. But this Lord proceeds
into a farther Amplification: And to whet his inveterate Malice against the
King, says as follows. Nay, They do not so much as sit here, dum been se
gesserint, as the Judges now by your Lordships Petition to the King have their
Places granted them, but at Will and Pleasure; and therefore as they were all
excluded by Edward the First, as long as he pleased, and Laws made excluso
Clero, so may they be by any King at his Pleasure in like manner. They must
needs therefore be in an absolute dependency upon the Crown, and thereby at
Devotion for their Votes, which how prejudicial it has been, and will be to
this House, I need not say.



If I could wonder at any thing which this Lord does or says in such Arguments
as these, when his Heart is up against the Clergy, I should wonder at this. For
if he will not suppose the King's Government to be Tyrannical, the Bishops have
their Places during Life, and cannot justly be put out of them, unless their
Miscarriage be such as shall merit a Deprivation. And therefore, by this Lord's
good leave, they have as good a Tenure as the Judges is of a Quamdiu been se
gesserint. And this they have without their Lordships Petition to the King, as
his Lordship tells us was fain to be made for the Judges, thereby galling the
King for giving some Patents to the Judges during Pleasure; which, as the Case
stood with them, whether he had Reason to do or not, I will not dispute. So
that manifest it is, that the Bishops do not hold their Bishoprics at the
King's Will and Pleasure, and consequently neither their Baronies nor their
Places in Parliament.

And I would have my Lord consider, whether all the Noblemen that sit in that
House, by Blood and Inheritance, be not in the same Condition upon the matter
with the Bishops. For as Bishops may commit Crimes worthy Deprivation, and so
consequently lose their Votes in Parliament; so are there some Crimes also
which Noblemen may commit (God preserve them from them) which may consequently
void all their Rights in Parliament, yea, and taint their Blood too.

And as for the Bishops Baronies, they are not at the King's Will and Pleasure
neither: For they hold their Baronies from the Crown indeed, but by so long
Prescription as will preserve them from any Disseisure at Will and Pleasure of
the King. So if they merit not Deprivation by Law and Justice, their Baronies
are safe, and that by as good Right, and far antienter Descent, than any the
antientest Nobleman of England can plead for himself.

For Edward the First, he was a brave Prince, and is of glorious Memory, and
respected the Dutifulness of his Clergy very Royally. As for the Acts of
Parliament made in his Time, and the Time of his Royal Successor Edward the
Third, I conceive nothing can be gathered out of the Titles or Prefaces of
those Acts, against either the Bishops presence at, or their Voting to those
Laws, by any Prohibition of Exclusion of them, by those famous Kings. For
though the Statute of Carlisle, 35 Edw. I. not Printed, be recited in the
Statute Et Similiter in the Statute of 27 Ed. 3. and 38 Ed. 3. both of
Provisces.
25 Edw. III. of Provisoes, and says, that by the Assent of the Earls, Barons,
and other Nobles, and all the Commonalty, at their Instances and Requests in
the said full Parliament, it was ordained. etc. without any mention at all of
the Prelates; yet it is more than probable, that the Prelates were Summoned to,
and present at these Parliaments. For first, it appears expressly that the
Statute of the Staple, 27 Edw. III. made in the same Parliament with the
Statute of Provisoes, that the Prelates were Assembled and Present there: And I
rather think that in all these Statutes of Provisoes (being professedly made
against the Liberty and Jurisdiction of the Pope, in those Times challenged in
this Kingdom, to whose Power the Bishops were then Subject) they voluntarily
chose to be absent, rather than endanger themselves to the Pope, if they Voted
for such Laws; or offend the King and the State, if they Voted against them.
But these Laws were not made excluso Clero, and that as long as the King
pleased (as this Lord affirms) and this is very plain in the Statute it self of
38 Edw. III. For in the last Chapter of that Statute, though the Prelates be
omitted in the Preamble, yet there it is expressly said, That the King, the
Prelates, the Dukes, Earls and Barons, etc. So here was not exclusion of the
Bishops by the King, but their own voluntary Absence, which made those kind of
Laws pass without them.

As for the Parliament at Carlisle, I conceive the Books are misprinted, and a
common Error risen by it. For that Parliament was held Anno 35 Edw. I. and was
the first of Provisoes; and as appears in the Records, the Prelates were
present. Rotulo (...). 25 Ed. 1. M. 6. (...).
But in 25 Edw. I. the Parliament was Summoned to London, and the Bishops
called to it. And there was M. 25 Dorso.
another Summons to Salisbury in the same Roll, to which the Prelates were not
called. But this, I conceive, was a Summons of the King's Great Council only,
and not of a Parliament, the Commons not being called any more than the
Prelates: Nor were there any other Summons, 25 Edw. I. but these two. That
which his Lordship infers upon this, is, that therefore the Bishops are in
absolute dependency upon the Crown; which is manifestly untrue, since they
cannot be outed at Will and Pleasure, but for Demerit only; and that may fall
upon Temporal Lords as well as Bishops. And therefore neither are they at
Devotion for their Votes; and therefore, in true Construction, no Prejudice can
come by them to that Honorable House. And I pray God their casting out be not
more prejudicial both to State and Church than I am willing to forespeak. After
this his Lordship tells us what he has done in this great Argument, saying, I
have now showed your Lordships how hurtful to themselves and others these
things, which the Bill would take away, have been. I will only Answer some
Objections which I have met withal, and then crave your Pardon for troubling
you so long.



His Lordship tells us he has showed how hurtful these things are both to the
Bishops and others, which this Bill would hew down; and out of his Zeal and
Love to the Church he has gone farther than any Man in this Argument; yet I
conceive he has not showed what he thinks he has. It Is true, he has strongly
labored it, but I hope it will appear he has not mastered it. I shall now see
how he Answers such Objections, as his Lordship says he has met with. And the
First Objection is, his Lordship says,

1. That they have been very Ancient. 2. That they are Established by Law. 3.
That it may be an Infringement to the House of Peers, for the House of Commons
to send up a Bill to take away some of their Members. To these three the Answer
will be easy.
I know not how easy the Answer will be, but these must needs be hard Times
for Bishops, if neither Antiquity can fence them against Novelty, nor Law
defend them against Violence, nor fear of weakening the House of Peers preserve
them against the Eagerness of the House of Commons; and that in the very House
of Peers it self. Let us see then and consider how easy the Answer will be to
these, and how sufficient also.

To the First. Antiquity is no good Plea; for that which is by Experience found
hurtful, the longer it has done hurt, the more cause there is now to remove
it, that it may do no more. Besides, other Irregularities are as ancient which
have been thought fit to be redressed; and this is not so ancient, but that it
may truly be said, Non fuit sic ab initio.

This Answer may be easy enough; but sure it is not sufficient: Nor do I wonder
that Antiquity is no good Plea in this Lord's account; for he is such an Enemy
to it, that he will have his very Religion new. If any thing be ancient it
smells of Antichrist. Yea, but if it be found hurtful, the longer it has done
hurt, the more cause to remove it. That Is true; if it be hurtful in and of it
self; so is not this. If it does hurt constantly or frequently; else you must
cast out the Lay Lords Votes too, and his Lordship's with the rest. For out of
all doubt their Votes do hurt sometimes, and it may be more often and more
dangerously than the Bishops Votes: And when this Lord shall be pleased to tell
us what those other Irregularities are, which are as ancient and yet redressed,
I will consider of them, and then either grant or deny. In the mean time, I
think it has been proved that it is no Irregularity for a Bishop that is
called to it by Supreme Authority, to give Counsel, or otherwise to meddle in
Civil Affairs, so as it take him not quite off from his Calling. And for his
Lordship's Close, That this is not so ancient, but that it may be truly said,
Non fuit sic ab initio; his Lordship is much deceived. For that Speech of our
Savior's, St. Matthew 19. 8. is spoken of Marriage which was instituted in
Paradise, and therefore ab initio, from the beginning, must there be taken from
the Creation, or from the Institution of Marriage soon after it. But I hope his
Lordship means it not so here, to put it off that Bishops had not Votes in the
Parliaments of England from the Creation: For then no question but it may be
truly said, Non fuit sic ab initio. But if his Lordship, or any other, will
apply this Speech to any thing else, which has not its beginning so high, he
must then refer his Words and meaning to that time, in which that thing he
speaks of took its beginning; as is this particular to the beginning of
Parliaments in this Kingdom. And then, under Favor of this Lord, the voting of
Bishops in Parliament is so ancient that it cannot be truly said, Non fuit sic
ab initio: For so far as this Kingdom has any Records to show, Clergymen both
Bishops and Abbots, had free and full Votes in Parliament; so full, as that in
the first Parliament of which we have any certain Records, which was in the
Forty and ninth Year of Henry the Third, there was Summoned by the King to Vote
in Parliament, One hundred and twenty Bishops, Abbots and Priors, and but
Twenty three Lay-Lords. Now there were but Twenty six Bishops in all, and the
Lords being multiplied (to the unspeakable Prejudice of the Crown) into above
One hundred, besides many of their young Sons called by Writ in their Father's
Lifetime, have either found or made a troubled time, to cast the Bishops and
their Votes out of the House.

2. To the Objection for being Established by Law, his Lordship says, The
Lawmakers have the same Power and the same Charge to alter old Laws
inconvenient, as to make new that are necessary.

The Lawmakers have indeed the same Power in them, and the same Charge upon
them, that their Predecessors in former Times had; and there is no question but
old Laws may be Abrogated and new ones made: But this Lord, who seems to be
well versed in the Rules and Laws of Government (which the poor Bishops
understand not) cannot but know that it is a dangerous thing to be often
changing of the Laws; especially such as have been ancient, and where the old
is not inconvenient, nor the new necessary; which is the true State of this
Business, whatever this Lord thinks.

3. And for the Third Objection, the Privileges of the House, this Lord says,
it can be no Breach of them. For either Estate may propose to the other by way
of Bill, what they conceive to be for public Good, and they have Power
respectively of accepting or refusing.

This is an easy Answer indeed, and very true. For either Estate in Parliament
may propose to the other by way of Bill, and they have Power respectively of
accepting or refusing; and there is no Breach of Privilege in all this. But
this easy Answer comes not home. For how my Lord understands this Objection, I
know not; it seems as if it did reach only to the external Breach of some
Privilege, but I conceive they which made the Objection meant much more. As
namely, that by this Bill there was an aim in the Commons to weaken the Lords
House, and by making their Votes fewer, to be the better able to work them to
their own Ends in future Businesses. So the Argument is of equal, if not
greater strength against the Lord's yielding to the Bill to the Iufringement of
their own strength, than to the Commons proposing it, and there is no doubt but
that the Commons might propose their Bill without Breach of Privilege; but
whether the Lords might grant it without impairing their own strength, I leave
the future Times, which shall see the Success of this Act of Parliament, to
judge of the Wisdom of it, which I shall not presume to do. I thought his
Lordship had now done, but he tells us, 4. There are two other Objections which
may seem to have more force; but they will receive satisfactory Answers. The
one is, that if they may remove Bishops, they may as well next time remove
Barons and Earls.



This Lord confesses the two Arguments following are of more force, but he says
they will receive satisfactory Answers. And it may be so. But what Answers
soever they may receive, yet I doubt whether those which that Lord gives be
such: For to this of taking away of Barons and Earls next, his Lordship Answers
two things. First he says, The Reason is not the same; the one sitting by an
Honor invested in their Blood and Hereditary, which though it be in the King
alone to grant, yet being once granted he cannot take away. The other sitting
by a Barony depending upon an Office, which may be taken away; for if they be
deprived of their Office, they sit not.



To this there have been enough said before, yet that it may fully appear this
Reason is not Satisfactory, this Lord should do well to know, or rather to
remember, for I think he knows it already, that though these great Lords have
and hold their Places in Parliament by Blood and Inheritance, and the Bishops
by Baronies depending upon their Office; yet the King, which gives alone, can
no more justly or lawfully alone away their Office without their Demerit, and
that in a legal way, than he can take away Noblemens Honors. And therefore,
for ought is yet said, their Cases are not so much alike as his Lordship would
have them seem. In this indeed they differ somewhat, that Bishops may be
deprived upon more Crimes, than those are for which Earls and Barons may lose
their Honors; but neither of them can be justly done by the King's Will and
Pleasure only. But Secondly, for farther Answer this Lord tells us, The Bishops
sitting there is not so essential. For Laws have been, and may be made, they
being all excluded; but it can never be showed that ever there were Laws made
by the King and them, the Lords and Earls excluded.



This Reason is as little satisfactory to me as the former. For certainly,
according to Law and Prescription of Hundreds of Years, the Bishops sitting in
that House is as essential as the Lords. And this about the Laws made without
them, is built only upon some difficult emergent Cases, from which they desired
to be exempt and free themselves: Not from any constraint of the State; nor
from any Opinion of the King, Peers or People, that it was fit to make Laws
without them. But to this we have given an Answer before.

But this Objection of taking away the Earls and Barons next, strikes (as I
conceive) another way at the Lord's House, than either of those Answers or
Reasons seem to meet with. And perhaps this Lord himself is willing to pass it
by, if he does see it; and it is thus. The House of Commons sees and knows well
enough, that should they bring up a Bill open, and with a bare edge to take
away the Votes from the Lords, it could not possibly be endured by either King
or Peers. Therefore the Bill which may come to take them away next, and which
may be meant in this Objection, may be a Bill to make one House of both, and
set them altogether, under the pretense of greater Unity, and more free and
quick dispatch of all Business, all Messages and Conferences, and breach of
Correspondencies, and Differences happening between the Two Houses, while they
are Two, being by this means taken away. And this I am sure has been much
spoken of since this Parliament began, and may with far more ease be next
compassed now the Bishops are thrust out; both because there are fewer in the
Lord's House to help to cast out such a Bill, and because the Commons House,
which would willingly receive the Lords in among them, would never admit the
Bishops into their House. So that both ways this is made far more easy to
Pass. And, should this happen, I would fain know of this Lord, wherein this
Objection would fail, that they might the next time remove the Barons and the
Earls. Not remove them from making Laws (as his Lordship speaks of it) but
remove them into the House of Commons, where their Votes shall be swallowed up
among the many, and might be quite overmaster'd, though they should not all
Agree and Vote one way. For then the meanest Commoner in that House would have
his Vote as great as the greatest Earls. Whereas now in their own House being
distinct, though all the House of Commons agree upon a Bill, or any thing else;
the Lords may, if they see Reason, alter or reject it. So that if hereafter
they be reduced to one House, I make no question but their Votes are gone next
after the Bishops. And if his Lordship shall think this an impossible
Supposition; let him know, it is not half so impossible, as that which he made
before, of the Heavenly Bodies breaking out of their own Spheres. But we are
now come to the last Objection, the other of the two, which his Lordship says
are stronger. And, 5. The other Objection is this, That this Bill alters the
Foundation of this House; and Innovations, which shake Foundations, are
dangerous.



And truly this Objection seems to me very strong; but perhaps that is by
reason of my Weakness; for my Lord tells us before, that it is capable of a
satisfactory Answer; and here his Lordship gives two for failing.

I Answer, First, That if there should be an Error in the Foundation, when it
shall be found, and the Master Builders be met together, they may, nay, they
ought rather to amend it, than to suffer it to run on still to the prejudice
and danger of the whole Structure.

This Answer, whatever this Lord thinks of it, is not satisfactory; and the
thing will be full of danger, whenever it shall be put to trial. For
Foundations are seldom meddled withal but with great hazard, and a Fundamental
Error in a Kingdom is born with more Safety to the whole than it can be taken
away. And this happens partly because among the many Subjects of a Kingdom
there are different Judgments, and as different Affections; whence it follows,
that all Men are not of Opinion, that that which is called an Error in the
Foundation, is so indeed: Nor do the Affections of all Men dislike it, nay
perhaps the greater, perhaps the better part will approve it. In this Case, if
the Master Builders fall to mending of this somewhat boisterously, may they not
rend all in pieces, to fall about their own Ears, and other Men's? And partly,
because the Master Builders which are to meet to repair the decays of the
State, though in all Ages they have the same Authority to make Laws, yet they
have not in all Ages the same Skill and Wisdom, for the making or the mending
of them. Whence it follows, that even the Master Builders themselves may
mistake, and call that the Error, which is indeed a great part of the Strength
of the Foundation: And so by tampering to mend that which is better already,
endanger the shaking, if not the fall, of the whole Structure, which they would
labor to preserve. And I pray God Posterity do not find it, that even the
Master Builders which are now met, be not so deceived, and with as ill Success,
in casting the Bishops Votes out of the House, under the Name of an Error in
the Foundation. But if this Answer satisfy not, his Lordship may hope his next
will. For, Secondly; he says This is not Fundamental to this House. For it has
stood without them, and done all that appertains to the Power thereof without
them, yea, they being wholly (...): and that which has been done for a time at
the King's pleasure, may be done with as little danger for a longer time; and
when it appears to the fit, and for public good, not only mahy, but ought to
be done altogether by the Supreme Power.



It seems this Lord distrusts his former Answer about mending Fun damental
Errors in a State, and therefore here he denies that Bishops and their Votes
are Fundamental to the Lords House. But I doubt his Lordship is mistaken in
this. For that is Fundamental in any Court, which in that Court is first laid
and settled, upon which all the future Structure is raised. Now in the Lords
House of Parliament, the Bishops Votes were laid at the very first, as well as
the Votes of the Lords Temporal. Nay, with a Precedence both in Place and
Number, and all the Ordinances and Powers of that great Court have equally
proceeded from the Votes of the Bishops and the Lords: and therefore for ought
which yet appears to me, either the Lords Vote are not Fundamental to that
House, or the Bishops are.

But his Lordship proves they are not Fundamental to that House, because that
House has stood without them. But weakly enough, God knows, like a House whose
Foundations are shaken upon one side, and because that House has done all that
appertains to the Power of it without them. It may be so. But I doubt whether
it did all that appertains to the Wisdom of it without them. For this relation
again to that Parliament under Edward the First, from which, his Lordship says
Bishops were excluded; and we know that Parliament is called Indoctum
Parliamentum, the unlearned Parliament: For all the Lawyers were excluded from
that Parliament as well as the Clergymen. And therefore were this Lord
indifferent, he might argue that Lawyers Votes are not Fundamental in the
Commons House; which is true, though no way convenient, rather than that Bishops
Votes are not Fundamental in the Lords House; which is utterly against all
Truth and Convenience. But his Lordship's Tooth is so sharp, and so black
against that Order, that he snaps at them upon all, and upon no Occasion, and
would invenom them had he Power.

To make this seem the better, his Lordship ends this Speech with a piece of
Philosophy, which I cannot approve neither. For he says, That which has been
done for a time at the King's Pleasure, may be done with as little danger for a
longer time. For First, this Proposition is unsound in it self: For many Cases
may happen, in which diverse things may be done for a Prince's Pleasure once, or
for a time, and with no great danger; which continued or often repeated, will
be full of danger, and perhaps not endured by the Subject. Secondly, I am
confident, let the Tables be but turned from a Bishop to a Layman, and this
Lord shall eat his own Proposition. For instance; in another Parliament, and in
a time generally received to be as good as that of Edward the First, in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and within my own Memory, Mr. Peter Wentworth moved in the
House of Commons to have an Heir apparent declared for the better and securer
Peace of the Kingdom in Aftertimes. The Queen, for her mere Will and Pleasure
(for that which he did was no Offense against Law) took him either out of the
House, or so soon as he came out of the House, clapped him up in the Tower,
where he lay till his Death. What will this Lord say to this? Will he say this
was done once at the Prince's Pleasure? Why then I return his Proposition upon
him, and tell him, that that which was done once at one Prince's Pleasure, may
be done oftener at other Prince's Pleasure with as little danger. Or will this
Lord say this was not done at the Queen's Pleasure, but but she might justly
and legally do so? Then other Princes of this Realm having the same Power
residing in them, may do by other Parliament Men, as she did with this
Gentleman. And which soever of the two he shall say, King Charles had as good
Right, and with as little Breach of Parliament-Privilege, to demand the Six Men
which by his Attorney he had accused of Treason, as that great Queen had to lay
hold on Mr. Wentworth.

Since I had written this, the Observer steps in and tells us, That a
Observations upon some of His Majesty's late Answers, p. 7.
mere Example (though of Queen Elizabeth) is no Law; for some of her Actions
were retracted: and that yet without question Queen Elizabeth might do that
which a Prince less beloved could never have done. It Is true, that a mere
Example is not a Law, and yet the Parliaments of England, even in that happy
Queen's Time, were not apt to bear Examples against Law; and if that she did
were not against Law, that is as much as I ask. For then neither is that against
Law which King Charles did upon a far higher Accusation, than could be charged
against Mr. Wentworth. It Is true again, that Queen Elizabeth might do that
which a Prince less beloved could not have done; that is, she might do that
with safety, which a Prince less beloved could not do, that is, not do with
safety. But whatsoever is lawful for one Prince to do, is as lawful for
another; though perhaps not so expedient, in regard of what will be well or ill
taken by the People. But otherwise the Peoples Affection to the Prince can be
no Rule nor Measure of the Princes Justice to the People.

I will be bold to give him another Instance. King Charles demanded Ship Money
all over the Kingdom: Either he did this justly and legally for the Defense of
himself and the Public; or he did it at his Will and Pleasure, thinking that
an honorable and fit way of Defense. I am sure this Lord will not say he did
it legally, for his Vote concurred to the condemning of it in Parliament: And
if he say he did it at his own Will and Pleasure, then I would fain know of his
Lordship, whether this which was done for a time at the King's Pleasure, may be
done with as little danger to the Liberty of the Subject, and the Property of
his Goods, for a longer time, and so be continued on the Subject? And if he
says it may, why did he Vote against it as a thing dangerous? And if he says it
may not, then he must Condemn his own Proposition. For he cannot but see, that
that which is once done, or done for a short time at a Prince's Will and
Pleasure, cannot be often repeated or continued, but with far greater danger
than it was once done. Though for the thing it self, if it were not legal, I am
sorry it is not made so. For it would be, under God, the greatest Honor and
Security that this Nation ever had: Whereas now the Tugging which falls out
between the King's Power, and the Peoples Liberty, will in time (unless God's
infinite Mercy prevents it) do that in this Kingdom, which I abhor to think on.

This Lord goes on yet and tells us, That that which has been so done for a
time, when it appears to be fit and for public Good, not only may, but ought
to be done altogether by the Supreme Power. So then here this is his Lordship's
Doctrine, that that which was once done at a Prince's Will and Pleasure, when
it shall appear to be fit, and for the public Good (as he supposes here the
taking away of Bishops Votes to be) it not only may, but ought to be done
altogether by the Supreme Power, as now that is done by Act of Parliament. Not
only may, but ought! Soft a little; His Lordship had the same Phrase
immediately before. Why but, First, every thing that is fit, ought not by and
by to be made up into a Law: For fitness may vary very often, which Laws should
not. Secondly, Every thing that is for the public Good, is not by and by to be
made up into a Law. For many things in Times of Difficulty and Exigency may be
for public Good, which in some other Times may be hurtful, and therefore not
to be generally bound within a Law. And if his Lordship shall say, as here he
does, that they ought to be done altogether, and be made up into a Law by the
Supreme Power, but fitted only to such Times; under his Lordship's Favor, that
ought not to be neither. For let such a Law be made, and he that is once Master
of the Times, will have the Law ready to serve his turn and theirs, whether the
Times bear the like Necessity or not.

And since every thing that is fit, and is for public Good, ought not by and
by, without more Experience of it, to be made up into a Law; then much less
that which appears so; yea, though it appear never so evidently; yea, and to
the wisest Parliament that ever sat. It Is true, they may make such a thing into
a Law, and it is fit for the most part so to do; but to say they ought to do it,
is more than I can believe. For no Parliament is or can be so wise as to be
infallible, and no Evidence can be so apparent unto them in those things of
infinite variety for the public Good, and in which is so much uncertainty; but
that they may both piously and prudently forbear the making of some of them
into a Law if they please. But no Man may forbear that which he ought to do,
when he ought to do it: And till that time comes, he ought not. This Lord has
now done, and so have I: And I shall end with my Prayers to God, that this Act
of Parliament now made to cast the Bishops and their Votes out of the
Parliament, how fit soever it seems, and how much soever it appears to this
Lord to be for the public Good, do not turn to the decay of Religion, and the
great Damage and Detriment of King and Peers, of Church and State.

Amen.
A SPEECH Delivered in the STAR CHAMBER, On Wednesday the Fourteenth of June,
1637. AT THE CENSURE OF J. Bastwick, H. Burton, and W. Prinn; CONCERNING
Pretended Innovations IN THE CHURCH.By the Most Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM
LAUD, Then Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty, CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
I Had no purpose to come in Print, but Your Majesty commands it, and I obey.
Most sorry I am for the Occasion that induced me to speak, and that since has
moved You to command me to Print. Nor am I ignorant that many things, while
they are spoken and pass by the Ear but once, give great Content; which when
they come to the Eyes of Men, and their often Scanning, may lie open to some
Exceptions. This may fall to my Lot in this particular, and very easily,
considering my many Diversions, and the little time I could snatch from other
Employment to attend this. Yet choose I rather to obey Your Majesty, than to
Sacrifice to mine own Privacy and Content.

Since then this Speech uttered in public in the Star Chamber, must now come
to be more public in Print; I humbly desire Your Sacred Majesty to Protect me,
and it, from the undeserved Calumny of those Men, whose Mouths are spears and
arrows, and their Tongues a sharp sword, Psalm. 57. 4. Though as the wise Man
speaks, their foolish Mouths have already called for their own stripes, and
their Lips (and Pens) been a snare for their Souls, Prove. 18. 6, 7.

The Occasion which led me to this Speech is known. There have of late been
diverse Libels spread against the Prelates of this Church. And they have not
been more bitter, which is the Shame of these raging Waves, than they are
utterly (...). 13.
false, which is Our Happiness. But I must humbly beseech Your Majesty to
consider, That it is not We only, that is, the Bishops, that are struck at, but,
through our sides, Your Majesty, Your Honor, Your Safety, Your Religion, is
impeached. For what Safety can You expect, if You loose the Hearts of Your
People? And how can You retain their Hearts, if You change their Religion into
Superstition? And what Honor can You hope for, either present, or derivative
to Posterity, if You attend Your Government no better than to suffer Your
Prelates to put this Change upon You? And what Majesty can any Prince retain,
if he lose his Honor and his People?

God be thanked it is in all Points otherwise with You: For God has blessed You
with a Religious Heart, and not subject to Change. And he has filled You with
Honor in the Eyes of Your People: And by their Love and Dutifulness He has
made You safe. So that Your Majesty is upheld, and Your Crown flourishing in
the Eyes of Christendom. And God forbid any Libellous Blast at Home from the
Tongues or Pens of a few, should shrivel up any growth of these.

We have received, and daily do receive from God, many and great Blessings by
You: And I hope they are not many that are unthankful to You, or to God for
You. And that there should be none in a Populous Nation, even Enemies to their
own Happiness, cannot be expected. Yet I shall desire even these to call
themselves to an Account, and to remember, that Blasphemy against God, and
slandering the Footsteps of his Anointed, are joined together, Psalm. 89. For
Psalm. 89. v. 50. Wherewith thine Enemies has Blasphemed Thee, and slandered
the Footsteps of thine Anointed.
he that Blasphemes God, will never stick at the Slander of his Prince; and he
that gives himself the liberty to Slander his Prince, will quickly ascend to
the next Highest, and Blaspheme God.

But then, as I desire them to remember, so I do most humbly beseech Your
Majesty to account with Your self too: And not to measure Your Peoples Love by
the Unworthiness of those few. For a Loyal and Obedient People You have, and
such as will spare nor Livelihood, nor Life, to do You Service; and are joyed
at the Heart to see the Moderation of Your Government, and Your Constancy to
maintain Religion, and Your Piety in Exampling it.

And as I thus beseech You for Your People in General, so do I particularly for
the Three Professions which have a little suffered in these Three most
Notorious Libellers Persons.

And first for my own Profession, I humbly beg of Your Majesty to think Mr.
Burton has not in this many Followers, and am heartily sorry he would needs
lead. The best is, Your Majesty knows what made his Rancour swell; I Will say no
more.

And for the Law, I truly Honor it with my Heart, and believe Mr. Prynn may
seek all the Inns of Court, (and with a Candle too if he will) and scarce find
such a Malevolent as himself against State and Church. And because he has so
frequently thrust mistaken Law into these Pamphlets, to wrong the Governors of
the Church, and abuse your good and wellminded People, and makes Burton and
Bastwick utter Law which, God knows, they understand not, (for I doubt his Pen
is in all the Pamphlets) I do humbly, in the Church's Name desire of Your
Majesty, that it may be resolved by all the Reverend Judges of England, and
then published by Your Majesty, That our keeping Courts, and issuing Process in
our own Names, and the like Exceptions formerly taken, and now renewed, are not
against the Laws of the Realm, (as it is most certain they are not) that so the
Church-Governnors may go on cheerfully in their Duty, and the Peoples Minds be
quieted by this Assurance, that neither the Law, nor their Liberty, as
Subjects, is thereby infringed.

And for Physic, the Profession is honorable, and safe; and I know the
Professors of it will remember that, Corpus Humanum, Man's Body, is that, about
which their Art is conversant, not Corpus Ecclesiasticum, or Politicum, the
Body of the Church, State, or Commonwealth. Bastwick only has been bold that
way. But the Proverb in the Gospel, in the St. Luke 4. 23.
Fourth of St. Luke is all I Will say to him, Medice, cura teipsum, Physician,
heal thy self. And yet let me tell Your Majesty, I believe he has gained more
by making the Church a Patient, than by all the Patients he ever had beside.

Sir, both my self, and my Brethren have been very coursely used by the Tongues
and Pens of these Men, yet shall I never give Your Majesty any sow'r Counsel; I
shall rather manifie Your Clemency, that proceeded with these Offenders in a
Court of Mercy as well as Justice: Since (as the Reverend Judges then declared)
You might have justly called the Offenders into another Court, and put them to
it in a way that might have exacted their Lives, for their stirring (as much as
in them lay) of Mutiny and Sedition.

Yet this I shall be bold to say, and Your Majesty may consider of it in Your
Wisdom, That one way of Government is not always either fit or safe, when the
Humors of the People are in a continual Change: Especially, when such Men as
these shall work upon Your People, and labor to infuse into them such
malignant Principles, to introduce a Parity in the Church or Commonwealth. Et
si non satis sua sponte insaniant, instigare, And to spur on such among them as
are too sharply set already: And by this means make and prepare all Advantages
for the Roman Party to scorn Us, and pervert Them.

I pray God bless Your Majesty, Your Royal Consort, and Your hopeful Posterity,
that You may Live in Happiness; Govern with Wisdom; Support Your People by
Justice; Relieve them by Mercy; Defend them by Power and Success; And Guide
them in the true Religion by Your Laws and most Religious Example, all the long
and lasting Days of Your Life: Which are and shall be the daily Prayers of

Your Sacred Majesty's most Loyal Subject, and Most Dutiful Servant, as most
bound, W. Cant.

Archbishop LAVD's SPEECH AT THE CENSURE OF J. Bastwick, H. Burton, and W.
Prinn.
My LORDS,
I Shall not need to speak of the infamous Course of Libelling in any kind: Nor
of the Punishment of it, which in some Cases was Capital by the Imperial Laws;
as appears, Cod. l. 9. T. 36. Nor how patiently some great Men, very great Men
indeed, have born Animo civili (that is Sueton. his word In Jul. c. 75.
) laceratam existimationem, The tearing and rending of their Credit and
Reputation, with a gentle, nay, a generous Mind.

But of all Libels, they are most odius which pretend Religion: As if that of
all things did desire to be defended by a Mouth that is like an open Sepulcher,
or by a Pen that is made of a sick and a loathsome Quill.

There were Times when Persecutions were great in the Church, even to exceed
Barbarity it self: Did any Martyr or Confessor, in those Times, Libel the
Governors? Surely no; not one of them to my best Remembrance: yet these
complain of Persecution without all show of cause; and in the mean time Libel
and Rail without all measure. So little of kin are they to those which suffer
for Christ, or the least part of Christian Religion.

My Lords, It is not every Man's Spirit to hold up against the Venom which
Libellers spit. For S. Ambrose, who was a stout and a worthy Prelate, tells us,
not that himself, but that a far greater Man than he, that is King David, had
found out (so it seems in his Judgment 'twas no matter of ordinary Ability)
Grande inventum, a great and mighty Invention, how to swallow and put off those
bitter Contumilies of the Tongue In Apol. 1. David. c. 6.
: And those of the Pen are no whit less, and spread farther. And it was a great
one indeed, and well beseemed the greatness of David. But I think it will be
far better for me to look upward, and practice it, than to look downward, and
discourse upon it.

In the mean time I shall remember what an Ancient, under the name of S.
Hierom, tells me *, Indignum est and praeposterum, It Is unworthy Ad Ocean. de
Ferend. Opprob.
in it self, and preposterous in demeanor for a Man to be ashamed for doing
good, because other Men glory in speaking ill.

And I can say it clearly and truly, as in the presence of God, I have done
nothing, as a Prelate, to the uttermost of what I am conscious, but with a
single Heart, and with a sincere Intention for the good Government and Honor
of the Church, and the maintenance of the Orthodox Truth and Religion of
Christ, professed, established, and maintained in this Church of England.

For my Care of this Church, the reducing of it into Order, the upholding of
the external Worship of God in it, and the settling of it to the Rules of its
first Reformation, are the Causes (and the sole Causes, whatever are pretended)
of all this malicious Storm, which has lowred so black upon me, and some of my
Brethren. And in the mean time, they which are the only, or the chief
Innovators of the Christian World, having nothing say, accuse us of Innovation;
They themselves and their Accomplices in the mean time being the greatest
Innovators that the Christian World has almost ever known. I deny not but
others have spread more dangerous Errors in the Church of Christ; but no Men,
in any Age of it, have been more guilty of Innovation then they, while
themselves cry out against it: Quis tulerit Gracchos?

And I said well, Quis tulerit Gracchos? For it is most apparent to any Man that
will not wink, that the Intention of these Men, and their Abettors, was and is
to raise a Sedition, being as great Incendiaries in the State (where they get
Power) as they have ever been in the Church; Novatian himself hardly greater.

Our main Crime is (would they all speak out, as some of them do) Burton's
Apol. p. 110.
that we are Bishops; were we not so, some of us might be as passable as other
Men.

And a great trouble it is to them, that we maintain that our Calling of Bishops
is Jure Divino, by Divine Right: Of this I have said enough, and in this place,
in Leighton's Case, nor will I repeat. Only this I will say, and abide by it,
that the Calling of Bishops is Jure Divino, by Divine Right, though not all
Adjuncts to their Calling. And this I say in as direct opposition to the Church
of Rome, as to the Puritan Humor.

And I say farther, that from the Apostles times, in all Ages, in all Places,
the Church of Christ was governed by Bishops: And Lay Elders never heard of,
till Calvin's newfangled Device at Geneva.

Now this is made by these Men, as if it were Contra Regem, against the King,
in Right or in Power.

But that is a mere ignorant shift; for our being Bishops, Jure Divino, by
Divine Right, takes nothing from the King's Right or Power over us. For though
our Office be from God and Christ immediately, yet may we not exercise that
Power, either of Order or Jurisdiction, but as God has appointed us, that is,
not in His Majesty's, or any Christian King's Kingdoms, but by and under the
Power of the King given us so to do.

And were this a good Argument against us, as Bishops, it must needs be good
against Priests and Ministers too; for themselves grant that their Calling is
Jure Divino, by Divine Right; and yet I hope they will not say, that to be
Priests and Ministers is against the King, or any his Royal Prerogatives.

Next, Suppose our Callings, as Bishops, could not be made good Jure Divino, by
Divine Right, yet Jure Ecclesiastico, by Ecclesiastical Right, it cannot be
denied. And here in England the Bishops are confirmed, both in their Power and
Means, by Act of Parliament. So that here we stand in as good Case as the
present Laws of the Realm can make us. And so we must stand till the Laws shall
be repealed by the same Power that made them.

Now then, suppose we had no other string to hold by (I say suppose this, but I
grant it not) yet no Man can Libel against our Calling (as these Men do) be it
in Pulpit, Print or otherwise, but he Libels against the King and the State, by
whose Laws we are established. Therefore, all these Libels, so far forth as
they are against our Calling, are against the King and the Law, and can have no
other purpose, than to stir up Sedition among the People.

If these Men had any other Intention, or if they had any Christian or
charitable desire to reform any thing amiss; why did they not modestly Petition
his Majesty about it, that in his Princely Wisdom he might set all things
right, in a Just and Orderly manner? But this was neither their Intention nor
Way. For one clamours out of his Pulpit, and all of them from the Press, and in
a most virulent and unchristian manner set themselves to make a Heat among the
People; and so by Mutiny, to effect that which by Law they cannot; and by most
false and unjust Calumnies to defame both our Callings and Persons. But for my
Part, as I pity their Rage, so I heartily pray God to forgive their Malice.

No Nation has ever appeared more jealous of Religion, than the People of
England have ever been. And their Zeal to God's Glory has been, and at this
day is a great honor to them. But this Zeal of theirs, has not been at all
times and in all Persons, alike guided by knowledge. Now Zeal, as it is of
excellent use, where it sees its way; so it is very dangerous company, where it
goes on in the You may see it in the Example of S. Paul himself, whose very
zeal in the darkness of his Understanding, which he then had, made him
persecute Christ and his Church, Act. 22. 3, 4. And he was very dangerous
company then; for he breathed out threatenings against the Disciples, Act. 9. 1.
So true is that of Saint Greg. Naz. Orat. 21. Zelus Iracundiam acuit: All Zeal
puts an edge to Anger it self: And that must needs be dangerous in the dark.
dark: And these Men knowing the Disposition of the People, have labored
nothing more, than to misinform their knowledge, and misguide their Zeal, and
so to fire that into a Sedition, in hope that they whom they causlesly hate,
might miscarry in it.

For the main scope of these Libels is to kindle a Jealousy in Men's Minds,
that there are some great Plots in Hand, dangerous Plots (so Page 5.
says Mr. Burton expressly) to change the Orthodox Religion established in
England; and to bring in, I know not what, Romish Superstition in the room of
it. As if the external decent worship of God could not be upheld in this
Kingdom, without bringing in of Popery.

Now by this Art of theirs, give me leave to tell you that the King is most
desperately abused and wounded in the Minds of his People, and the Prelates
shamefully.

The King most desparately: For there is not a more cunning trick in the World,
to withdraw the Peoples Hearts from their Sovereign, than to persuade them that
he is changing true Religion, and about to bring in gross Superstition upon
them.

And the Prelates shamefully: For they are charged to seduce, and lay the Plot,
and be the Instruments.

For his Majesty first. This I know, and upon this occasion take it my Duty to
speak: There is no Prince in Christendom more sincere in his Religion, nor more
constant to it, than the King. And he gave such a Testimony of this at his
being in Spain, as I much doubt whether the best of that Faction durst have
done half so much as his Majesty did, in the Face of that Kingdom. And this
you, my Lord, the Earl of Holland, and other Persons of Honor, were Eye and
Ear Witnesses of, having the happiness to attend Him there. And at this day, as
his Majesty (by God's great Blessing both on him and us) knows more, so is he
more settled and more confirmed, both in the Truth of the Religion here
established, and in Resolution to maintain it.

And for the Prelates; I assure my self, they cannot be so base, as to live
Prelates in the Church of England, and labor to bring in the Superstitions of
the Church of Rome upon themselves and it. And if any should be so foul, I do
not only leave him to God's Judgment, but (if these Libellers, or any other,
can disdover that his base and irreligious falsehood) to shame also, and severe
Punishment from the State: And in any just way, no Man's Hand shall be more, or
sooner against him, than mine shall be.

And for my self, to pass by all the scandalous reproacbes, which they have
most injuriously cast upon me, I shall say this only.

First, I know of no Plot, nor purpose of altering the Religion established.

Secondly, I have ever been far from attempting any thing that may truly be
said to tend that way in the least degree: And to these two, I here offer my
Oath.

Thirdly, If the King had a mind to change Religion, (which I know he has not,
and God forbid he should ever have) he must seek for other Instruments. For as
basely as these Men conceive of me, yet I thank God, I know my Duty well, both
to God and the King: And I know that all the Duty I owe to the King, is under
God. And my great happiness it is (though not mine alone, but your Lordships
and all his Subjects with me) that we live under a Gracious and a Religious
King, that will ever give us leave to serve God first, and Him next. But were
the days otherwise, I thank Christ for it, I yet know not how to serve any Man
against the Truth of God, and I hope I shall never learn it.

But to return to the business; what is their Art to make the World believe a
change of Religion is endeavored? What? Why forsooth, they say, there are
great Innovations brought in by the Prelates, and such as tend to the advancing
of Popery.

Now that the Vanity and Falsehood of this may appear, I shall humbly defire
your Lordships to give me leave to recite briefly all the Innovations charged
upon us, be they of less or greater Moment, and as briestly to answer them. And
then you shall clearly see, whether any cause has been given of these unsavory
Libels; and withal, whether there be any show of cause to fear a change of
Religion. And I will take these great pretended Innovations in order, as I meet
with them.

First, I begin with the News from Ipswich.

Where the First Page. (...)
Innovation is, that the last Years Fast was enjoined to be without Sermons in
London, the Suburbs, and other infected Places, contrary to the Orders for
other Fasts in former times: Whereas Sermons are the only means to humble Men,
etc.

To this I say First. That an after-Age may without Offense, learn to avoid any
visible Inconvenience observed in the former. And there was visible
Inconvenience observed in Men's former flocking to Sermons in Infected Places.

Secondly, This was no particular Act of Prelates; but the business was debated
at the Council Table, being a matter of State, as well as of Religion. And it
was concluded for no Sermons in those Infected Places, upon this Reason, that
Infected Persons or Families, known in their own Parishes, might not take
occasion upon those by-days to run to other Churches where they were not known,
as many use to do, to hear some humorons Men Preach; For on the Sundays, when
they better kept their own Churches: The Danger is not so great altogether.

Nor Thirdly, is that true, that Sermons are the Only means to humble Men. For
though the Preaching of God's Word, where it is performed according to his
Ordinance, be a great means of many good Effects in the Souls of Men; Yet no
Sermons are the only means to humble Men. And some of their Sermons are fitter
a great deal for other Operations: Namely, to stir up Sedition, as you may see
by Mr. (...); for this his printed Libel was a Sermon first, and a Libel too.
And it is the best part of a Fast to abstain from such Sermons.

2. The Second Innovation is, Page. (...)
That Wednesday was appointed for the Fast Day, and that this was done with
this Intention, by the Example of this Fast without Preaching, to suppress all
the Wednesday Lectures in London.

To this I answer First, That the appointing of Wednesday for the Fast Day was
no Innovation. For it was the day in the last Fast before this: And I my self
remember it so, above forty years since more than once.

Secondly, If there be any Innovation in it, the Prelates named not the day; my
Lord Keeper, I must appeal to your Lordship: The day was first named by your
Lordship, as the usual and fittest day. And yet I dare say, and swear too, that
your Lordship had no aim to bring in Popery; nor to suppress all, or any the
Wednesday Lectures in London. Besides, these Men live to see the Fast ended,
and no one Wednesday Lecture suppressed.

3. The Third Innovation Page. 3
is, that the Prayer for seasonable weather was purged out of this last
Fast-Book, which was (say they) one cause of Ship-wrecks and tempestuous
weather.

To this I say, First in the General; this Fast-Book, and all that have
formerly been made, have been both made and published by the command of the
King, in whose sole Power it is to call a Fast. And the Archbishop and Bishops
to whom the ordering of the Book is committed, have power under the King, to
put in, or leave out, whatsoever they think fit for the present Occasion; as
their Predecessors have ever done before them. Provided that nothing be In
contrary to the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England

And this may serve in the General for all Alterations, in that or any other
Fast-Book, or Books of Devotion upon any particular Occasions, which may and
ought to vary with several times, and we may, and do, and will justify, under
his Majestys Power, all such Alterations made therein.

Secondly, For the particular. When this last-Book was set out, the weather was
very seasonable. And it is not the custom of the Church, nor fit in it self to
pray for seasonable weather when we have it, but when we want it. When the
former Book was set out, the weather was extreme ill, and the Harvest in
Danger; Now the Harvest was in, and the weather good.

Thirdly, (...) most inconsequent to say, that the leaving that Prayer out of
the Book of Devotions, caused the Shipwrecks and the Tempests which followed.
And as bold they are with God Almighty, in saying it was the cause: For sure I
am, God never told them that was the cause. And if God never revealed it, they
cannot come to know it; yet had the Bishops been Prophets, and foreseen these
Accidents, they would certainly have prayed against them.

Fourthly, Had any Minister found it necessary to use this Prayer at any one
time during the Fast, he might with ease and without Danger, have supplied that
want, by using that Prayer to the same purpose, which is in the Ordinary
Liturgy.

Fifthly, I humbly desire your Lordships to weigh well the Consequence of this
great and dangerous Innovation. The Prayer for fair weather was left out of the
Book for the Fast; Therefore the Prelates intend to bring in Popery. An
excellent Consequence, were there any show of Reason in it.

4 The Fourth Innovation Page. 3.
is, That there is one very useful Collect left out, and a Clause omitted in
another.

To this I answer First, As before; It was lawful for us to alter what we
thought fit.

And Secondly, Since that Collect made mention of Preaching, and the Act of
State forbad Sermons on the Fast-days in infected Places, we thought it fit, in
pursuance of that Order, to leave out that Collect.

And Thirdly, For the branch in the other, which is the first Collect, though
God did deliver our (...) out of Romish Superstition, yet ( God be blessed for
it) we were never in. And therefore that clause being (...) expressed, we
thought fit to pass it over.

5. The Fifth Innovation Page. 3.
is, That in the sixth Order for the Fast, there is a passage left out
concerning the abuse of Fasting in relation to Merit.

To this I answer. That he to whom the ordering of that Book to the Press was
committed, did therefore leave it out; because in this Age and Kingdom there is
little Opinion of Meriting by Fasting.

Nay, on the contray, the Contempt and Scorn of all Fasting (save what humorous
Men call for of themselves) is so rank, that it would grieve any Christian Man
to see the necessary Orders of the Church concerning Fasting, both in Lent and
at other set times, so vilified as they are.

6. The Sixth Innovation Page. 3.
is, That the Lady Elizabeth and her Princely Children are dashed (that is their
phrase) out of the new Collect, whereas they were in (...) Collect of the
former Book.

For this First, The Author of the News knows full well that they are left out
of the Collect in the latter Editions of the Common Prayer Book, as well as in
the Book for the Fast. And this was done according to the Course of the Church,
which ordinarily names none in the Prayer but the Right Line descending. Yet
this was not done till the King himself commanded it; as I have to show under
his Majesty's Hand.

Secondly, I beseech your Lordships to consider, what must be the Consequence
here: The Queen of Bohemia and her Children are left out of the Collect,
therefore the Prelates intend to bring in Popery; For that (you know) they say,
is the end of all these Innovations. Now if this be the end and the
Consequence, truly the Libellers have done very dutifully to the King, to
poison his People with this conceit; that the Lady Elizabeth and her Children
would keep Popery out of this Kingdom, but the King and his Children will not.
And many as good Offices as these have they done the King quite through these
Libels, and quite through his Kingdoms. For My part, I honor the Queen of
Bohemia, and her Line, as much as any Man whatsoever, and shall be as ready to
serve them, but I know not how to depart from my Allegiance, as I doubt these
Men have done.

7. The Seventh Innovation Page. 3.
is, That these words (who art the Father of thine Elect and of their Seed) are
changed in the Preface of that Collect, which is for the Prince and the King's
Children. And with a most spiteful inference, that this was done by the
Prelates to exclude the King's Children out of the number of God's Elect. And
they call it an intolerable Impiety and horrid Treason.

To this I answer, First, That this Alteration was made in my Predecessor's
time, before I had any Authority to meddle with these things farther than I was
called upon by him

Secondly, This is not therefore to lay any (...) upon my Predecessor; for he
did in that but his Duty: For his Majesty acknowledges it was done by his
special Direction, as having then no Children to pray for.

And Thirdly, This Collect could not be very old, for it had no being in the
Common Prayer Book all Queen Elizabeth's time, she having no Issue.

The Truth is, it was made at the coming in of King James; and must of
necessity be changed over and over again pro ratione Temporum, as Times and
Persons vary. And this is the Intolerable Impiety, and horrid Treason they
charge upon Us.

In this Method the Innovations are set down in the News from Ipswich. But then
in Mr. Burion's News from Friday-street (called his Apology) they are in
another Order, and more are added. Therefore with your Lordship's leave I will
not repeal any of these, but go on to the rest, which Mr. Burton adds.

8. The eighth Innovation Burton's Apology, page 2.
is, That in the Epistle the Sunday before Easter, we have put out In, and made
it At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow; which Alteration, he says, is
directly against the Act of Parliament.

Here give me leave to tell you, it is At the Name of Jesus, in the late Learned
Translation made in King James his time. About which many Learned Men of best
note in the Kingdom were employed, besides some Prelates.

But to this I Answer: First, It Is true, the Common Prayer Book was confirmed
by Act of Parliament, and so all things contained in it, at the passing of that
Act. But I hope if any thing were false Printed then, the Parliament did not
intend to pass those slips for current.

Secondly, I am not of Opinion, that if one word be put in for another, so they
bear both the same Sense, that there is any great matter done against the Act
of Parliament.

Thirdly, This can make no Innovation. For In the Name, and At the Name of
Jesus, can make no Essential Difference here. And Mr. Pryn (whose Darling
business it has long been to cry down the Honor due to the Son of God, at the
mentioning of his saving Name Jesus) knows the Grammar Rule well, In a Place or
at a Place, etc.

Fourthly, If there were any Error in the change of In into At; I do here
solemnly protest to you, I know not how it came: For authority from the
Prelates, the Printers had none; and such a word is easily changed in such a
negligent Press as we have in England. Or if any altered it purposely, for
ought I know, they did it to gratify the Preciser sort. For therein they
followed the Geneva Translation, and Printed at Geneva, 1557 In Octavo.
. where the words are, At the Name of Jesus. And that is 94 years ago; and
therefore no Innovation made by us.

Fifthly, This I find in the Queen's Injunctions Injunction 52.
, without either word In or At. Whenever the Name of Jesus shall be in any
Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise pronounced in the Church ('it is enjoined) that due
Reverence be made of all Persons, Young and Old, with lowliness of Coursy and
uncovering of the Heads of the Men-kind, as thereunto does necessarily belong,
and heretofore has been accustomed. So here is necessity laid upon it, and
custom for it, and both expressed by Authority in the very beginning of the
Reformation; and is therefore no Innovation now.

9. The Ninth Innovation Page. 3.
is, That two places are changed in the Prayers set forth for the Fifth of
November: And ordered to be read (they say) by Act of Parliament. The first
place is ohanged thus, from Root out that Babylomish and Antichristian Sect,
which say of (...), etc. Into this form of Words; Root out that Babylonish and
Antichristian Sect (of them) which say, etc. The second place went thus in the
old: Cut off these Workers of Iniquity, whose Religion is Rebellion. But in the
Book Printed 1635, it is thus altered; Cut (...) those Workers of Iniquity, who
turn Religion into Rebellion, etc.

To this I say, First, It Is a notorious Untruth, that this Book was ordered to
be Read by Act of Parliament. The Act of Parliament indeed is Printed before
it; and therein is a Command for Prayers and Thanksgivings every Fifth of
November; but not one Word or Syllable for the Form of Prayer: That Is left to
the Church; therefore here is no Innovation against that Act of Parliament.

Secondly, The Alteration first mentioned, that is, That Sect, or That Sect of
(...); if of so small Consequence, as it is not worth the speaking of: Besides,
if there be any thing of moment in it, it is answered in the next.

Thirdly, Both for that and the second place, which seems of more moment; and
so for the rest not only in that Book, but that other also for His Majesty's
Coronation; His Majesty expressly commanded Me to make the Alterations, and see
them Printed. And here are both the Books with His Majesty's Warrant to each of
them. So that herein I conceive I did not offend, unless it were that I gave
not these Men notice of it, or asked them leave to obey the King.

Against this there can be but two Objections, should Malice it self go to
work. The one is, That I moved His Majesty to command the Change. And the
other, That now, when I saw my self challenged for it, I procured His Majesty's
Hand for my security.

To these I Answer clearly, First, That I did not move the King, directly or
indirectly, to make this Change.

And Secondly, That I had His Majesty's Hand to the Book, not now, but then,
and before ever I caused them to be Printed; as now they are. And that both
these are true, I here again freely offer my self to my Oath.

And yet Fourthly, That you may see His Gracious Majesty used not his Power
only in commanding this Change; but his Wisdom also; I shall adventure to give
you my Reasons, such as they are, why this Alteration was most fit, if not
necessary.

My first Reason is, In the Litany in Henry VIII. his time It was put into the
Litany of Hen. VIII.'s time, as appears in his Primer, with his Injunction
before it.
: and also under Edward VI. And it is in both the Service Books of Edw. VI. both
that which was Printed 1549, and in that which was after, Anno 1552.
there was this Clause: From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his
detestable Enormities, from all false Doctrine, etc. Good Lord deliver us. But
in the Litany in Queen Elizabeth's time this Clause about the Pope was left
out, and it seems of purpose, for avoiding of Scandal: And yet the Prelates for
that not accounted Innovators, or Introducers of Popery. Now it is a far greater
Scandal to call their Religion Rebellion, than it is to call their chief Bishop
Tyrant.

And this Reason is drawn from Scandal, which must ever be avoided as much as
it may.

My second Reason is, That the Learned make but Three Religions to have been of
old in the World, Paganisns, Judaism, and Christianity. And now they have added
a Fourth, which is Turcism, and is an absurd mixture of the other Three. Now if
this ground of theirs be true (as it is generally received) perhaps it will be
of dangerous Consequence sadly to avow, that the (...) Religion is (...). That
some Opinions of theirs teach Rebellion, that is apparently true, the other
would be thought on, to say no more. And this Reason well weighed, is taken
from the very Foundations of Religion it self.

My third Reason is, Because if you make their Religion to be Rebellion, then
you make their Religion and Rebellion to be all one. And that is against the
ground both of State and the Law. For when diverse Romish Priests and Jesaits
have deservedly suffered Death for Treason, is it not the constant and just
Profession of the State, that they never put any Man to Death for Religion, but
for Rebellion and Treason only? Does not the State truly affirm, That there was
never any Law made against the Life of a Papist, quatenus a Papist only? And is
not all this stark false, if their very Religion be Rebellion? For if their
Religion be Rebellion, it is not only false, but impossible, that the same Man
in the same Act should suffer for his Rebellion, and not for his Religion.

And this King James of ever blessed Memory understood passing well, when (in
his Premonition to all Christian Monarchs Page 336.
) he says, I do constantly (...) that no Papist either in my time, or in the
time of the late (...), ever died for his Conscience. Therefore he did not
think their very Religion was Rebellion: Though this Clause passed through
Inadvertency in his time. And this Reason is grounded both upon the Practice
and the Justice of the Law.

Which of these Reasons, or whether any other better, were in His Majesty's
Thoughts, when he commanded the Alteration of this Clause, I know not. But I
took it my Duty to lay it before you, that the King had not only Power, but
Reason to command it.

10. The Tenth Innovation Page 3.
is, That the Prayer for the Navy is (...) out of the late Book for the Fast.

To this I say, There is great Reason it should. For the King had no declared
Enemy then, nor ( God be thanked) has he now. (...) had he then any Navy at
Sea. For almost all the Ships were come in before the Fast-Book was set out.

But howsoever, an excellent Consequence it is, if you mark it; The Prayer for
the Navy was left out of the Book for the Fast, therefore by that, and such
like Innovations, the Prelates intend to bring in Popery. Indeed, if that were
a piece of the Prelates Plots to bring in Popery from beyond Sea, then they
were mightily overseen that they left out the Prayer for the Navy. But else
what Reason or Consequence is in it, I know not, unless perhaps Mr. Burton
intended to befriend Dr. Bastwick, and in the Navy bring hither the Whore of
Babylon to be ready for his Christening, as he most profanely Scoffs.

Well: I pray GOD the time come not upon this Kingdom, in which it will be
found, that no one thing has advanced or ushered in Popery so fast, as the
gross Absurdities even in the Worship of God, which these Men, and their like,
maintain, both in Opinion and Practice.

11. The Eleventh Innovation Page 105.
is, The Reading of the Second Service at the Communion Table, or the Altar.

To this, First, I can truly say, That since my own Memory, this was in use in
very many Places, as being most proper (for those Prayers are then read which
both precede and follow the Communion,) and by little and little this ancient
Custom was altered, and in those Places first, where the Emissaries of this
Faction came to Preach. And now if any in Authority offer to reduce it, this
ancient Course of the Church is by and by called an Innovation.

Secondly, With this the Rubricks of the Common Prayer Book agree: For the
first Rubric after the Communion tells us, that upon Holy Days, though there
be no Communion, yet all else that is appointed at the Communion shall be read.
Shall be read? That Is true, but where? Why, the last (...) before the Communion
tells us, That the Priest, standing at the North-side of the Holy Table, shall
say the Lord's Prayer, with that which follows. So that not only the Communion,
but the Prayers which accompany the Communion (which are commonly called the
Second Service) are to be read at the Communion Table. Therefore if this be an
Innovation, it is made by the Rubric, not by the Prelates; And Mr. Burton's
Scoff, that this Second Service must be served in for Dainties Page 105. [Then
the Second Service, as Dainties, must be said there.]
, savours too much of Belly and Profanation.

12. One think sticks much in their Stomachs, and they call it an Innovation
Page 105.
too. And that is Bowing, or doing Reverence at our first coming into the
Church, or at our nearer Approaches to the Holy Table, or the Altar, (call it
whether you will) in which they will needs have it, That we Worship the Holy
Table, or God knows what.

To this I Answer: First, That God forbid we should Worship any thing but GOD
Himself.

Secondly, That if to Worship GOD when we enter into his House, or approach his
Altar, be an Innovation, it is a very old one.

For Moses did Reverence at the very Door of the Tabernacle, Numb. 20. 6.
Hezekiah, and all that were present with him, when they had made an end of
offering, bowed and worshipped, (2 Chronicles. 29. 29.) David calls the People to it
with a Venite, O come let us Worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord
our Maker, (Psalm. 95. 6.) And in all these Places (I pray mark it) it is bodily
Worship.

Nor can they say, That this was Judaical Worship, and now not to be (...). For
long before Judaism began, Bethel, the House of GOD, was a place of Reverence,
( Genesis 28. 17, etc.) Therefore (...), Of, and To GOD.

And after Judaical Worship ended, Venite, Adoremus, as far up wards as there
is any track of a Liturgy, was the Introitus of the Priest, all the Latin
Church over.

And in the daily Prayers of the Church of England, this was retained at the
Reformation; and that Psalm, in which is Venite, Adoremus, is commanded to
begin the Morning Service every Day. And for ought I know, the Priest may as
well leave out the Venite, as the Adoremus; the calling the People to their
Duty, as the Duty it self, when they are come.

Therefore even according to the Service Book of the Church of England, the
Priest and the People both are called upon, for external and bodily Reverence
and Worship of GOD in his Church. Therefore they which do it, do not Innovate.
And yet the Government is so moderate, ( God grant it be not too loose
therewhile) that no Man is constrained, no Man questioned, only religiously
called upon, Venite, Adoremus, Come, let us Worship.

For my own part, I take my self bound to Worship with Body as well as in Soul,
when ever I come where God is Worshipped. And were this Kingdom such as would
allow no Holy Table standing in its proper place, (and such places some there
are) yet I would Worship God when I came into His House. And were the times
such, as should beat down Churches, and all the curious carved Work thereof,
with Axes and Hammers, as in Psalm. 74. 6. (and such Times have been) yet would
I Worship in what place soever I came to Pray, tho there were not so much as a
Stone laid for Bethel. But this is the misery, it is Superstition now adays for
any Man to come with more Reverence into a Church, than a Tinker and his Bitch
come into an Alehouse; the Comparison is too homely, but my just Indignation
at the Profaneness of the Times, makes me speak it.

And you my Honorable Lords of the Garter, in your great Solemnities, you do
your Reverence, and to Almighty God, I doubt not, but yet it is versus Altar,
toward his Altar, as the greatest place of God's Residence upon Earth. (I say
the greatest, yea greater than the Pulpit. For there it is Hoc est Corpus meum,
This is my Body: But in the Pulpit it is at most but Hoc est Verbum meum, This
is my Word. And a greater Reverence (no doubt) is due to the Body, than to the
Word of our Lord. And so, in Relation, answerably to the Throne where his Body
is usually present, than to the Seat whence his Word uses to be proclainted.
And God hold it there, at His Word; for, as too many Men use the matter, it is
Hoc est Verbum Diaboli, This is the Word of the Devil, in too many places.
Witness Sedition, and the like to it.) And this Reverence ye do when ye enter
the Chapel, and when you approach nearer to Offer. And this is no Innovation,
for you are bound to it by your Order, and that is not New.

And Idolatry it is not, to Worship God toward His Holy Table; For if it had
been Idolatry, I presume, Queen Elizabeth and King James would not have
practiced it, no not in those Solemnities. And being not Idolatry, but true
Divine Worship, You will, I hope, give a poor Priest leave to Worship God, as
Your selves do: For if it be God's Worship, I ought to do it as well as You:
And if it be Idolatry, You ought not to do it more than I.

I say again, I hope a poor Priest may Worship God with as lowly Reverence as
you do, since you are bound by your Order, and by your Oath, according to a
Constitution of Henry the Fifth, (as appears In Libro Nigro Windesoriensi, p.
(...).
) to give due Honor and Reverence, Domino Deo, and Altari ejus, in modum
Virorum Ecclesiasticorum; That is, to the Lord your God, and to his Altar (for
there is a Reverence due to that too, though such as comes far short of Divine
Worship) and this in the manner as Ecclesiastical Persons both Worship and do
Reverence.

The Story which led in this Decree is this: King Henry the Fifth, that Noble
and Victorious Prince, returning gloriously out of France, sat at this
Solemnity; and finding the Knights of the Order scarce bow to God, or but
slightly, and then bow toward Him and His Seat, startled at it (being a Prince
then grown as Religious, as he was before Victorious) and after asking the
Reason; for till then the Knights of the Order never bowed toward the King or
his Seat; the Duke of Bedford answered, it was settled by a Chapter Act three
Years before. Hereupon that Great King replied. No, I Will none of this, till you
the Knights do it satis been, well enough, and with due performance to Almighty
GOD. And hereupon the forenamed Act proceeded, that they should do this Duty to
Almighty GOD, not slightly, but ad modum Virorum Ecclesiasticorum, as low, as
well, as decently, as Clergymen use to do it.

Now if you will turn this off, and say, it was the Superstition of that Age so
to do; Bishop Jewel will come in to help me there. For where Harding names
diverse Ceremonies, and particularly howing themselves, and adoring at the
Sacrament, I say, adoring At the Sacrament, not adoring the Sacrament; there
Bishop Jewel (that Learned, Painful and Reverend Prelate) approves all, both
the Kneeling and the Bowing, and the Standing up at the Gospel (which as
ancient as it is in the Church, and a common Custom, is yet fondly made another
of their Innovations:) And farther, the Bishop adds, B. Jewell's Reply to
Harding's Answer, Art. 3. Div. 29.
That they are all commendable Gestures, and tokens of Devotion, so long as the
People understand what they mean, and apply them unto GOD. Now with us the
People did ever understand them fully, and apply them to GOD, and to none but
GOD, till these Factious Spirits, and their like, to the great disservice of
GOD and His Church, went about to persuade them that they are Superstitious, if
not Idolatrous Gestures: As they make every thing else to be, where GOD is not
served slovenly.

13. The Thirteenth Innovation Page. 4, 5; 105.
is, The placing of the Holy Table Altarwise, at the upper end of the Chancel,
that is, the setting of it North and South, and placing a Rail before it, to
keep it from Profanation, which Mr. Burton says, is done to advance and usher
in Popery.

To this I Answer, That it is no Popery to set a Rail to keep Profanation from
that Holy Table; nor is it any Innovation to place it at the upper end of the
Chancel as the Altar stood. And this appears both by the Practice, and by the
Command and Canon of the Church of England.

First, By the Practice of the Church of England. For in the King's Royal
Chapels, and diverse Cathedrals, the Holy Table has ever since the Reformation
stood at the upper end of the Quire, with the large or full side toward the
People.

And though it stood in most Parish Churches the other way, yet whether there
be not more reason, the Parish Churches should be made conformable to the
Cathedral and Mother Churches, than the Cathedrals to them, (...) leave to any
reasonable Man to judge.

And yet here is nothing done, either by violence or command, to take off the
Indifferency of the standing of the Holy Table either way, but only by laying
it fairly before Men, how fit it is there should be Order and Uniformity; I say
still reserving the Indifferency of the standing.

But howsoever I would fain know, how any discreet moderate Man dares say, that
the placing of the Holy Table Altar-wise (since they will (...) call it so) is
done either to advance to usher in Popery? For did Queen Elizabeth banish
Popery, and yet did she all along her Reign from first to last leave the
Communion Table so standing in her own Chapel Royal, in St. Paul's and
Westmidster, and other places; and all this of (...) to (...) on usher in that
Popery which she had driven out?

(...) since her Death have two Gracious Kings kept out Popery all their (...),
and yet (...) the Holy Table standing, as it did in the Queen's time, and all
of purpose to advance or usher in Popery which they kept out?

(...) what is the matter? May the Holy Table stand this way in the (...)
Chapel, or Cathedrals, or Bishops Chapels, and not elsewhere? (...), if it be
decent and fit for God's Service, it may stand so (if (...) please) in any
Church. But if it advance or usher in any (...) and Popery, it ought to stand
so in none.

Not has any King's Chapel any Prerogative (if that may be called one!) above
any ordinary Church to dis-serve God in, by any Superstitious (...) Where, give
me leave to tell you, that the King and his (...) (...) most (...), and with
Scorn abused, in the last Leaf of Mr. (...) Appeal, for such it is.

(...), This appears by the Canon or Rule of the Church of (...) too, for it is
plain in the last Injunction of the Queen, That the Holy Table ought to stand
at the upper end of the Quire, North and South, or Altar-wise. For the words of
the Queen's Injunctions are these.

The Holy Table in every Church (mark it I pray, not in the Royal (...) or
Cathedrals only, but in every Church) shall be decently made, and set in the
place where the Altar stood. Now the Altar stood at the upper end of the Quire,
North and South, as appears before by the (...) of the Church. And there to set
it otherwise, is to set it cross the place, not In the place where the Altar
stood: and so, Stulti dum vit ant vitia -- weak Men, as these Libellers are,
run into one Superstition while they would avoid another; For they run upon the
Superstition of the Cross. while they seek to avoid the Superstition of the
Altar. So you see here is neither Popery nor Innovation in all the Practice of
Queen Elizabeth, or since.

These words of the Injunction are so plain, as that they can admit of no shift.

And give me leave to tell you, That a very learned Prelate of this Church, and
one whom I think these Men will not accuse, as a Man like to advance or usher
in Popery, is of the same Opinion: It Is my Lord the Bishop of Salisbury.

Some difference was lately rising about placing the Communion Table in a
Parish Church of his Diocese. The Bishop, careful to prevent all Disorder,
sends his Injunction under his Hand and Seal to the Curate May 17. 1637.
and Churchwardens, to settle that business: In which he has these two
Passages remarkable. I have seen and read the Order.

The first Passage is this; By the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth (says he) and
by Can. 82. under King James, the Communion Tables should ordinarily be set and
stand with the side to the East Wall of the Chancel. Therefore this is (...),
since there is Injunction and Canon for it.

The other (...) this, It Is Ignorance (says that learned Bishop) to think that
the (...) of the Holy Table there, relishes of Popery. Therefore, if it do not
to much as relish of Popery, it can neither advance it, nor usher it in. (...)
therefore this is a most odious Slander and Scandal cast upon (...)

So here is enough (...) for (...) (...) and Rule of the Church of England since
the (...). (...) (...) that time, both in this and other Churches of (...), in
the (...) and West ordinarily, the Holy Table or Altar stood so: (...) this Mr.
Burton says little.

But the Lincolnshire Minister comes in to play the Puritan for that.
Concerning which Book ((...) in my way) and the Nameless Author of it, I shall
only (...) these two things.

The one is, that the (...) from the first word to the (...) in the Book; for
he (...) on him both for the Name and for the placing of the Holy Table, and
the like, to prove, that Generally and Universally, and Ordinarily in the whole
Catholic Church, both East and West, the Holy Table did not stand at the upper
end of the Quire or Chancel. And this he must prove, or he does nothing.

Now when he comes to make his Proofs, they are almost all of them particular,
few or none general and concludent; for he neither brings Testimonies out of
the General and received Rituals of the Easteru and Western Churches, nor of
Fathers and Histories of the Church, which speak in General terms of all, but
where they speak of particular Churches only.

So that suppose the most that can be, that is, suppose his Quotations be all
truly alleged, and true too in the sense that the Minister takes them, (though
in very truth, the (...), most of them, are neither truly alleged, nor sensed)
yet they (...) but exceptions of, and exemptions from the general Practice. And
you know both in Law and Reason, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non (...). So that
upon the sudden I am not able to resolve, whether this Minister has done more
wrong to himself or his Readers, for he has abused both.

The other is, that in the Judgment of very many learned Men, which have
perused this Book, the Author is clearly conceived to want a great deal of that
learning, to which he pretends; or (...) to have written this Book wholly and
resolvedly against both his Science and his Conscience.

And for my own part, I am (...) of Opinion, this Book was thrust now to the
Press, both to (...) these Libellers, and, as much as in him lay, to fire both
Church and State.

And tho I wonder not at the (...), yet I should wonder at the Bishop of the
Diocese (a Man of Learning and Experience) that he should give Testimony to
such a Business, and in such Times as these.

And once more, before I leave the (...) Table, Name and Thing, give me leave
to put you in mind, that there is no danger at all in the Altar, Name or Thing.
For at the (...) (...) the Reformation, though there were a Law for the taking
down (...) Altars, and setting up of Holy Tables in the room of (...); yet
(...) places the Altars were not suddenly removed. (...) Queen in her
Injunction to this? Why she says, That there (...) of great moment in this,
saving Injunct. ultim.
for Uniformity, and the (...) of the Law in that behalf. Therefore for any
danger or (...) was in the Altars, Name or Thing, they might even then have
been left standing, but for Uniformity, and the Imitation of the Law.

But howsoever, it follows in the same Injunction, That when the Altar is taken
down, the Holy Table shall be set In ( not cross) the place where the Altar
stood: which (as is aforesaid) must needs be Altar-wise.

14. The Fourteenth and the last Innovation comes with a mighty Charge, and
it is taken out of an Epistle to the Temporal Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council. Of which Epistle we got one Sheet, and so (for ought I yet know) that
Impression staid: In that Sheet is this Charge; the words are.

The Prelates, to justify their Proceedings, have forged a new Article of
Religion, brought from Rome ( which gives them full power to alter the Doctrine
and Discipline of our Church at a Blow (as they interpret it) and have foisted
it (such is their Language) into the beginning of the 20th Article of our
Church. And this is in the last Edition of the Articles, Anno 1628. in affront
of His Majesty's Declaration before them, etc.

The Clause (which they they say is forged by us) is this, The Church (that is,
the Bishops, as they expound it) has Power to Decree Rites and Ceremonies, and
Authority in matter of Faith. (The word is Controversies of Faith, by their
leave.) This Clause (say they) is a Forgery fit to be Examined, and deeply
Censured in the Star Chamber. For it is not to be found in the Latin or English
Articles of Edward VI. or Queen Elizabeth, ratified by Parliament.

And then in the Margent thus, If to Forge a Will or Writing be censurable in
the Star Chamber, which is but a wrong to a private Man; how much more the
Forgery of an Article of Religion, to wrong the whole Church, and overturn
Religion, which concerns all our Souls?

This is a heavy Charge, my Lords; but I thank God the Answer's easy.

And truly I grant, that to Forge an Article of Religion in whole or in part,
and then to thrust it upon the Church, is a most heinous Crime, far worse than
the Forging of a Deed. And is certainly very deeply Censurable in this Court.
And I would have humbly besought you, that a deep Censure might have been laid
upon it, but that this Sheet was found after, and so is not annexed to the
Information, nor in Judgment at this present before you.

But then, my Lords, I must tell you, I hope to make it as clear as the Day,
that this Forgery was not, that this Clause mentioned was added by the Prelates
to the Article, to gain Power to the Church, and so to serve our turns. But
that that Clause in the beginning of the Article was by these Men, or at least
by some of their Faction, rased out, and this to weaken the just Power of the
Church to serve their turns.

They say (to justify their Charge) that this Clause is not to be found in the
Articles, English or Latin, of either Edw. VI. or Q. Elizabeth.

I answer: The Articles of Edw. VI. and those made under Q. Elizabeth differ
very much. And those of Edw. VI. are not now binding. So whether the Clause be
In or Out of them, it is not much material.

But for the Articles of the Church of England, made in the Queen's time, and
now in force, that this Clause for the Power of the Church to Decree
Ceremonies, and to have Authority in Controversies of Faith, should not be
found in English or Latin Copies till the Year 1628. that it was set forth with
the King's Declaration before it, is to me a Miracle; but your Lordships shall
see the Falsehood and Boldness of these Men.

What? Is this Affirmative Clause in no Copy, English or Latin till the Year
1628? Strange: Why, my Lords, I have a Copy of the Articles in English of the
Year 1612, and of the Year 1605, and of the Year 1593, and in Latin of the Year
1563, which was one of the first Printed Copies, if not the first of all. For
the Articles were agreed on but the Nine and twentieth day of January (...)
1563.

And in all these, this Affirmative Clause for the Churches Power is in. And is
not this strange boldness then to abuse the World, and falsely to say it is in
no Copy when I my self, out of my own store am able to show it into so many,
and so anciently.

But My Lord's, I shall make it plainer yet: For it is not fit concerning an
Article of Religion, and an Article of such Consequence for the Order, Truth,
and Peace of this Church, you should rely upon my Copys, be they never so many
or never so ancient.

Therefore I sent to the Public Records in my Office, and here under my
Officers Hand, who is a Public Notary, is returned me the Twentieth Article
with this Affirmative Clause in it. And there is also the whole Body of the
Articles to be seen.

By this your Lordships see how free the Prelates are from Forging this part of
the Article. Now let these Men quit themselves and their Faction, as they can,
for their Index Expurgatorins and their foul Rasure in leaving out this part of
the Article. For to leave out of an Article is as great a Crime as to put in;
And a Main Rasure is as Censurable in this Court as a Forgery.

Why, But then my Lords; what is this Mystery of Iniquity?

Truly, I cannot certainly tell, but as far as I can I Will tell you.

The Articles you see were fully, and fairly agreed to and subscribed in the
Year 1563. But after this, in the Year 1571, there were some that refused to
subscribe, but why they did so, is not recorded. Whether it were about this
Article or any other I know not. But in Fact this is Manifest, that in that
Year 1571, the Articles were Printed both in Latin and English, and this Clause
for the Church left out of both. And certainly, this could not be done, but by
the malicious cunning of that Opposite Faction. And though I shall spare dead
Men's Names where I have not certainty; Yet if you be pleased to look back and
consider who they were that Governed businesses in 1571, and rid the Church
almost at their pleasure; And how potent the Ancestors, these Libellers began
then to grow, you will think it no hard matter to have the Articles Printed,
and this Clause left out.

And yet it is plain, That, after the stir about Subscription in the Year 1571,
the Articles were settled and subscribed unto at last, as in the Year 1562, with
this Clause in them for the Church: For looking farther into the Records which
are in mine own Hands, I have found the Book of 1563 subscribed by all the
Lower House of Convocation, in this very Year of Contradiction, 1571, Dr. John
Elmar (who was after Lord Bishop of London) being there Prolocutor: Alexander
Nowel Dean of St. Paul's, having been Prolocutor in 1563, and yet living and
present and subscribing in 1571. Therefore, I do here openly in the
Star Chamber charge upon that pure Sect this foul Corruption of falsifying the
Articles of the Church of England; let them take it off as they can.

I have now done, and it is time I should, with the Innovations charged upon the
Prelates, and fit to be answered here.

Some few more there are, but they belong to matter of Doctrine, which shall
presently be answered, Justo Volumine, at large, to satisfy all Well-Minded
People. But when Mr. Burton's Book which is the Main one, is answered (I mean
his Book no this Railing) neither Prynn, nor Bastwick; nor any Attendants upon
Rabshakeh, shall by me or my care be answered. If this Court find not a way to
stop these Libellers Mouths and Pens, for me they shall rail on till they be
weary.

Yet one thing more, I beseech you, give me leave to add. It Is Mr. Burton's
Charge Page 175.
upon the Prelates. That the Censures formerly laid upon Malefactors, are now
put upon God's Ministers for their Virtue and Piety.

A heavy charge this too. But if he or any Man else can show that any Man has
been punished in the High Commission, or elsewhere, by the Prelates, for Virtue
and Piety, there is all the Reason in the World we should be severely punished
our selves. But the Truth is, the Virtue and Piety for which these Ministers
are punished, is for Preaching Schism and Sedition, many of their Sermons being
as bad as their Libels, As Burton's Libell was one of his Sermons first. But
whether this stuff have any Affinity with Virtue and Piety, I submit to any
Christian Reader.

And yet Mr. Burton is so confident of his Innocence, even in this Cause
wherein he has so foully carried himself, that he breaks forth into these
words, Page 7.
I never so much as once dreamed, that Impiety and Impudency it self, in such a
Christian State as this is, and under such a gracious Prince, durst ever thus
publicly have called me in Question, and that upon the open Stage, etc.

You see the boldness of the Man, and in as bad a Cause, as (I think) in this
kind ever any Man had.

I shall end all with a passage out of S. Cyprian, Lib. 1. Ep. 3.
when he, then Bishop of Carthage, was bitterly railed upon by a pack of
Schismatics, his answer was, and it is now mine; They have railed both bitterly
and falsely upon me, and yet non oportet me paria cum illis facere, it becomes
not me to answer them with the like either Levities or Revilings, but to speak
and write that only which becomes Sacerdotem Dei, a Priest of God.

Neither shall I in this give way (though I have been extremely vilified) to
either Grief or Passion to speak, remembering that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37. 8.
Fret not thy self, else shall thou be moved to do Evil.

Neither yet, by God's Grace, shall the Reproaches of such Men as these make me
faint or start aside, either from the Right-way in matter of practice (they are
S. Cyprian's words again Ib. p. 10.
) or, a certa Regula, from the certain Rule of Faith.

And since in former times, some spared not to call the Master of the House,
Beelzebub, how much more will they be bold with them of his Household, as it is
in St. Matthew 10. 25. And so bold have these Men been; but the next words of
our Savior are, Fear them not.

I humbly crave Pardon of your Lordships for this my necessary length, and give
you all hearty thanks for your Noble Patience, and your Just and Honowable
Censure upon these Men, and your unanimous dislike of them, and defense of the
Church.

But because the business has some Reflection upon my self, I shall forbear to
censure them, and leave them to God's Mercy and the King's Justice.

FINIS.

