Chaplin Mayor. Die Martis Decimo Nono die Februarii, 1677/8 Annoque Regni
Regis Caroli Secundi Angliae, etc. Tricesimo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Young to print his Sermon preached on Sunday
morning last, at the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
this City.

Wagstaff.

IMPRIMATUR

Guil. Jane, R.P.D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Mar. 4. 1677/8.
A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN. Of
the City of LONDON. AT GVILD-HALL Chapel, February the 17th. 1677/8. By EDW.
YOUNG, B L.L. Fellow of New College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for William Birch at the Peacock in Cheapside, and William
Leach at the Crown in Cornhill. 1678.

A Sermon preached before the LORD MAYOR, etc. February the 17th. 1677/8.
Psalm. 52. 7. Lo this is the man that took not God for his strength, but
trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his
wickedness.
IT is an Observation as true as common, that no man was ever extremely wicked
upon a sudden; a hardy sinner must be a work of time, a Creature of industry
and toil, of conflicts and repulses: And that because Nature, however depraved,
has yet left such strong guards upon Virtue, that no man can break through them
without doing violence not only to his Reason, but his very Complexion too. It
is no easy thing to overcome the shame that naturally attends all dishonest
actions, and makes those that commit them to love darkness. It is no easy
thing to overcome the fear that naturally haunts the guilty conscience, and
makes darkness it self to be no security: much less is it easy to dare to live
at enmity with God, after conviction that he is all-knowing, and just, and his
wrath a consuming fire. And yet notwithstanding all this, since woeful
experience puts it out of question that men do daily arrive at this desperate
pitch; that how dangerous soever the precipice be, thither they venture; and
being there, bear their danger with less concern then others can behold it: It
may be worth our while to enquire how, and by what degrees sin thus advances;
and as it advances, infatuates. The scheme is laid down in my Text; where, in
the person of Doeg, we have the description of a sinner Consummate; one that
had filled up his measure, and was now ripe and overtaken with judgment. For
the first words of the verse, Lo this is the man, point out his miserable end,
which the Context will tell us, was destruction and casting out of the Land of
the living. And the rest of the words (on which I design chiefly to insist.)
are his character, exhibiting the wicked course of life which brought him to
that miserable end, (viz.) He took not God, etc.

The Character consists of three Members, which are as it were the three
Stations of the Broad way; The first being Alienation from God, the second
Application to the World, the third Impiety professed: and these three are
Consequential to each other, as well in the order of Nature, as of the Text.

I beg in with the first member of the Character, He took not God for his
strength.

The order and importance of this default, will best appear if we inquire into
the true measures of humane nature; and see what strength she has in her self,
and what she wants; and thence deduce the necessity of our dependence upon God.

From those that have searched into the state of humane nature, we have
sometimes received very different and incompatible accounts; as though the
Inquirers had not been so much learning, as fashioning the subject they had in
hand; and that as arbitrarily as a Heathen Carver that could make either a God
or a Tressel out of the same piece of wood. For some have cried down Nature
into such a desperate impotency as would render the Grace of God ineffectual;
and others, on the contrary, have invested her with such power and
self-sufficiency, as would render the Grace of God superfluous. The first of
these Opinions wrongs Nature in defect by allowing her no strength, which in
consequence most make men desperate: The second wrongs Nature in excess by
imputing too much strength, which in effect must make men confident: And both
of them do equally destroy the Reason of our application to God for strength.
For neither will the man that is well in conceit, nor yet the desperate, apply
himself to a Physician; because the one cries there is no need, the other,
there is no help. I presume therefore that a more distinct view of these two
extreme opinions, may properly serve to guide us into the notice of the true
state of Nature, which lies between them both.

As for the first Opinion, which wrongs Nature in Defect, it was hatched in the
Heathen Schools upon this occasion. The Philosophers having considered the
reproachful nature of sin, how that in it self it was nothing but injury,
turpitude, and folly; and in its effects, mischief, inquietude, and ill-boding
fears: concluded justly that the commission of it was base and infamous, and
that the deliberate choice of a sinful action was a greater reproach to
reason, then reason was an ornament to man: But nevertheless finding themselves
dipped in the common guilt, and too soft to resist the pleasing evil, but
likewise too proud to own the reproach of it; They set their wits on work to
contrive an expedient, how a man might sin, and yet not be in the fault, and so
be able to keep his Crimes and Credit too. The expedient they contrived was
this, to maintain, That sin was no voluntary Act, but a mere forced one: and
this they proved by two Mediums, Fate and Matter; as each of them introducing a
necessity upon humane actions. From the first they argued, that all humane
actions were pre-determined by the irresistible Power of an Eternal Decree, so
that Man did not purely act any thing of himself, but was a mere passive Tool
in the hand of Destiny. From the second they argued, That though man were
allowed liberty of Acting, yet he could have no liberty of Choice, because his
Choice was always determined to the worser side by a certain insuperable
malignity in matter; that is, by the pravity of his constitution. Upon either
of these accounts it followed that man was a mere impotent slave, always
overruled by force, either from without or within; and therefore since he could
not possibly help what he did, why should he be blamed for it? rather let the
causes be blamed to which he owed his necessity. Thus did the Philosophers
endeavor to bring mankind off from the scandal of their faults by impeaching
Nature; as an indulgent Jury will bring off a murderer by a Non Compos mentis.

As to their Hypothesis of the Irresistible Decree I shall speak no more of it
but this, that they who first broacht it, and therefore were most fond of it,
found it clogged with so many ill consequences, so reflecting upon the Deity,
and of such ill influence upon Manners, that though they were accounted the
most pertinacious sect of men in the world, they have left it honestly
retracted. Chrysippus disavows it in Cicero and Gellius; and the more Modern
Stoics build all their Morals upon a clear contrary foundation: for (...) is
their first Principle: that is, all men's internal actions are naturally free.

As for the Malignity of Matter, it was a Notion more tolerable among the
Heathens, because their errors about the Eternity and Original Qualities of
Matter were perhaps Invincible: but for Christians to impute the same effects
to the Corruption of our Nature by the Fall, as though we had thereby
contracted such a Complexional Necessity of sinning, as neither precept nor
caution, nor all the remedies that God has provided; could rescue us from that
Necessity: This is a great Calumny to Nature, and affront to God's goodness,
and a mere crude apology of such as were first resolved for a lazy indulgence
to Vice. And yet this pretense is not unusual; it is not unusual to hear men
confess their sins in such a subtle form, as though they were drawing schemes
of Sophistry against the day of Judgment. I must not deny my sins, (says the
Man) the righteous man falls seven times a day; We dwell in a body of sin; Our
first Parent eat of the forbidden fruit, and so derived a Curse upon his
unhappy posterity; Homo sum, I am a son of Adam, I need say no more to speak my
guilt. And now what means such a Confession as this, but that the Man is
willing to discharge the burden of his Conscience upon something out of his
own power; and to insinuate that it is not will and choice, but force of
constitution that makes us sinners; that we are born with such tainted
principles, flesh so stubborn, and appetites so impetuous, that neither Rule
nor Institution, nor Endeavor, nor Grace it self can regulate them; and that
thereupon as Adam urged against God for the first sin committed, The Woman that
thou gave me beguiled me and I did eat: so his Posterity might urge for all
that have been committed since, The Nature that thou have allotted us, has
betrayed us, and we are sinners. Thus will men dawb with untempered mortar (in
the Prophet's Allegory) though the wall shall be cast down, and they in the
midst of it. For to assign the true measures of Nature in reference to Defect,
I lay down this for the Fundamental Truth, That whatsoever there is, either of
impotence or positive malignity in our Natures, it is only such as is
consistent both with the Purity and Mercy of God; and therefore we may
certainly conclude, that it cannot be so much as shall either administer matter
of excuse to those that will be bad, or argument of despair to those that
desiret o be good. We are born with propensions to Vice, and appetites prone to
close with tempting Evils; but these are so far from being actually evil
themselves, that they are the very life of Virtue, and foundation of Reward.
It Is true, they create difficulties in virtue, and make the way rugged; but
then God is pleased to consider these difficulties indulgently; and for that
very reason he admits man to terms of repentance and reconciliation; whereas
the Angels who were made of a purer nature, and less obnoxious to temptation,
were allowed no such remedy. But moreover these difficulties which our
infirmity creates, are far from being insuperable; we know our armor, and we
are commanded to fight, and we are assured of Victory: whatsoever of strength
we have not in our selves, we know where to have supplied, and whatsoever those
excellencies are which we deplore as lost in the Fall, the Gospel assures us,
that supervening Grace makes a full repair of them. Grace is new light to the
understanding, and new power to the will, and new regularity to the faculties
that ought to obey, and a new harmony to our whole discomposed frame. In a
word, Grace is more to us now in the state of corruption, then in the state of
primitive perfection we could have been to our selves. Whosoever therefore
shall consider the defects and impotence of our present state, together with
the rich promises of God in Christ, I know nothing that he ought reasonably to
argue or infer thence but this, that we now lie under a stricter obligation to
live in a perpetual dependence upon God; that we have now a double tie to be
Religious; that is, both to serve God and our selves; forasmuch as our
addresses do not more effectually pay him homage, then they do supply our own
wants. God could give without asking, if it seemed good; but then perhaps we
should be more apt to glory as though we had not Received: whereas to receive
when we want, is the same thing in effect, as to have had it in store; but with
this advantage, that it makes us retain a greater veneration for the Donor; as
a man is in greater probability to live humble and dutiful when he has his
livelihood conferred on him by daily dispensation, then if he had the whole in
entire possession. God could redintegrate Nature, if it seemed good; and
re-instate her in her original rights and powers: But then perhaps the man who
now in the state of corruption attributes his vices to his Constitution, not to
his Will, would if he had been born with greater strength and sufficiency have
attributed the glory of his virtue to his own conduct and not unto God; and so
had he had in him less of the sin of the man, he would have had more of the
sin of Lucifer, that is, pride and affectation. It Is a wise Rule in all things
of Providence to conclude, That that is best that now is; and questionless it
could not be better with us then it is, notwithstanding all the infirmities of
our Nature, if we had but the happiness to make such use of them as God
intends, that is, to fix our dependence and application more strictly to
himself.

I pass in the second place to the Notion of those that exalt Nature above her
due measures, and invest her with such a self sufficiency, as would make the
Grace of God appear superfluous.

Quid opus est Votis? says the Philosopher; what need is there to pray? make
thy self a good man; it is idle to petition God for that which thou can bestow
upon thy self. And many among Christians (beside Pelagius) seem to have
consulted the Philosopher more then the Scriptures, for their method of
inculcating Religion and a good life. They recommend virtue in pompous
harangues, and urge Religion from the Rational Topics of convenience and
inconveniency; they display the amiableness and advantages of Good, and the
deformity and mischiefs of Evil. How ugly is envy? how tormenting is revenge?
how brutal is drunkenness? how pernicious is lust? On the contrary, meekness,
temperance and beneficence, how serene are they in their state, and how
commodious in their effects? And needs a man now (say they) any infusion here
to determine his choice? or any assisting influence to put it in execution? All
that he seems to need is only this, that he do not turn fool, and desert the
use of those faculties and powers which Nature has given him. After such a
Moral discourse as this, having called upon Reason, and stirred up advertency
to apply it, they presume they have done enough, and leave us to grow good upon
our own stock and strength. But alas! these are Icarus his flights, Nature has
provided no wings for man to soar so high with. Vice will never be chased out
of the world with Invectives, nor Virtue advanced to her Empire by Panegyricks.
The most prudent advertency, and the most manly resolution; the most rational
love, and the most generous indignation that ever Opinionative Morallist could
conceive and fortify his breast withal, will never be able to secure a man
against the subtle approaches or the violent assaults of sin: It Is only the
Divine Assistance that is our castle and defense, and the vital spring of all
our good habits; and whosoever terminates his hopes, even of serving and
pleasing God, upon the confidence of any other strength then what is derived
from God, his hopes are impious, and he must miscarry.

It Is true that Rational Arguments are proper, nay necessary to excite a man to
his duty; which is a Rational service, and effected by Rational endeavors, not
lazy presumptions: But then this is the point, A man must likewise know, that
when he is about his duty, he is not sufficient for that which he is about: for
God has reserved a partial agency to himself, and he does as much command our
application to him for this assistance, as he does demand all the rest of our
duty. For as God does require us to keep his Commandments, so in order to the
doing of this, he does altogether as much require us to Ask, to Seek, and to
Knock; that is, to apply our selves for ability to do what he commands: and
therefore he who shall undertake to reason and argue a man into his duty,
without insisting on the necessary application to God, does the same thing in
resemblance, as if he should cut off the Travelers legs, and provide him with
a staff. That one instance of S. Peter to our Savior, Mat. 26. Though I should
die with thee, yet will I not deny thee; being as stout a Resolution, upon as
good motives, and from as honest a heart, as any man else can ever dare to
pretend to, has sufficiently baffled all humane confidence, and demonstrated
that the opinion of strength in our selves in vanity, and the issue of it
defeat.

Having thus adjusted the true measures of humane Nature, as consisting between
the two extremes of self-sufficiency to Good, and absolute necessity to Evil:
It results, that the not making God our strength (which in one word we may call
Indevotion, Doeg's first charge in my Text) is the great Parent Evil; an Evil
more prolifical in us then that of Adam; and if we will with S. Augustine,
attribute the Universal Origin of sin to a Deficient Cause, it must be to this
Defect of Application to God, as being the first, the inlet, and the cause of
all others. For whatsoever inadvertencies a man may be guilty of before, it is
impossible he should fall under the dominion of any vicious habits, until he
has first fallen from this Guard of the Divine Assistance. But then on the other
side, when a man has once by neglect fallen from this Guard; when either through
desuetude, or infrequency, or mere formality of devotion, he has suffered his
mind to grow alienated from God, and his dependence upon him, to diminish and
fail; that man is then arrived to a pitch, where it is as impossible for him to
stay, as it is to fix after the first step down a precipice: He must go on, and
his next genuine advance, is to the second Member of Doeg's charge, (viz.) He
trusted in the multitude of his Riches. For

The Soul of man, like common Nature, admits no Vacuum; if God be not there,
Mammon must be; and it is as impossible to serve neither, as it is to serve
both. And for this there is an essential reason in our constitution; For Man is
designed and born an Indigent Creature, full of wants and appetites, and a
restless desire of happiness, which he can by no means find within himself; and
this indispensably obliges him to seek for his happiness abroad: Now if he seek
his happiness from God, he answers the very intention of his frame; and has
made a wise choice of an object, that is adequate to all his wants and desires:
But then if he does not seek his happiness from God, he must necessarily seek
it somewhere else; for his appetites cannot hang long undetermined, they are
eager and must have their quarry; If he forsake the fountain of Living waters,
yet he cannot forsake his thirst; and therefore he lies under the necessity of
hewing out broken Cisterns to himself; He must pursue, and at least promise
himself satisfaction in other enjoyments. Thus when our Hope, our Trust, and
our Expectations abate toward God, they do not abate in themselves, but are
only scattered among undue and inferior Objects. And this makes the connection
infallible between Indevotion, and Moral Idolatry; that is, between the neglect
of God's worship, and worshipping the Creature; for whatsoever share we abate
toward God, we always place upon something else; and whatsoever thing else we
prosecute with that share of love, desire, or complacency, which is due unto
God, that is in effect our Idol; as is expressly declared in the case of
Riches, Col. 3. 5. which is the particular matter I am to treat about in this
second part.

Riches are Gods blessing, and the good man's promise, and administer not only
the lawful comforts to Nature, but the greatest means and opportunities to
Virtue; and yet the managery of them is so nice and hazardous, and they
occasionally produce so much of evil, that, as the Poets did therefore conclude
them to come from Hell, so the Scriptures tell us in earnest that they
generally tend thither.

Not things themselves, but affections and opinions about things are evil, says
the Rule; and it being so in the present case, I shall briefly note some
affections of men that thus pervert Riches into evil.

I shall mention three. Excess of Desire. Mistake of Right. And undue
Complacency.

The first respects Riches in Prospect, the other two in Possession. I begin
with Excess of Desire.

The Stoick's Wise man would have no desire, for fear of Disappointment; but
it is certain the Good man will have no great desire, for fear of Impiety. For a
great desire can hardly be entertained without a secret quarrel with
providence, an unthankfulness for what is present, and a preference of our own
wish before the good pleasure and ordination of God. When the Israelites
desired a King, they desired no more then the completion of God's own promise
to them; there was nothing sinful in their desire, but the excess of it; It
was come to this, Nay but we will have a King; and then God sent them a King in
his anger, and many infamous calamities during the whole course of his reign.
Nor was Rachel's desire of Children any other then natural and just, till it
came to this impatience, Give me Children or else I die; and then God
disappointed her with a Grant, and punished her with her very wish; for she died
in Childbearing. All things are lawful for me (says the Apostle) but I will
not come under the power of any; and so in like manner, the desire of all
things is lawful, while it is temperate, but an impetuous desire grows a
Master in the Soul; it brings it under its power: and our freedom, and our
reason, and our conscience too, must upon occasion submit to its Tyranny. Hence
it comes to pass, that the desire of Riches does very often absolutely profane
the soul, and turn the Temple of God into mere Shop and Exchange. When the man
should be Religious, his thoughts are never at home; they are abroad in
attendance upon the design in hand; and Mammon is the commanding object of all
his value and devotion. God Almighty requires that the strongest breathings of
our heart, should, like the smoke of the Accepted Sacrifice, mount directly to
Heaven; but the Covetous man's desire does, like the rejected smoke, incline
all downwards, and spend it self upon the Earth. He is restless in contrivance,
and hardy in pursuit; confident in attempts, and bold and importunate in
addresses; (and what is worse) he looks upon sordid compliance, and base
connivence, and all the acts of dissimulation and fraud, as only provident
methods of attaining his end. His thoughts being thus in full employ, and his
imagination always busy, he lets time roll over his head, without making any
reflections worthy his immortal part; so that scarcely does the poor Emet tug
for a heap of earth, with more toil, or less Religion then he.

Thus does man in the first place vitiate Riches by Desire, and make them his
sins before they are his. But if they come into possession, he vitiates them in
the second place by Mistake of Right.

It Is certain that the worldly man studies nothing so accurately as his Title
to his Estate and yet when all is done he mistakes it, for he counts himself a
Proprietor where he is but a Steward. For the good things of this life being by
no means the Christians portion, God never consigns them to us into Property,
but only into Trust. They employ the Manager, and approve the Faithful; but
he that fails in his accounts will find, that his Revenues are his Debts. It Is
therefore the Wise man's care to make friends with the Mammon; to sow as he
hopes to reap; to justify his expenses, and to bless the stock by
thankfulness, temperance and charity: But he that assumes more right then God
has given, that is, he that takes what he has to be absolutely his own, the
first Inference he makes is this, that he may do with it what he pleases; that
he may either spend it upon his own luxury, or hoard it up for that of his
Heirs; and thus he eludes all the obligations of charity, and esteems the
casting his bread upon the waters as great a folly in the figure, as it is in
the letter. It was thus that Dives in the Parable, had carved for himself, who
when he petitioned for a drop of water to allay his torments, his mouth was
stopped, and his petition rejected with this sole answer, Son remember that
thou in thy lifetime had thy good things. Questionless many a man has had
his good things in his lifetime, and yet his share after this life not a jot
the less; but this was Dives his case, he took the good things of this life
for his property, and his portion, and used them accordingly; and therefore it
was that now he must expect no more.

The third Affection whereby a man vitiates his Riches is undue Complacency,
which is an Acquiescence of mind in the Object of enjoyment, or (in the
Scripture expression) a setting our hearts upon it.

A moderate complacency or satisfaction in the good things of this world is
requisite to make a man thankful, as a proportion of spirits is necessary to
sense; but an absolute complacency, or rest in them, is (like a great excess
of Spirits) a very stupor and loss of mind. The best rule about Riches is to
possess them as though we possessed them not; that is, to respect them with
such an equality of temper, as neither to place our happiness in their
presence, nor our misery in their loss: But the worldly man possesses them so,
that he is possessed by them; they take in his heart, and then fill it so
completely, that he is not sensible of any other hunger or desire. How sweetly
does he sing, Soul take thy rest, for I am rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing? How securely does he sleep when his senses drop tired
from variety of diversions, and lie locked up in the fumes of agreeable juices?
Do we think that the Kingdom of Heaven is like to suffer violence from such a
man? no, it is rather to be feared that he would count Heaven it self a
violence, and an overture of change would shock and disgust him. For what
indeed should he do there? whose conceptions are wholly levelled to the
pleasures of sense; of wines and meats, and their wanton consequences; and who
is no more apprehensive of immaterial joys, then the grossest brute is of
Music or Picture. And here I limit the second station of the Broad way; that
is Doeg's second charge, He trusted in the multitude of his Riches.

And now the sinner being advanced thus far through the neglect of Piety, and
love of the World, and finding his road grateful, and the return tedious, and
the visage of repentance so austere, that if he put himself under her conduct,
he must lose all that he knows how to prize; that is, gayety and pleasure, and
perhaps riches too: and these thoughts making deeper impressions, then any
thing future can, upon a mind whose reasonings are now grown weak, and
consideration little; what can he resolve but to go on? But because to go on,
and at the same time to look back, is distracting; because reflection upon guilt
is a torment, and a cowardly sinner is an insufferable penance, he finds it
necessary to take better courage; that is, in the words of my third part, To,
strengthen himself in his wickedness: and thereupon he betakes himself to the
two strong holds of sin, Debauchery and Atheism, and thence he bids defiance to
Heaven. Like an ungrateful Subject, who after he has long abused his Prince,
and his crimes are grown so great that they cannot be compounded on easy
terms, and his stomach so haughty too, that he hates to stoop to due submission
and allegiance, He draws his sword and flings away the scabbard, and resolves
to defend himself by a meditated rebellion.

The first strong hold that the rebel sinner betakes himself to is Debauchery,
which in its proper notion, is no more then an express art against Thinking.
To indulge appetites and gratify senses, to live soft and delicate according
to the scheme of studied pleasure, is the business of the Voluptuous; but the
Debauchee is not so choice: For his end is not so much to please, as to amuze;
and his whole study is only for a course of expedients how to darken the mind,
and divert thought, and fence out reflection. His wine is not to refresh but to
drown; and therefore he drinks not like an Epicure, but rather like a Spartan
Slave, when he drunk to bring drinking into disgrace. His Discourse is not for
understanding, but for noise. Noise is good company and wit; and so with hurry
and laughter, and any thing that is loud, he stifles the remonstrances of
Reason, and murmurs of Conscience, as drum and trumpet cover the cries of a
battle. He guards himself against the awe of virtue, by an habitual contempt of
the good; and secures himself against counsel, by a preventing derision of the
serious: He hates every solemn act, if it be but a grace at his meal; lest the
remembrance of a God should check his jollity, and bridle his excess. But
then, if notwithstanding all this art, his body chance to tire under the
drudgery of vice, and so he be overtaken with the intervals of apprehensive
thoughts, the last Refuge of his uneasy and desperate mind is Atheism. And
questionless, how poor a Refuge soever Atheism be, it was never any other then
Refuge: it is an Opinion that was never offered by Reason, but always sought
for by Distress. And this without doubt is the reason why one age of
Christianity has produced more Atheists, then were ever known in the whole
extent and duration of Heathenism; because the Christian lying under greater
convictions, and therefore stronger pressures of conscience, must needs be more
forcibly urged to fly to this Refuge, then the Heathen could be, whose
knowledge of sin and judgment being less, his fears must necessarily be so
too. After the man has once resolved upon Atheism, he does generally in the
first place swear Fidelity to his Opinion; that is, he does by familiar forms
of Oaths and raving Imprecations inculcate to himself that God is nothing but a
Mormoe or Bugbear; and so he hardens himself in his pretense.

In the next place he pronounces Religion a Trick; contrived by the Art of
Princes, and conserved by the Interest of Priests; that if ever any talked
wisely about Religion, it is only they who discard all particular positive
Religions, and stick only to that of Nature. But then what is Nature, or at
least the Interpreter of Nature, but common usage and Custom? And what is it
that we have not Custom for? We have Custom for all sorts of Vices; we have
Custom for opposite Religions, and for no Religion; and so in fine from Nature
can arise no Obligation at all.

In the next place the Doctrine of Spirits is cried down as absurd; and all the
matters of fact that tend to assert their being, can obtain no more credit,
then Lucian's raillery upon the enchanted Broomstaff. But most of all absurd in
his conceit, and unphilosophical is the Doctrine of Immortal Souls. For what do
Souls act above the power of subtle matter in the state of Union? and how can
they disengage themselves from common perishing in the state of dissolution?
The Beasts approach very near us in our most wise and sagacious operations
without the hazard of being Immortal; and why should man fancy that hazard to
himself? No, we are born at all adventures; and we shall be as though we had
never been; and our Spirits shall vanish into soft air. And now what can be
done with a man of this persuasion? It Is to as little purpose to tell him of
Hell and torments, as of Charon and Cerberus; All is Par sollicito Fabula
somnio, as his Minion Poet has concluded it; And thus the Atheist is become as
safe and impregnable, as in a Castle of Brass.

But alas the miserable dream of peace that must wake into an eternity of real
evils! Alas the pityable Reasons that must be confuted by so sad an Experiment!
For as we have hitherto taken the prospect of the sinner's way, so my Text
requires us to look a little farther, and advert his end. You have seen what
the man was; he was gay and secure in his wickedness: but now Lo this is the
man; this is his present state, he is become a spectacle of vengeance, an
object of terror and of scorn, and pointed out for a warning to all that shall
come after. Lo this is the Man that had shipwrackt his Faith, and wasted his
Conscience, and corrupted his Mind, so that he had lost the notices of what he
should do, as well as the care of what he did: But now his Miseries have
rectified his Notions; He believes and trembles; He sees God again in the
terror of his judgments; and is convinced by an eternal dying, that the soul
is subject to no other death. He now lies scourged with past enjoyments; and
terrified with his present passions: His Wit and Parts groan under the
Conviction of Folly; and his shame and anguish are consummated by despair. But
my Text only points at this; nor is it my business to insist upon it any
farther. I have my end in minding you from the Example, that Sin and Judgment
are inseparably linkt together; That if we will escape Doeg's end, we must
avoid his way; That if we will resist sin successfully, we must resist it in
its first Issues, and pluck up the roots of it, which in passing I have
discovered.

And now that the most important of what I have said, may be left more
immediately upon your thoughts, I shall sum it up into one sentence, and
conclude: The lesson that the whole example does most genuinely teach us is
this, That when a man once ceases to take God for his strength, (which was
Doeg's first default) when he once neglects to apply himself to Heaven for
conduct and support, that man naturally falls from one sin to another, and
there is no security of stopping betwixt Indevotion and the Bottomless Pit.

From which the Divine mercy prevent us.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Birch.
A Description of the 17 Provinces, commonly called the Low Countries, the
present Stage of Action; also of the Rivers, Commodities, All Cities, strong
Towns, and Forts; as Utrecht, Gaunt, Bruges, Ipre, Ostend, Newport, S. Omers,
Cambray, Valenciennes, etc. with other things remarkable therein. Price bound 1
s. The Angler's delight, Containing the whole Art of Neat and Clean Angling;
wherein is taught the readiest way to take all sorts of Fish from the Pike to
the Minnow; together with their proper haunts, and times of fishing for them;
as also the Method of Fishing in Hackney River, and of the best stands there;
with the manner of making all sorts of good Tackle; The like never printed
before. By W.G. Gent, Bridge's Word to the Aged, Steps of Ascension unto God,
or a Ladder to Heaven; Containing Prayers and Meditations for every day of the
week, and for all other times and occasions. By E. Gee. Shepard's Court-keepers
Guide. The French King Conquered by the English, the King of France and his Son
brought prisoners into England, besides diverse Earls, Lords, and above 2000
Knights and Esquires; wherein is given an account of several great Battles
fought, and wonderful Victories obtained over the French when they have had six
to one against the English; to the honor and renown of England's unparalleled
Valor, Conduct, and Resolution. Leybourn's Universal Instrument, performing
all such Conclusions, Geometrical and Astronomical, as are usually wrought by
the Globes, Spheres, Sector, Quadrants, Planupheres, or any other the like
Instrument yet in being, with much ease and exactness. The Reasonableness of
God's Law, and Unreasonableness of Sin. Allen of Contentment. The Young
Merchants Glass, wherein are exact Rules of all Weights, Coins, Measures,
Exchanges, and other matters necessary used in Commerce; as also Variety of
Merchants Accounts, after the Italian way of Debtor and Creditor, in
Factorage, Partnership, and Bartar; likewise the Method of keeping Pursers
books. By J. Every. Clark's Martyrology. Fol. His Examples, in 2 Vol. Fol.
Marrow of Ecclesiastical History. Fol.
THE END.

