A SNAKE in the GRASS Caught and Crushed.

OR A Third and Last Epistle to a now furious, DEACON in the Church of England,
The REVEREND Mr. George Keith, WITH Some Remarks on my former Epistles to him,
especially That against Plunging in Baptism.

(...).

Pythagoras. By Trepidantium Malleus.

LONDON: Printed for John Marshal, at the Sign of the Bible in
Grace Church Street. 1700.

A Third and Last Epistle to Mr. George Keith.
Reverend Sir,
WHEN Men Dethrone their Judgments, and Reason, and put their Humors and
Passions in their Place, no wonder if they run as a Coach and Horses that have
lost their Guide or Charioteer, here and there; every where, and no where: Such
cannot only castrate Authors, but make Legions for Histories; and like Pioneers
of Rome, call for Fire from Heaven, but fetch it from Hell. This you will
grant, some Bapts have lately done (vulgarly Anabaptists): They have employed a
Socinian to Argue, and a worse to Rave; this Fire, all the Water in which such
are plunged, cannot quench. But no wonder, when D. Russel was not ashamed to
put Blessed Calvin in such a Hue and Dress, as if an incatnate Devil; and put
not only Castellio, that rank Arminian, that called Solomon's Canticles a
profane Book; but Servetus himself, that called the Trinity a Cerberus, in
such glorious Array, as if a terrestrial Angel; for this was he burnt, not for
being an Anabaptist.

Felix quem faciunt* I am charged with a Notion never known before; That
Baptizo signifies not once to Plunge in all the New Testament, tho so many
Critics say the contrary.

1. These Critics say with me, and others, the Word signifies other ways, of
washing too. So Leigh, who is instar omnium, and cites for me, Mat. 3.11. What
say you to this Bapts? now if you leave them in one thing, why not I in another?

2. Bernardus non videt omnia. They were fallible Men. Rhegius the famous Man
of France, whose Life, Clark in his blundering way, has written, found out the
right Construction of Ovid.

Nam vos mutastis and illas.
Tho so many Generations before mistook it. M. Mead discovered the (...) to be
the Doctrine, not of Devils, as we read, but Mediators, called by Hesiod and
others, Demons. That the Genitive was not of the Efficient, but Matter: All now
yield to this true Discovery, though New, I might name New Discoveries, as in
Philology, Divinity, so in Philosophy, particularly the Ingenious Esquire Boil.

3. Yet this Discovery was not mine; I gave another the Honor of it, who
since, I find had it from other Authors before his time. I confess I was the
first Man that gave 'em the Name of Bapts, which, no doubt, will continue.

The Blood of Beasts offered in Sacrifice, and the Water of Purification was by
Pouring, or Sprinkling, not by Plunging or Dipping. John therefore that came in
with his Baptism, cannot be supposed to have any Baptism but what harmonized
with the Jewish ones; we find also, not only in the Law, but the Prophets,
glorious things mentioned of Gospel Times, from this Practice, Isa. 2.15. So
shall he Sprinkle many Nations.

Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I Sprinke clean Water upon you, and you shall be clean.
Look we farther; when the Gospel was Planted, and all fulfilled, how all is
expressed Tim. 3.5, 6. They were said to be saved by the washing of Regeneration;
how? shed* as Acts 2.17. Pouring of the Spirit proves all: I am of his Mind,
who said, Baptizing in Enon was so far from proving Plunging, That it disproves
it. They therefore left Bathabara; says he, because the Waters were Deep, and
not so fit for Baptism; and came to Enou, for the Rivulets there, were fit for
Baptism but not Plunging.

Reverend Sir, I am much importuned to Write you a Third Epistle about your
Sermons at Turners Hall, and G. Church lately Printed, but I long refused.

1. Because I have often appeared for you* but I am Answered, that matters not,
This is not ad Idem.

2. Because I think I have done it already: I find but little you have said
about the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Episcopacy, but what I have Answered in my
Apology* in my Letters to Mr. Lasly, and Friendly Epistle to you. I pray look
on all once again: You approved then of what I did. How came you so soon
changed? It would be an Abuse clapped on my Readers, to deceive them of their
Time, and Money, to transcribe what they know I then wrote.

3. Because I think some things in the Sermons are too triflng and unfit for an
Answer, as your Gloss on these Words. He that breaks one of the least of
these Commandments, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God. So the
Rushing of many Waters, and other Places brought for your Confusions in your
Liturgy. To Cite, for Episcopacy, Psalm. 45.16. Isaiah 60.17. Is such playing
with God; I dare not do it with Mr. Keith, somewhat like the Exposition you
gave of that Text. The dead cannot praise thee; Those that be dead in Sin, in
your Loyal Sermon Printed five Years since.

I was, Sir, your Herrer in G Church; in the Afternoon, when I came there, I
saw the Reader with his Spectacles on his Nose, and both with Eyes close to the
Book, thus reading Prayers to his God. No Eyes nor Hands lift up to Heaven in
any praying Posture, but both as nailed to the Book, for fear of not reading
right, as if the Poor Man had not lost only the Power of Godliness, but the
uery Form of it too. Many Ignorant Profane Men in Prayer, that never send
their Hearts to Heaven, send their Eyes and Hands ^twards it.

Mr. Keath, let you and I talk privately; for it would not be safe to ask you
openly, whether you can believe, That the great God, the Blessed Jesus, the
Holy Spirit, ^ever sent qualified Men for their Work (for unqualify'd ones run
before they are sent) to read other Men's Prayers to God? Were it not for some
Penal Laws yet in force against Dissenters, I should go near to say, That for
such a one to read other Men's Prayers to God, is not only as Scandalous, but
ten times more so, than to read other Men's Sermons to the People? When the
Apostle tells the Church, the Gifts God gave Men, Tongues, Interpretation of
Tongues, Prophesying, Interpretations, etc. Never mentioned he the poor, poor,
pitiful poor Gift of Reading.

When the Jewish Church was in its Swadling-Clouts, and fed with Milk, taught
by many Ceremonies, God made every one of them himself, not they; yet then
there were no Forms, no Liturgies for the Priests to read, or People to hear
when they came together.

As weak as they were, they were not so weak. Who dares now impose under the
Gospel Dispensation, when the Church is become a Man, and much more, as of the
Grace, so of the Gifts of the Spirit is now poured out.

You pleading up Conformity, unhappily chose this Text, (the best to caution us
against it.) Luke 1.6. And they were has Perfect, walking in all the
Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord, blamelesly.

1. Why, good Mr. Keith, were Zachary and Elizabeth commended for walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of Men? No, the Pharisees were severely
Censured for this by our Lord, and so the Churches by Paul. With an in vain do
you worship me. And I am afraid of you. I hope, Sir you have not lost your
Senses, if you were so weak to think we had lost ours.

2. Can you charge any of us, against whom you most set your sellf at that
time, with not walking in the Commandments and Ordinances of God? Your Work lay
then not with the Quakers. Zachary observed Circumcision, Sacrifices, etc. Not
washing of Hands, Philacteries. We observe Baptism and Lord Supper, not Cross
nor Surplice: No wonder. I overheard a Clergyman say in the Church; your
Sermon was nothing to the Text.

Was it not a lovely sight to hear you declaring against Schism, who soon lept
from Turners Hall, after the Sacrament received, to a public Church? To tell
us, you were only as a Catechist there, or that the Bishop gave his Consent, is
poor thin Sophistry; what is his Lordship such a Plenipotentiary, as if all
Power were given to him in Heaven, and in Earth, That he can make Schism no
Schism, and Laymens Preaching lawful, without Ordination? You were pleased to
tell us, That there were no lawful Sacraments, where was no lawful
Administrator. That no Man was a lawful Administrator but one Ordained by a
Bishop, etc. That all other Churches wanted what was integral (Episcopacy): I
thank you, that on my Letter to you, you were pleased to leave this out in the
Printed Sermon. Dared you thus to fly in the Faces of the Reformed Churches,
Holland, Geneva; and now blessed be Cod, Scotland, and other Churches who own
Presbytery, and that by Divine Right? For those Protestant Churches that have
Bishops, they only preside in Synods, and out of them are as other Men; no
Spiritual Courts, etc. Such an Episcopacy, and Bishop Usher's Episcopacy, many
Presbyterians would yield to. You know Bp. Jewel, Bp. Davenant, and others;
Even Mr. Hooker himself in his Eccles. Pol. as well as honest Bishop Crofts in
his Naked Truth, abhorred your Notions. These never thought Episcopacy of
Divine Right, nor doubted the validity of Presbyterian Ordinations beyond Sea.
You cannot be ignorant, That when two Scottish Ministers were made Bps. in the
Reign of James the 1st. when one objected their not having Episcopal
Ordination, how sharply he was reproved by a Prelate and others for his
Objection? Laud, that Semi-Protestant, talked as you do; he and you have but
little Thanks from your own, for such bold Assertinns: If you are a Laudensian
already, Sir, what will you be next? A Cardinal's Cap was offered him. I hope
God will keep you from the Temptation. When one talked before the present Bishop
of London at your rate, he gravely and wisely said, He was ^ot there to judge
Christian Churches, These wild Notions I have considered in my two forenamed
Books, and there I refer; and if you think it convenient to Reply, Answer me
there as well as here. It was not long since you told the Anabaptists they were
in the right about the Subject and Form of Baptism: Some are pleased to say, I
Cured you of these Errors. Then Independency was the best Government; but for
Presbytery, I confess you never had a good Word then; and why? because they
were not pure enough in admission to the Lord's Table: Yet gave a jump to
Episcopacy (I thought you would as soon turn to the Church of Rome.) You are
now gotten among pure Communicants: The Church was lately in the Wilderness,
and you had found in the Revelations she would not come out these Thirty Years.
Well, seeing the Mountain will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the
Mountain. Seeing the Church will not come out of the Wilderness to you, you are
gone to her in the Wilderness (so it is) to get her Blessing too whilst you
live. You then told your Friends, Baptism was an Ordinance of Christ, but there
was not an Administrator upon Earth.

To be plain, I wish, That as you have long left the Quakers for talking of a
Christ within, not of a Christ without; you have not run among them that talk
of a Christ without, not of a Christ within. I was not a little surpised,
looking lately into your Quakerism no Popery, A Book done with all imaginable
Subtilty, to find you assert Perfection in the Quakers Sense and Phrases, and
with Robert Barclay on 1 John 1.8. to distinguish, aliud est peccare, aliud
peccatum habere. And what I found in your Immediate Revelation, you may imagine.
Are you not changed in Principles? Had W. C. harped on these things, I had
never written my Reprimand. Whoever heard you

1. Hearty in the Confession of sin to this Day?

2 Sigh, or shed one Tear for deluding Thousrnds of Souls to Quakerism, Deism,
as you now call it?

How come you to have so many good Words for the Papist in the Sermon I heard?

I am informed, you are desired to tell us where (as you say) Mr. Baxter said,
The Sign of the Cross was no more than the putting of a Thread about a Man's
Fingers, to put him in mind of what he would remember.

1. Women and Children more do thus then Wise Men.

2. I remember no such Words of his, though I have read so many of his Books. But
he declared often he could not conform here. In his Life written with his own
Hand, he called it p. 199 a Hemane Sacrament, a Transient Image: Are not your
Studies filled not only with Calvin's Work, but Mr. Pool's Synopsis, the Works
Of Dr. Owen, and other great Dissenters, as well as our Studies with some of
your Bishops Works. When, where and how got Bp. ^tillingfleet. Bp. Tillotson
and other Bishops and Clergymen, their Learning. That you talk at such an idle
rate, as if the Cabalistical Notions were still working in your Head, or
Transmigration of Souls, That all our Souls were in Adam's Head, as Legions of
Devils in one Man; Are you ^u^ed ^ere?

Was it proper to tell us at Turner's Hall, That you believed M. Penn and the
Quakers, would find Mercy with God, notwithstanding their Errors, and yet offer
to prove, they owned not one Article of the Christian Faith; and yet that Faith
in a outward Crucified Christ, was necessary to Salvation. These are Mysteries
I cannot fathom, nor any Man else.

2. Is it proper to tell us what Refreshment you find at Common Prayer? (Once
in Quakerism) I knew a Man that would say all Drinks were sweet to him, strong
or small, fresh or dead. One said, he found great Refreshment, when he saw the
King's Head cut off.

3. Was it proper to tell us of your Conversion and Change of Heart before a
Quaker, and when so? No, Sir, deceive not your self, you were no Convert when
you made so light of Sin, etc. And deluded so many Thousands, and I am bold to
say it without the breath of Charity, if you were not converted since, you
never were cdnverted at all.

4. Was it proper so much to value your self for your Catholic Charity, and
yet be so severe on a sudden on the best Reformed Churches? Well, Sir, when you
are a Bishop, or a Beneficed-Man, if Persecution came again, I will never live
in your Dioces, nor in your Parish. You tell us Timothy was a Bishop. I pray
how many thousands or Hundreds by the Year had my Lord Bishop? Was Timothy's
Dioces as large as the Bishop of Londons! etc. In Ephesus most of them were
Pagans; was he the Bishop of these too? he Drank too little Wine, and preached
too often, in season and out of season to be a Bishop. These take Care of Mint
and Cummin; not of the weighty matters of the Law.

Sir, if your Zeal for your new gaudy Spouse, in all her Trinklets, be such
that there can be no Intimacy, I pray you there may be no Enmity. Preach
Repentance, Faith, and Gospel Obedience; and if it pleased you to decline such
Frequent and sever lashing others, the Quakers themselves, as well as us in the
Pulpit, consider, at your leisure, whether it be not best.

Excuse my not following you at large, not only for the reasons before named;
my Referring you to my Apology, and first Frinedly Epistle to you; but to be
plain, it would be a burden too heavy for my Shoulders, to bear the Expense of
all the Impresions of all my Books, were I not, of late more concise then once.
I may be larger in time; perhaps you may hear from more then one, you change
often and yet Confident still; Are the Dissenters indeed the Cause of the
Profaneness of your Church, by not complaining in the Spiritual Court? They
would be angry should we tell them why we do ii not, what Man was ever
Excommunicated for Drunkeness, Whoredoms, Swearing, or other sins in the two
last Reigns, or to this day, tho under a good King? Seek to win the Quakers by
kindness; and mention not their private Concerns in the Pulper. which I ever
hated to make a Place of Controversies and Contention.

I am brought to this work with very great difficulty; I desired fitter and
greater Men to appear. They refused charging you with former Disputes against
the Trinity etc. and yet declareing you ever were sound in the Faith; so that,
say they, you are if this be true, a Sound Quaker (or unsound one if you will)
still. The importunity of my Friends has prevailed with me to this Third and
Last Epistle to you; I pray you, as a Wise Man, give over, your weak Pleas for
your Ceremonies, as that the Saints in the Revelations appeared in white. Why
have you not Crowns on your Heads and Palms in your Hands too? If the Surplice
makes you look like Saints above, what do the Black Gowns under make you like?
So that if this Ceromony represents any thing, It is the Hypocrite who is a
Saint without, and a Devil inside; or such a Whited Wall as Paul named the High
Priest, o^ whom he said, God shall smite thee on the mouth.

L me ask you at parting, some plain Questions? How wicked a thing is it to
excommundcate or swear to read a Writ of excommunication, (if occasion be)
against some of the best of Men, for Toys and Trifles? When the Fox was set to
keep the Geese, King Charles the Second a Papist, to protect your Church, you
know what was done by Men that perhaps would smile to hear any talk seriously
of Christ and the Life to come.

What if Anabapristry had gotten the Ascendant; were in its Zenith, were it
unlawful to withdraw, or separate, if it had the stamp of Authority? If
Presbytery were so. Could Mr. Lashly and other Episcoparians comply? what
becomes of your Plea, about the Jewish Church, if not?

How odious was it to tell the World, what Encouragement you had to come among
Dissenters? which to my certain knowledge, was a mistake? what London Noncon
Ministers ever visited you, my self excepted?

Tell me plainly, and like a Man, why not a Cross in the breast at Prayer, with
those good C^ristians as you call them of the Roman Church as well as one in
the Forehead in Baptism; with our Ceremony-Mongers in your Church?

Why not Holy Water, to signify the Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus, as well
as a Surplice, or Sacrum Pallium, to signify Purity? Or would you conform to
these, if the Law require them? If you say, No, why not as well as to those you
conform too? If you say, Yes; what end is there of these Fooleris, or vain
additions to the Divine Law? Is this to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has set us free?

If you say, as I hear you do; a Surplice is no more than a Gown; what Man
should you go to your Table (or a Place nor so sweet) with it? This would be
accounted a Profanation of the Holy Garment.

Dare you take Ignorant, Scandalous, Sponsers in Baptism, to make them
perfidious by a Humane Law. Or to say over the Graves of the greatest Atheist,
Heretic, or Debauch? you hope he is gone to Heaven.

Did you ever read Acts 20.28* That you talk of Ephesus having a Diocesan? Or
know you no better an Evangelist, but to make him a Prelate? Answer what others
and my self have said of these Matters.

Do you not, with a Blush, look on your late Ordination in a Chamber, without
one word of Prayer to God, or Counsel to you But what was in the Service Book?
The Bishops generally do their Work more solemnly and gravely. Was it thought
any thing good enough for you?

If Cross kneeling, or other Ceremonies were lawful, but not necessary, as you
all say* How dare you impose them on us that think them sinful? Read Romans 14.
Baptism shall not be administered, if the Parents consent not to, the Cross. The
Lords Supper shall not be administered to the best of Men all their days, if
they cannot kneel. Answer this to God another Day, if you can. You impose on
Christ, as well as us, to dedicate a Child by a Humane Superstitious Sign to
him.

If a Book of Sports, or any other wicked Paper were to be read, would you not
seek for a Distinction, to bribe Conscience? for Conscience may be so. What
will you do on the 30th of January, etc. In your Shop of false Hearts and Faces
too? A disjointed Fabric. Put Preferment in the other Scale. Is it proper to
Invite any Men into a dangerous Pesthouse, by telling them they may live
there? He that consorts with Pelicans, cannot but smell of the Wilderness, etc.

Was it not expedient, bottoming you Bursiness on, 1 Luke 6. To have considered
the difference between the Jewish Church and Christian? How far the first was
National (though I acknowledge I own it not to be so, in that Sense as is
commonly said) Have we one High Priest, etc. Go then to the Church of Rome.
What Church could Zacary or Elizabeth, if they separated, go into, etc.

My Old Friend, but new Enemy, you have a Male (many Males), in your Flock:
ability of speaking aptly to God by Prayer, and to the People by Counsel in
Sacraments, and other Ministerial Administrations: Offer not to the Lord a
corrupt Thing, for he is a great King: Offer it to thy Governor; see whether
he would accept it: Should Ingeniou^ Mr. Keith make a Speech to K. William, and
in the close pray for his welfare; would he be pleased to see him take out a
Book and read another Man's Speech and Prayer before him* Would you, could you
read the Liturgy in your Family, Morning and Evening? I believe not: You
generally approve not of the lazy Creatures, that do, (tho they may plead that
Ignorance you cannot): If not, tell me Sir, at parting: Can you imagine God is
well pleased with that lazy, careless Worship of yours in his own House, That
you, or not only most serious Men; but sober Men cannot be pleased with in
their own? Is this to stir up the Gift of God in thee? Dare you to offer to the
Lord that which cost you nothing* If you do create me any Trouble for my
Plainness, as some think you will; I plead, you are the Aggressor, I only the
Defendant* I am against any Dissenters beginning with you, if you with us, I
pray give us leave to Reply and vindicate our Cause against your Charge, if
not, to be plain, we will take it. If you are set already on Persecution, do
your worst, I only say of my self: The Will of the Lord be done.

Tho you closed your Sermon I heard, without one Word of Prayer to God, I will
not end my Work so with you, who, as I am informed, every where Preach against
all Dissenters. The Lord rebuke thee.

And now Mr. Deacon, let me know your Office, and how you come by it? A Deacons
Work is to take care of the Poor. Have you left the Word of God to serve
Tables? A Deacon to Preach, to Baptize, and give only one Element in the Lord's
Supper, is not a Creature of God's making, but Man's, or -- To Ordain; to
Preach, and not permit to do it without a License after; what shall we call it?
You may go up and down with your Prayer Book to Baptize, and so regenerate more
then we Non-cons can do by all our preaching. For when you have mumbled out a
few Words, and Baptized a Child, he is regenerated and born of the Spirit,
immediately; and if he die before he has committed any actual Sin, he is
undoubtedly saved.

Since we are all guilty of Schism in our Meetings, when you were not so at
Turners-Hall, because you had the Bishop's leave, as you pleaded: Do you think,
if the Bishop gave us leave to do as we do, we were clear of the odious Crime
of Schism you and your Fraternity charge on us? If we be in danger of going, to
Hell for Schismatics, will he not have so much pity on our Souls, to speak one
word to save us from endless Misery? Were you a Catechist, as you say, what
Catechism taught you then, or who were the Children, or younger sort so taught?
You chose a Text, raised Doctrines, made Uses as others do to my Knowledge.
This Plea was the most Non-sensical Harangue I ever heard from Mr. Keith.

When you talk of the Ignorance of some Scottish Presbyterians. I pray remember
Thousands of the Sons of the Church. What get you by such Stories as these you
talk of? Of a Scottish Presbyterian that Catechis'd a young Man in the Church.

Q. Who made Man? A. God. Q. Who made Woman? A. I cannot tell, that is not in
my Catechism. Q. Who made the Deel. (Devil)? A. I cannot tell. Minist. God
made him. A. Did he? I think it was the worst Days mork that ever he did* Do
not such Ignorant Cattle abound every where?

Seeing you, and many of your Communion often urge Mr. Baxter's Authority, or
Opinion against us. I pray you consider, How in his English Nonconformity, a
large Book, written since the Revolution, he tells us what manner of Saints be
in your Church: He says a certain Doctor of Physic gave an Account, That Eight
Hundred Persons, in such a time, dyed of the French Pox in London.

Now said the Brisk Old Gentleman; if Enquiry were made, I doubt not, there
could not be found Eight of those Eight Hundred, but what were of your Church,
except some good honest Women, who got it of their Husbands of that Communion.
He that pretended to give an Answer to that Book, Wrote like one who understood
not Five Pages in it. But what a Noise is hear? Mr. Baxter said this, and Mr.
Baxter granted that. What then? It may be a foul, a very foul Error for all
that. Mr. Baxter was neither yours nor ours. He disowned himself to be a
Presbyterian, we thank him. You that talk so much; oh the excellency of Peace
and Union, but will not part with Ceremonies for it. Consider the Story Mr.
Alsop told Dr. Stillingfleet, almost Twenty Years since. They were like that
Gentleman, who pretended to be at Deaths-Door for a Coy Lady that refused him,
but she being importuned by his Friends to accept the Gentleman, and save his
Life, said let him then Clip his Whiskers. He being told this, replied, I will
not part with one Hair of my Face for any Lady in the Land. King Charles
pleased himself with the Story and its Application, and said Mr. A. gave a true
Character of the Men he described.

You see, Sir, I am not yet in the Number of your Defamers. I dare not say if
George Keith, and not William Pen, had taken the Chair when George Fox dyed, we
had never heard of George Kieth, the Reformed Quaker. I believe Dr. Hicks, and
Mr. Lashly two strenuous Advocates for the Church of England, have reconciled
you to Liturgies, Ceremonies, and Episcopacy. They who call you Aesop, forget
what a Wise Man Aesop was, and who said; He has made us, and not we our selves.

With out a Complement, I know I yet Love you, and value you for those
acomplishments God has blessed you with? you are a Man of Thought, and if it
plea^^d you to Visit, as before, you should be as Welcom^ to me as ever without
harping on any unpleasant String, but seeing you refuse this, and love not a
Dissenter, I only say, I am sorry I have lost so good, so Ingenious a Friend,
to serve whom I wolud yet ride or go far. Give over Preaching up, every where,
Conformity to the vain Traditions of Men, or censuring the best of Churches:
But Cry aloud, spare not, Lift up your Voice like a Trumpet, show to the lasy
Prelates and Priests, their Transgresions; and to the Drunken, Swearing,
Whoring, Members, and Communicants of the (so Called) Church of Eegland, their
Sins*

I never doubted, but among you, on the one Hand, and the Anabaptists on the
other, are found some as God like men as are in the World; and pray, you may be
in the Number, I hate the least thought of doubting any Man's Integrity or
State, for his Opinion in these Matters. I dare not say, such a Man wrongs his
Conscience, Sins against his Light: I did not, when I read (or rather said
without Book) the Liturgy or attended on it. Neithe^ may Mr. Keith, as far as I
know, The Searcher of Hearts knows from what Principles, he Acts, and what ends
he propounds to himself* He now knows, or may know; and Men and Angels shall
know another Day. Blessed is the Name and Memory of Humble Bp. Usher Devout Bp.
Hall, Holy Dr. Connot (and others and Zealous Dr. Hornick of whom I know
extraordinary instances of Converse with Heaven; May the Name and Memory of my
Dear Old Friend Mr. Keith be blessed also.

Some ask us, may a Man be saved in the Church of England? Yes, what need then
of Nonconformity?

I ask. May a man live on Barly-Bread and Water? Yes, What need then of good
Meat and good Drink?

May a Man live and go up and down London streets Winter and Summer, naked,
above the Wast? Yes, A Jacobite did it several Years, what need then of a shift
or Coat, about these Parts. May a Man be in a House with them that Dye with the
Itch, Small Pox, or Plague it self, and yet live? Yes, what need then leaving
that House? Need enough, tho the Separation were called Schism, and forbidden
by the civil Magistrate with penal Laws.

I suppose you will quickly hear from others; If from Mr. Owen, I pity you:
Consider, I pray you what he has done above most Men, about Ordination by
Presbyters, not Bishops As many Reformed Quakers have gone back again on the
News of your Conformity, so I doubt more will. Are you to be made a Biship?
Have you not been already Consecrated in a Dream? I would rather you were
s(...) times then once otherwise. M(...) know the Story Bp. Latimer mentions in
one of his Sermons, of a Bishop that thundered when he saw one of the Bells
want a Clapper; one pointed to the Pulpit, there is a Bell that has been
without a Clapper for two years past, provide one there. Mind not, great Sir,
Toys and Trifles, with the neglect of the great Matters of the Law. The good
words you have for the Papists, do the Dissenters a kindness, under your keen
Censures of them. Grotius had not one good Word for Calvin; gets up all the
little Stories he could agginst him, a^ Judica^, prout (...)mas, and odisti;
amas, and odisti, prout libet, etc. Nay, touches him as to his Morals; when
learned Papist have been his Compurgators here; as Mr. Baxter has learnedly,
and unexceptionally proved in his Key for Catholics, yet he had many a good
word for the Catholics (for so he always called the Papists) at last he says,
That Humor or a spirit of opposition (or words of the same import) made some
charge them with Idolatry, when they were no more guilty of it, then the Jews
in looking toward the Ark, and about Transubstantiacion, he talks of
Transelementation. Grotius Appendix. Are not such good Sons of the Church of
England, which in her Homilies and Liturgy, charges the Church of Rome with
Idolatry?

FINIS.

