The New HISTORY OF Count ZOSIMVS, SOMETIME Advocate of the Treasury of the
Roman Empire.

With the Notes of the Oxford Edition.

In Six Books.

To which is prefixed Leunclavius's APOLOGY for the Author.

Newly Englished.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill, 1684.

G. J. Vossius concerning the Author.
THE Language of Zosimus is concise, expressive, pure and sweet; according to
the judgment of Photius (Patriarch of Constantinople) in his Bibliotheca; but
being a Heathen, he often reproaches the Christian Princes; and is upon that
score reprehended by the same Photius, Evagrius, Nicephorus and others: Yet
still Leunclavius is of Opinion, that Zosimus ought to be believed even in
those Relations, there being no doubt but that the Christian Princes were
guilty of many Enormities, which it became a faithful Historian not to pass by.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
THE Author's Work having been subject to multitude of Censures, It Is
impossible this Translation should escape Reflections.

But Zosimus has been thought worthy of an Apology by Johannes Leunclavius a
Noble German, who also took the pains to translate him into Latin; and the
History has been printed several times in the last Age; particularly some Books
by that Good Man Henricus Stephanus, and the whole by the learned Sylburgius.
And of late years at Oxford, with the knowledge, if not direction, of a Reverend
Prelate and Famous University; as also in Germany, with the Notes of diverse
Eminent Persons.

The French who make all Excellent Pieces of Antiquity their own, have lately
made him speak their Language; and conjoined him with the Histories of Xiphilin
and Zonaras: and it is not unknown, in that Country the Press is kept by Jealous
Masters.

As he now stands in the English Tongue, if there be any Poison contained in
Him, it may be Hoped, that peradventure, there will be found many Men, who
understand neither Greek nor Latin, and yet have Sense enough to avoid Poison.

J. H.

THE Reader is humbly desired to excuse an Erratum, Page 346. where the Notes
are put into the History it self. It begins Hence does, and ends Dealt withal.

Leunclavius's APOLOGY FOR ZOSIMVS, Against the unjust Reflections of Evagrius,
Nicephorus, Cedrenus, and others.
ALTHOUGH I were either to Dispute against Men even of a different Religion, or
were not to undertake the defense of a Man, who, for having professed the old
exploded Pagan Superstition, would certainly at first sight lose any manner of
favor that he could expect in his cause among Men of our times; yet encouraged
and supported with evident Arguments from Truth it self, and the weakness of
those which are brought against him by his Adversaries, I will not fear but
that what I have to say will with impartial Men obtain. But I foresee his
Defense is like to prove no easy Province, being to reply to those Men who
under the pretense of defending the Christian Religion and those Princes who
were the most celebrated Patrons of it, charge one of the most elegant and
useful Historians with lying and calumniating; and who because he was no
Christian must not be admitted to be a proper or a faithful reporter of those
things which were transacted in the Commonwealth. For mankind is generally so
unhappily built, as easily to believe those Men whom they find of the same
Opinions with themselves, even in things indifferent, but especially in matters
of Religion, crying down in the mean while Men of different Sentiments,
although the things they deliver do not appear repugnant to truth. But seeing
there is that force in Virtue in general, but especially in truth, that we
cannot but approve it even in an Enemy; we hope you will hear what we have
undertaken to say in a few words in defense of Zosimus, and that Men not too
perverse and disingenuous will acknowledge that matters of fact may with candor
and integrity be transmitted to future Ages by Men even of a different Religion
from our selves.

Zosimus is assaulted with abundance of ill language, bespattered, cursed and
given to the Devil for a most wicked Fellow, and principally for professing
himself a Pagan; though I even in this commend the ingenuity of the Man, and
yet at the same time lament his want of judgment, who being a person of
extraordinary Wit, yet like the wise of the World, as the Scripture speaks,
could not discern the light of the Divine Truth: but seeing that could be no
hinderance why he should not faithfully relate and discreetly judge of those
things which were well or ill done in the administration of the Government, let
us proceed to those things in which the principal force of the Accusation
consists.

They say he was unjust to the memory of Constantine for introducing a new
Religion and its increase under him; and this we may grant them, considering it
is impossible for any Man to wish well to him who against our wills would alter
our Religion, when we think it most agreeable to truth, and which has been
confirmed by the Authority and consent of almost innumerable Ages. But what
then? Was this hatred of Zosimus toward Constantine any motive for him
calumniously to write how Constantine was the first Emperor that exacted that
wicked and intolerable kind of Tax called (...) or aurargenteum, (that which in
the Civil Law Books is termed aurum lustrale, because it was collected every
fourth year,) or was it for this reason that he has related how Constantine
seized upon the Estates and goods of other Men? a grievous charge indeed, and
Zosimus is to be reproved for his slanderous way of Writing, if it appear that
he has reported these things of the Emperor untruly: but I am so far from
believing that Zosimus wants good and indubitable Authors for what he says,
that although there needed other Testimonies, yet that Constantine cannot be
acquitted from this Charge, is evident from one substantial Argument; for
either Constantine found this grievous imposition already laid upon his People
by some of his Predecessors or else he cruelly imposed it himself. If we
acknowledge Constantine to have been the Author, as Zosimus out of the Writers
of those times demonstrates we ought to do, what reason is there to accuse him
for relating matter of fact, as he had received it from others, as became a
faithful Historian; his Adversaries are more to be blamed, who expatiating more
in the praises of Constantine than becomes them, forget the duty of Historians,
and seem rather to write Panegyrics and Declamations than Histories.

But let it be so that Zosimus forged this against him whom he knew to have
been the first among the Emperors that professed the Christian Religion, and
was therefore resolved to be revenged of him for deserting that of his
Ancestors by aspersing him with the imposition of a Tax unheard of, and so
odious to the People.

Well then, Constantine did only retain (which yet these Cavillers dare not
insist on) a most hateful custom which he had received from his Predecessors;
however our excellent Emperor is not altogether innocent, who would not
abolish a Tax so sordid and abominable, (and introduced by Heathen Princes)
after he had himself embraced the Christian Religion. For what mighty
difference is there between the Author of an evil custom, and him, who when he
has Power does not abrogate a cruel and unjust one brought in by those that
preceded him? But themselves deny not but this Tax was collected and with great
cruelty too, under Christian Princes; and confess that Anastasius the first a
considerable time after Constantine did by a certain wile get all the Books,
wherein were the accounts of this Money, into his own hands, out of all the
Provinces, and burned them, to the inestimable benefit and satisfaction of his
poor Subjects. Let them not therefore complain of any injury done to
Constantine till they prove by good and substantial evidence that He was not
the Author of this imposition; and though they should acquit him from being the
Author, yet they cannot but confess that he will still stand equally criminal
for approving and retaining so horrid and villainous a thing. But let us hear I
beseech you what weighty reasons they produce, to prove that Constantine could
not be the Author of so base an Imposition.

Zosimus himself, say they, confesses that Constantine did with incredible
expense build Constantinople, and considerably enlarged the space without the
Walls of the old City; that he adorned it with a Palace no way inferior to
that of Rome, and several other Edifices beautiful and magnificent; that in
imitation of the City of Rome he granted to the common People a certain
allowance of Corn: that the Senators who at his request left Rome and went to
Constantinople, he gratified with noble Houses and considerable sums of Gold.
How then should the thought of such a Tax enter into the mind of such a Prince?
and Zosimus was not aware how he contradicted himself in asserting things
almost repugnant and inconsistent of the same Man. These are their Arguments,
but who sees not that they are taken from us? Zosimus says, that Constantine
was profuse and extravagant as soon as he had gotten the Empire to himself, and
this he proves effectually; that he wasted the public Revenue by unreasonable
largesses, that he consumed vast sums in voluptuousness, impoverished the
Exchequer by many costly and unnecessary Structures, and lastly mistook
Profuseness for Munificence.

If these things shall appear to be true, as certainly they are, no wise Man
will think it strange that he found out new ways of extorting Money, and when
just and reasonable Methods would not suffice, that he made use of some cruel
and unheard of before. He that was wont to throw away such vast sums for his
humor, would not want it for his pleasures; for no men are so rapacious after
other men's goods as they who most madly wast what they have themselves, upon
their own luxury and excess, and to as much purpose do they brag of
Constantine's bounty to his Soldiers: and this too they tell you Zosimus
confesses, and what wonder if having purchased the Empire this way, he made use
of the same to keep it; for had he not, there had been no reason why the Army
should not have preferred the lawful Issue of Constantius which he had by his
Wife Theodora, rather than Constantine. The riotous and greedy humor of
Soldiers will not endure frugal and tenacious Princes, but are ever most
devoted to them who feed their lusts though to the exhausting of the public
Treasury. And impossible it is, that those exorbitant largesses which are
wasted upon those Soldiers, (who having been once corrupted are ever after
mutinous) to keep them in their obedience, should not be to the destruction of
those poor Subjects from whom it is torn with the greatest cruelty in the
World. Hence those new kinds of exactions were merely to redress the effects of
prodigality: and to rehearse these kinds of Oppression, whether instituted by
Constantine, or the elder Theodosius, or Valentinian the first, is not
impudently to bespatter or rail at godly and religious Princes, but to relate
things as they were, which we observing may be able to make use of to our
advantage. For if we rightly consider, it amounts to no more than admonishing
Princes of the present and future Ages, that because they profess the Christian
Religion, they should not flatter themselves with a belief of such a right to
the goods and properties of their Subjects, as Julian, and other Pagan
Emperors never pretended to, who for their abstinence, gentleness and
moderation in Government have been a reproach to some who professed a better
Religion.

And the same Zosimus, say they, in another place applauds this Constantine for
some actions of his bravely and valiantly performed, and ought not he to have
taken care how he diminished his glory, whom he before had celebrated so much?
as if it were impossible to commend Constantine, Theodosius and other Christian
Princes without approving all that they did; or as if for this very reason he
did not appear the honester Man, and without all controversy fitter to be an
Historian, who though he observed some Vices in Constantine, very notorious,
would not yet be so unjust to his memory, as to omit those things which were
commendable in him.

Nor could Zosimus's hatred to the Christian Religion transport him so far and
hurry him into such undecencies as are too evident and scandalous in you,
considering the Religion you profess. For those Princes who would be thought
Christian, though for the most part lewd and immoral Men, you can scarce
forbear deifying, bellowing out their praises to the very Sky; and at the same
time others, that were destitute of that light, though otherwise Men of
incompatable worth and Virtues, you are not ashamed to rob even of that praise
which their merits challenge as their due. I do not now speak of humane
frailty, which will not admit a Man so to deport himself as to be liable to no
exception; and therefore wise Men acknowledge that of Theognis to be true: Vir
bonus interdum malus est, alias bonus idem. I will allow Constantine to have
been indeed a great Man, he was the first among the Emperors that abolished
those severe and bloody Laws against our Religion, he embraced the true Worship
of God, he removed that Tyranny that had so long been exercised against the
Church and the Commonwealth; and lastly in a great measure quieted those
intestine Differences which were among those of the Christian Profession, by a
Convocation of most holy Men. These are indeed worthy Actions of an excellent
Prince, and such as all good Men will not only acknowledge but admire and
applaud. But their way it was, who have written the History of the times about
Constantine, not only to report those things which were good and commendable,
but even those too which can no way be justified, and that the Laws of History
do necessarily require, and of considerable use it is in the life of Man;
however it may seem to fully and diminish his glory of whom it is related. And
if Zosimus have done this with great freedom of speech, he is not certainly
more to be reproved for it than some others, who professing not the Pagan, as
he did, but the Christian Religion, have not stuck bitterly to lash Constantine
as well for those things which Zosimus has likewise charged him with, as also
that an Emperor pretending to be a Christian should promulgate a Law, inserted
in Justinian's Code, forbidding those to be accused for the use of Magic Arts,
who from those wicked Rites seek relief for sick bodies, and the conservation
of those things which are necessary to life; that is, Men who forsake God the
fountain of all good things, and expect those assistances from evil Angels
which they despair of receiving from the Almighty: as if it were not expressly
forbid in the Scripture, or that the use of that could be lawful, which is in
it self impious and damnable: and not without reason do the same Men discommend
Constantine for changing his Counsels and resolutions in his old age, when by
the persuasion of his Sister Constantia he recalled Arius the Author of that
most pernicious Sect from banishment, and commanded Athanasius, who, for his
extraordinary Piety and Religion, had so well deserved of his own and all
succeeding ages, to be banished into France; and these are Crimes more
inexcusable than what Zosimus has charged him with, these respecting the
honor of God, the peace of his Church and the salvation of his Peoples Souls;
Zosimus, in the mean while complaining chiefly of those things in Constantine
which tended to the prejudice of the Commonwealth.

And what is Zosimus's Crime, which Evagrius and Nicephorus make such a stir
about, in relating how Constantine murdered his Son Crispus Caesar, a most
hopeful Youth and of great Virtue, and his own Empress Fausta? is not this a
singular piece of impudence which denies that to have been done, which the
consent of those Writers who are of undoubted veracity, confirms the truth of?
But Eusebius, say they, who was contemporary with Constantine and survived him
too, mentions not one word of those Parricides. But what if this testimony be
not good? For I must tell you, this kind of Historians, Prelates I mean,
Priests and Monks have but a scurvy reputation for their fidelity this way; for
those Princes who preferred them, they do not only praise immoderately, but
studiously endeavor not only to free from the guilt, but from the very
suspicion too of those Villainies, which, for all that, are too apparent to be
either concealed or excused; and some again, and those no mean Persons, either
not fairly passed over, or which is worse, unjustly stigmatized. But let us not
make use of this advantage against so eminent an Author as Eusebius, and
therefore allow that either he would not, or durst not write, his own
circumstances and those of the times not admitting it; for either he wrote his
History while Constantine was alive, or soon after his death: while he was yet
alive he could not, without unavoidable hazard of his life, bring in the story
of so horrid a Villainy, and little less could he have expected from Constantius
who survived his Father and Brethren, if he had written it after he was dead.
For whom I beseech you should he spare who spared not his own blood? shall we
say therefore that those murders of Constantine were feigned, because Eusebius,
for fear of the Father, and when he was dead, of the more cruel Son, durst not
insert them into his History? But Eusebius, say they, commends Crispus, and
therefore very unlikely it is, that he should have been murdered by his Father;
as if an enraged Father who was jealous of his Son's being naught with his
Mother-in-law, could in the height of his passion so far command himself as to
spare him because he was a hopeful and a forward Youth: or had not afterward
testified his resentment of the injury he had done so excellent and virtuous a
Person, when touched with grief and remorse for the murder of such a Son, he
strangled his own Wife Fausta who was the occasion of his suspicion, in a Bath.
Eusebius therefore if he had a mind to be safe, could not better consult his
own security than by wholly declining the mention of Crispus's murder in his
History; for one of these two he must necessarily have done, either have made
Crispus die innocent, or not; guilty he would not, because the contrary was
manifest to all Men, and innocent he durst not, for fear of accusing the
Father: And hence we may truly infer that Crispus was unblameable, because
among the rest who testify his innocence, Zosimus relates how sadly he was
lamented by his Grandmother Helena; and therefore Eusebius for reasons best
known to himself left that in doubt which Zosimus more remote from that Age
ought by no means to have omitted. And truly I cannot but admire what was in
the minds of these Men, who not content to have exposed themselves by their
zeal against Zosimus, will not allow Constantius to have been cruel at all,
because he did not execute Vetranio who had been guilty of Treason: as if one
single instance were sufficient to entitle a Man to the Character of a gentle
and merciful Prince, (who at other times inhumanly butchered his own Relations)
for sparing a Man who by the course of Nature could not live long, of no Birth,
not bravely taken or conquered, but circumvented by a mere wile. And the same
Constantius does Nazianzen a Man otherwise prudent enough commend only out of
hatred to Julian, a Man in many extraordinary Virtues, not equal, but far
superior to Constantius; to whom though you allow his Apostasy to the Pagan
follies to have been a reproach, yet I cannot see any reasonable cause why you
should so far prefer that other Champion of the Arian madness.

And now I must prepare to wipe off another Calumny, whereby Zosimus is accused
partly for belying, partly for reproaching of Constantine, in reporting that
being troubled in Conscience for having violated all the sacred ties of
Religion, for his Murders and other Villainies, and not being able to obtain
such an absolution from the guilt of his sins in the Pagan Religion as would
satisfy and quiet his mind, He did by the persuasion of a certain Spaniard
called Aegyptius, come over to the Christian faith, as to a Religion that would
give him peace of mind, provided he did with a firm belief and penitent heart
apply himself to him whose Office it is to reconcile us to God.

This they who are for acquitting Constantine against the faith and stream of
Historians will not allow to be true, because it was so long before he would
admit of Baptism which is ordained for the washing away of sins; and for this
they produce the Authority of Theodoret, who has written how Constantine was
baptized at Nicomedia a little before his death. But this no way invalidates
the truth of what Zosimus relates; for it was possible for Constantine to
profess the Christian Religion and not have been baptized; it being a custom
which too much prevailed about that time for many, although Christians by
profession, to defer Baptism till they were near their ends, out of an Opinion
which had then very much obtained and which yet even with us is not wholly
rejected, viz. that after Baptism such a strictness of life was requisite as
not to admit the least slip; and if after it we happened to fall, no absolution
or forgiveness was ever to be expected again. Although indeed Theodoret has
particularly mentioned that Constantine would not be baptized, always desiring
that in imitation of our Savior he might at length have that sacred Rite
performed in the streams of Jordan. This deferring his Baptism therefore
hinders not at all but that Constantine was sufficiently satisfied that by his
embracing the Christian Religion he was fully acquitted from the guilt of his
Crimes. Nor does his being so very solicitous for a lasting and effectual peace
of mind deserve any blame at all; but rather this passage in Zosimus redounds
very much to the honor both of Constantine and our Religion too. For who can
blame him for his penitence and being willing to be restored to the favor of
Almighty God, and for the time to come amend a life so wicked and unrighteous
as his had been? Who will deny the Christian Religion to be the most excellent
that ever was, which reconciles us to that God who in our Consciences we know
is displeased with our iniquities, and gives us that repose and quiet of mind,
in which the greatest felicity of our whole life consists, and which the old
Philophers did so anxiously and to so little purpose study to acquire?

Any one therefore may see what trifling and unreasonable arguments Evagrius
and Nicephorus make use of to lessen as they please the truth of those things
which Zosimus like a faithful and wise Historian has delivered of Constantine,
mingling his Virtues with his Vices, as well those things which were
commendable in him as what was scandalous and wicked, in which Constantine
himself seems to have degenerated from his own natural disposition* ought we
not rather to remember that most wise saying of Herodotus, That there never yet
was, nor is there ever likely to be any Man who through the whole course of his
life had not some mixture of evil, and with extraordinary Virtues, Vices as
extraordinary? And what if a Pagan talk unskilfully of our Religion? ought that
to be any motive for us to treat Zosimus at that rate, or condemn him never to
be read again?

And to as much purpose do they say, that Zosimus lies in affirming that from
that time the Christian Religion was introduced, the Roman Empire was harassed
by the barbarous part of the World, and in its extent diminished, and scarce
any remains of its ancient grandieur, but resembled some mighty Fabric with
patched Roofs and supported with buttresses; and to refute this they produce a
List of a great many Provinces added to the Roman Empire after our Savior was
born, and had published his Religion to the World, as part of Macedonia,
Albania, etc. Though this be no better than a Cavil and no just Reply. For
Zosimus speaks not of the beginning and as it were the Infancy of our Religion,
but observes it of those times wherein it was spread and had gotten some force,
and by the light and power of its Doctrine had so dispelled the mists of
Paganism, and beaten out the Superstitions of the Heathens, that neither Prince
nor People had any veneration or esteem for the Rites and Ceremonies of their
Ancestors; but if we shall look closer into that which they say of the
Provinces reduced under the Roman jurisdiction, 'twill be a question whether
the ignorance or impudence of these Cavillers is most to be admired; for
Zosimus will immediately reply, and truly too, that those Conquests are owing
to the Valor and Conduct of the Luculli, Pompeii, Julii, Vibii, Drusi, Tra^ani
and the rest of those Pagan Heroes; and on the contrary will charge the loss of
them to our account; nor indeed can we with any modesty or umbrage of Truth
deny but that it was so. Wherefore we must find out other Arguments to confute
Zosimus, and assign other causes why some Nations and Empires are reduced to
confusion and ruin at some certain ominous and unlucky times, and by no means
allow the institution of the Christian Religion to be the occasion, as some
mistaken Men blinded with the prejudice of Education and the impressions they
received from their Forefathers would insinuate, when the like contingencies
are evident from ancient Histories, and we daily see the experience of it our
selves.

But to return to these Men who are so much for lashing of Zosimus, who,
laboring to prove against him, that the Commonwealth flourished more under
Christian than Pagan Emperors, object the unfortunate expedition of Julian
against the Persians: but because Men differ in their Opinions concerning this
Prince, and the ancient Divines more especially are most injust in theirs.
Before we proceed in the defense of Zosimus; let us see what manner of Man this
Julian was, setting aside the business of Religion; and we shall find in him
very many, not faint strokes, but strong and express signs of extraordinary
Virtues, which if his mistake in Religion had not obscured, you might have
beheld in him, though but a young Man, the most admirable and perfect Idea of a
good and excellent Prince, he had a vigorous Wit and capacious understanding,
adorned from his Childhood, not, as Noblemen use to be, with a slight and
superficial knowledge, but he attained such a perfection in all the liberal
Sciences, that by confession of all sides he excelled even his Masters, Men too
most eminent themselves; and that he has deservedly this reputation for
Learning, needs no other proof, than those elegant and elaborate Pieces of his
which are yet extant; and that he was no mean Civilian is evident from his
Rescripts which are still to be seen in the Books of the Civil Law. Now as to
what relates to his other Accomplishments; the warlike Germans by sad
experience almost to their destruction are proofs of his singular Fortitude and
Prudence in Military Affairs, who fearing even the extinction of their name
became Petitioners to a young Man for Peace; a People who had given Laws to the
mightiest Emperors both before and after Julian: and during these Wars it is
incredible how great was his frugality and temperance both in eating and
drinking, how little he slept, and what pains he took, contemning all the
Charms and allurements of Pleasure; he lived like a Philosopher amidst the
clashing of Swords and sound of Trumpets: and a very great instance of a
modesty that seemed a stranger to Ambition did he give, when Constantius
married him to his Sister Helena, and made him Caesar when he thought of nothing
less. For when by the Emperor's command the Purple Cloak was thrown over him,
willing to show how little he esteemed that Princely Garment, he repeated this
Verse of Homer, Purpurei vis leti and inexorabile fatum Occupat. His gentleness
and readiness to forgive Men, was very often remarkable, and then especially
when the Antiochians had jested upon him more sharply and saucily than became
Subjects to their Prince, he was content with the revenge of a most witty
Oration, which though it were to their shame, could not be read without delight
to others.

His Chastity, a Virtue so rare in great Princes, he did ever so carefully
prefer, as not only during the life of his Wife never to violate, but even
after her death, in the very flower of his age refused to marry again, yet ever
abhorred all unlawful love; nor contented to demonstrate by his practice how
much he esteemed this Virtue, he had always in his mouth these Verses of
Bacchilides an ancient Poet,

Vt quum de statua facies formosa revulsa est
Non decus in reliquo corpore truncus habet;
Sic reliqui mores spreti sine honor jacebunt,
Ni sint ornati laud pudicitiae.
Who can be so brutish and disingenuous as not to admire and celebrate a Man so
illustrious for endowments of mind and body as Julian, in whom so excellent a
Wit, as appears from his Sayings, so much Learning, from his Writings, such
Skill in the Civil Law, from his Rescripts, so much Valor, from his Actions,
so much Modesty, from his Behavior, such Chastity, from his Continence, were
so remarkable and conspicuous? yet some there are such strangers to humanity,
who under the pretense only of his defection from the Christian faith,
impudently deny him those praises which are due to his Virtues, and are not
ashamed to proclaim him for an unfortunate Prince and pernicious to the
Commonwealth, because, say they, he was unsuccessful against the Persians, and
being slain in the Enemies Country had like to have ruined the Empire. Whereas
indeed the Persians and the Germans, two Nations so fatal and terrible to the
Romans, he reduced to such streights, that the Germans broken with such dismal
overthrows, earnestly sought Peace, and when they had obtained it from him,
they religiously observed it as long as he lived, out of fear of so fortunate a
young Man; though at other times a People unquiet and impatient of rest and
leisure: and the Persians terrified with a series of Victories, durst no more
come fairly into the field, nor fight upon equal terms, but burning and
destroying their own Country, were forced to confess that they wanted but a
little of a total subversion; and whatever of terror or damage was brought
upon the Romans was owing to Jovian, a Man of our own Religion, who to the
eternal reproach of the Roman name became almost a petitioner for Peace to an
Enemy even conquered himself, and appeased those by the surrender of I know not
how many Provinces, whom he ought to have made buy a Peace at the price of some
of their own Territories. What strange humor is this then, that Men should
take delight to lay those miscarriages upon other Men which are in truth to be
charged upon our selves?

And now let us see with what weighty Arguments these Censurers undertake to
demonstrate how the Christian Princes have been much juster and braver Persons
than those that were Pagans, and that the Commonwealth flourished more under
them. The Pagan Princes say they, were most of them slain and plagued with
Seditions; whereas ours were neither murdered by their Domestics nor by
foreign Enemies, and therefore the times wherein they reigned are to be
accounted happier than the others. I think we need not go very far to show them
how very forgetful or how infatuated they are with endeavoring to calumniate
others. Are not they I beseech you to be accounted Domestics that are related
to us by blood? and after our Parents are not our Brethren next akin? and will
not our Cousin-germans succeed in course? Let us see then what was acted
between the Sons of Constantine who all professed the Christian Religion.
Constans the youngest of these, having surprised his eldest Brother Constantine
by a wile, dreaming of no such matter, barbarously murdered him by a company
of base Assassines. Magnentius a Rebel slew this very Constans polluted with
the blood of his Brother. Constantius the only surviver, savagely hunting
after the blood of his own Kindred so long, till at length having destroyed the
posterity of his Brother, his own Family became extinct. What sadder and more
tragical Examples of Parricides than these can you expect? but these our fine
Historians never so much as thought of; these, which were indeed a
stumbling block to those who before having no great kindness for our Religion,
were confirmed in their abhorrence by this bloody and inhumane Scene.

But what Zosimus relates of the Immoralities of the Emperor Valens, Evagrius
takes not so ill, because he was a defender of the Arian Heresy; several of
the Ancients, among whom Paulus Varnefridus, commonly called Diaconus, and
Jornandes complain of him as the Author of that wicked Law (as they term it) by
which he restrained those vast numbers of those, who under pretense of Religion
affected Solitudes and took upon them a kind of Monkish life; and that Persons
fit for the management of Affairs and the support of the Commonwealth should be
fetched out of those holes, and forced according to their several capacities
either to enter into the Wars, or the discharge of civil Duties; and truly for
this very reason I think Valens undeservedly reprehended; and some there are
who think this Law brought into use for the raising provisions for the Army out
of those allowances which went toward the maintenance of those Lubbards, and
that good Troops might be formed out of them and paid without the charge of the
Commonwealth, by turning those Revenues that way, which by the superstitions of
their Predecessors had been bequeathed to the feeding the Bellies of a parcel
of lazy Monks.

And here you see what it is Evagrius and Nicephorus make such ado about
against Zosimus. But their empty and trifling reasons for excusing Christian
Princes, their vanity in accusing Pagans, their impudence in denying the truth,
and their ignorance in asserting falsehoods, I hope I have sufficiently exposed.

There remains Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople, who charges Zosimus for
barking like any Dog against the Godly; but we have before shown that there is
no hurt in his barking, nor any venom in his bite: which that it may be evident
in a few words: We see through the whole History of Zosimus, Constantine is
reproved by him for the cruelty of his exactions, his Parricides,, his Luxury,
his profuseness; which Vices it seems, even the Christian Religion could but
little restrain in him. He objects to his Sons their slaughter of one another,
and the murder of their Kindred. He shows the sloth of Jovian, and the
cowardice of his mind in quitting those Provinces which belonged to the Empire.
He sets a mark upon Valentinian for his unreasonable suspicion, and thence his
cruelty to such as he distrusted, his oppressing his People with immoderate and
unreasonable Taxes. In Gratian, he shows how his too great affection toward
the barbarous Nations, and his contempt of his own Subjects were the occasion
of his death and an alteration in the Commonwealth. He blames Theodosius for
changing and augmenting the number of Magistrates and selling of their places,
and his being so excessively given to voluptuousness; though excepting these,
he as freely praises him. He terms his Son Arcadius no better than beast, for
being governed only by Eunuchs and idle Women to the extreme detriment of the
Commonwealth and the grief of all good Men; and says that Honorius was even as
slothful as his Brother.

These are those godly Princes, I suppose, against whom Photius complains
Zosimus has barked, in exposing their Vices to the World; who nevertheless if
he found any thing that deserved commendation he never dissembled it. Add the
Pillars of our Religion, St. Chrysostom, who he says was wont with great
Eloquence to soften and cajole the unlearned Rabble: and Pope Innocent, who
opposed not the use of those impious Rites for the safety of the City, as if he
had had that of Virgil in his mind, Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta
movebo. And lastly the Monks, whom he takes notice of for abstaining from
Marriage, filling Cities and Villages with Colleges of single People, of use
neither to the Wars, nor to any civil Duty in the Commonwealth: but have ever
since gone a certain way whereby they have secured a considerable part of the
Earth to themselves, and under pretense of relieving the poor, have reduced a
great part of mankind to beggary. And here you see the yelping Photius is so
displeased at.

In those other things wherein Zosimus has reflected upon the Christian
Religion, you may observe a kind of admirable return or Circle of Times and
humane things. He relates how Gratian died by a kind of Judgment for refusing
to put on the Garment of the Pontifex Maximus, according to the custom of his
Predecessors, declaring himself a Christian and no Worshipper of the host of
Heaven: which Garment was wont to be presented to the Pagan Emperors with the
same Ceremony as in succeeding ages the Christian used to put on the Stolae
Diaconatus. He reports how the Senate in defense of the Religion they had
received from their Ancestors, laid before Theodosius the Antiquity of their
Rites and Worship, having derived them from the very foundation of their City,
and by the observing of which the People of Rome had preserved their Empire
twelve hundred years; that it was unreasonable to prefer a Religion that had so
little to say for it self to one so ancient and august. And adds, how
Theodosius abolished those sacred Rites which by the Institution of his
Ancestors ought to have been perpetual, how he forbad sacrificing at the
Public charge, and commanded provisions for the Army to be raised out of them
for the safety of the Roman Empire; He complains of his removing the Images,
and shortly after, the Statues of Gold and Silver and coining vast sums of
Money out of them, which he was afterward forced to part with to Alaric to buy
a Peace at his hands; that Serena Theodosius's Niece sacrilegiously robbed the
Mother of the Gods of her Jewels and wore them herself, and that her Husband
Stilico took away those huge Plates of Gold which were (...) to the doors of
the Temple belongings to the Capitol. But who is there that has not seen the
like in our days and heard the like Complaints? From all which it is evident
that that common Enemy of mankinds that he might obstruct the true Worship of
God, has always been the same. But it is my Opinion, that Wise Men will be so
far from refusing to read Zosimus, that the variety of these kinds of Relations
will render him more acceptable and delightful.

This is what I had to offer in his Defense against the frightful Invectives of
some Writers; and which I hope will obtain among those Men who are capable of
making a right judgment of things. I could if I pleased or thought it worth my
while enlarge in the just praise of Zosimus's History; But because, as they
say, Good Wine needs no Bush, I will no longer detain the Reader from
entertaining himself better with the most Elegant Writings of our Author; and I
promise my self, that excepting those things which relate to Church Affairs,
the learned Reader will in all others prefer him far before either Eusebius,
Socrates, Sozomen or Theodoret; or if out of a religious kind of scruple they
are afraid to prefer a Pagan to those Ecclesiastical Writers of the upper
Form, yet we do not at all doubt but they will without dispute allow him to
equal them in his way, and not so much as admit the rest of them as Zonaras,
Cedrenus, etc. into competition with him.

A New HISTORY Written by Count ZOSIMVS, Sometime Advocate of the Treasury.
The First Book.
WHEN Polybius of Megalopolis designed to write the History of all remarkable
passages in his time, he thought it the best way to show from matter of fact,
that the Romans, who had Wars with their neighboring Nations for six hundred
years after the building of their City, gained, in that time, no very great
Dominions. But when they had reduced some small part of Italy, which, after
Hannibal came over, at the Battle of Cannae, they lost; and saw their Enemies
lie before their Walls, they grew so great and fortunate, that, in less than
fifty three years, they were masters not only of all Italy and Africa, but
subdued the Spaniards too. And being still desirous to propagate their Empire,
they passed the Ionian Bay, conquered the Grecians, and ruined the Macedonians,
whose King, that then was, they took alive and carried to Rome. Now the cause
of all this no man will say was merely humane; but either fatal Necessity, or
the Influence of the Stars, or the Will of God, which favors all our Actions,
as long as they are just and good. For these things lay such a train of seeming
causes upon future contingencies, that thinking men suppose, the Administration
of humane affairs is managed by divine Providence; so that when peoples Spirits
are up and vigorous, they thrive and are in good plight, but, on the contrary,
when these are dejected and want courage, those dwindle into the present
circumstances.

But my business is, to show from the things themselves, that what I say is
true; and therefore I must tell you, That after the Trojan War until the Battle
of Marathon, the Greeks did nothing, that I know, worth the speaking of either
against each other, or any body else. But when Darius, by his Prefects, or
great Governors of Towns and Provinces, came to oppose them with infinite
numbers of men, eight thousand Athenians, inspired, as it were from Heaven, and
armed by mere chance, ran out to meet him, and got so much the better of it,
that they killed ninety thousand and forced the rest to fly the Country. And
this fight it was, that put the Grecians into a far better condition than
formerly. But when Darius was dead, and Xerxes came with an Army so much
greater, that he seemed to bring all Asia into Greece (for he filled the Sea
with Ships and the Land with Soldiers) he found it necessary to cross over
from Asia into Europe; and therefore, as if the two Elements of Earth and Water
had not been capable of receiving his Army, unless they had robbed each other
of their natural use, he made a Bridge over the Hellespont for the Foot-Soldiers
to march upon; nay, he cut a passage through the Mountain Athos, where Ships
rode as in the Sea. Whilst in the mean time the Grecians, though they were
terrified at the very report of such an Enemies approach, yet they prepared for
him as well as they were able. And in one Seafight at Artemisium and another at
Salamis, they obtained a Victory so far beyond the former, that Xerxes was glad
to escape with his life, when he had lost most of his Army; whilst the
remaining part of them, that were slain at Plataeae, did, by their deaths, so
much advance the glory of the Grecians, that in the strength of their
reputation and renown, they nor only set the Greeks, that were in Asia, at
Liberty, but possessed themselves of almost all the Islands.

And indeed, if they had been unanimous among themselves, and content with
their then present condition, nor the Athenians fallen out with the
Lacedaemonians about the Government and Menage of Greece, they would never have
had any foreign Lords. But when the Peloponnesian War had weakened the strength
of the Greeks, and made their Cities poor, Philip had room and opportunity to
enlarge that Kingdom, which his Father left him, by arts and stratagems, though
he was not equal in strength to any of his neighbors. For he did so oblige his
own Soldiers, and all others that would fight under his Command, with Money,
that he grew great enough to engage with the Athenians at Cheronea, and, after
that Victory, was so kind and courteous and won so much upon all men, that he
thought himself well enough prepared to go against the King of Persia. But
before he could raise a competent number of men, he died.

Then Alexander came to be King, who as soon as he had settled Affairs in Greece,
went over into Asia with a considerable Army. Where having conquered the
Satrapes (i. e. Governors of Provinces) who opposed him, he made his way
toward Darius himself, who with an innumerable Host had taken all the places
about Issus. And there engaging with the Persians he gained an incredible
Victory, routed Darius, and went himself through Phaenicia, and Syria into
Palestine. (What he did at Tire and Gaza, you may read in those Historians that
have written concerning Alexander.) From thence he marched into Egypt, and when
he had paid his Devotion to Jupiter Ammon, and ordered the building of
Alexandria, returned to finish the Persian War. But on his way thither, finding
all people had a kindness for him, he went into Mesopotamia; and though he
heard that Darius had a greater Army than before, now in readiness, yet he
proceeded with what forces he then had and engaged with him at Arbela; where he
was so victorious that he killed almost all Darius's men, and ruined the
Persian Monarchy, though the King himself escaped.

After that, when Besus had killed Darius, and Alexander, having achieved
great things in India, was come again to Babylon, he died. Upon whose decease
the Macedonian Government being divided into Satrapies or petit Principalities,
and enfeebled by continual Wars among themselves, Fortune subdued the remaining
part of Europe to the Romans. And then going over into Asia, fighting the Kings
of Pontus and Antiochus, and making War afterward against the Dynastes or
Princes of Egypt, they enlarged the Empire something every year, as long as
their Senate stood, by reason that their Consuls were ambitious of out-doing
one another. But when the Civil Wars betwixt Sylla and Marius, as, afterward,
betwixt Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great, had ruined the Commonwealth, they
laid aside the Aristocracy [or Government of the Nobility] and chose
Octavianus, Dictator: committing the whole Administration of Affairs to him
alone, without considering, that they had thrown (as it were) the Dice upon all
peoples hopes and ventured the hazard of that vast Empire upon one Man's
inclination and power. For whether he designed to govern by Justice and Equity,
he could not please all men; as not being able to assist them that were at a
great distance, in any convenient time, nor could he find out so many Officers,
that would be ashamed not to answer the character or judgment given of 'em; or
suit himself to so many different humors: or whether he would break through
the bounds of Imperial Kingly Government, and move toward Tyranny, by
disturbing the present establishments, winking at great Crimes, selling of
Justice, and looking upon Subjects as Slaves (as most Emperors, and indeed
almost all, except some few, have done) it must of necessity follow, that his
unbounded, brute power would prove a common Calamity. For fawning Rascals and
Parasites are preferred by such a Governor into places of greatest Trust, by
the help of those Estates and Honors that he bestows upon them. Whilst modest,
quiet men, that are averse to such a way of living, do very justly resent their
own not enjoying the same benefits. And hence it is that Towns are filled with
insurrections and tumults; for when all Offices both Civil and Military are
conferred upon covetous Magistrates, it makes both the Citizens uneasy in Peace,
and discourages the Soldiers in War.

Now that this is so, experience has plainly shown, together with those things
that happened soon after in the Reign of Octavianus. For the Dance called
Pantomimus [which signifies, a Dance in imitation of every body] was introduced
at that time, though it had never been used before, since Pylades and Bathyllus
invended it; besides a great many other things that occasion much mischief even
to this day. But indeed Octavianus seemed to govern very moderately, especially
after he took Athenodorus the Stoics counsel, and in respect of Tiberius, who
succeeded him: for he was so severe a Tyrant, that his Subjects could not
endure him, but expelled him into an Island, where he lay private for some time
and then died. After him Caius Caligula, who far exceeded Tiberius in all sorts
of wickedness, was slain by Chaereas, who by that bold action resolved to free
the Commonwealth from his cruel Tyranny. Then Claudius came to be Emperor, who
committed all his Affairs to the conduct of Libertines [the Sons of those who
had been Slaves] that were Eunuchs, and his Successors were then advanced to
the Imperial Throne. Of whom I resolve not to say one word, because the World
shall not know, what monstrous and enormous actions they were guilty of. But
Vespasian, and his Son Titus were much more moderate in their time; as, on the
other hand, Domitian surpassed all others in cruelty, luxury and avarice: for
which reason when he had been a plague to the Commonwealth for fifteen years
together, he was killed by Stephanus, one of his Freemen, and seemed to suffer
justly for his wicked actions.

From this time good men succeeded in the Empire, as Nerva, Trajan, and after
him Adrian, Antoninus Pius, and that pair of Brothers called Verus and Lucius,
who corrected many Errors in the State, and not only recovered what their
Predecessors had lost, but made likewise some new additions. But after them,
when Commodus the Son of Marcus had been Emperor, who was addicted not only to
Tyranny but even prodigious Vices besides, till Marcia his Concubine took manly
courage and killed him, the Empire was conferred upon Pertinax. But the Court
Guards being not able to endure his strict way of exercise and Discipline,
which made 'em mutinee and kill him also, Rome had like to have been all in an
uproar and confusion, whilst the Pretorian Soldiers, that were designed to
secure the Palace, endeavored to extort out of the Senate hands the power of
making a Sole-governour. And now the Empire being set to Sale (as it were) one
Didius Julianus, by the instigation of his Wife, and through more folly than
Wisdom, produced a sum of money wherewith he purchased the Empire; and made
such a Show as the people never saw in their lives before, or any other legal
Attendance; besides the Soldiers, who set him up, and by violence gave him
possession of the Palace, with all the furniture that was in it. But he was
called in question and taken off too, by those very men that raised him to his
Hononr, nor was his Life any more than a momentany, golden Dream.

When he was removed, the Senate sat in consultation, who they should choose
Emperor in his room, and pitched upon Severus. But Albinus and Niger
pretending a right of Government at the same time, there arose fierce civil
Wars between 'em; so that the Cities were divided, some being for one side and
some for the other. Whereupon there were great commotions in the Eastern parts
and in Egypt; nor did the Bizantians, who were Nigers friends and entertained
him, refuse any dangerous Attempt, till Severus got the Victory and Niger was
killed. After whom Albinus also quitted the Empire and this World together, so
that the sole Power was now devolved upon Severus. He therefore applied himself
to rectify those things that had been carried with such exorbitancy,
inflicting in the first place severe punishments upon the Soldiers that killed
Pertinax and delivered up the Empire to Julianus. Which having done and settled
the Militia, he went against the Persians, and in the same expedition took
Ctesiphon and Babylon, overran the Arabians, (called Scenites, from their
living in Tents) conquered Arabia in general, and did many other great
Exploits; besides that he was inexorable to Delinquents and made a public
distribution of their goods, who were guilty of any heinous Offense.

Having adorned a great many Cities with sumptuous Buildings, he declared his
Son Antoninus Emperor, but, being near his death, left, not only him, but his
other Son Geta also, coheirs in the Government, and made Papinianus (a very
just person and one that was more skilled in the knowledge and interpretation of
the Law than any Roman either before or since) their Guardian or Protector. But
Antoninus not long after suspected this worthy Person, who was Prefect of the
Court, for no other reason, but because he did what he could to frustrate a
Design that Antoninus had laid against his Brother Geta, and Papinianus had
discovered. He therefore resolved to remove this Obstacle, and with the
Soldiers contrived Papinianus's destruction. After which when he had his hands
at liberty he slew his Brother whom even his own Mother could not save, though
he sled to her for protection.

But not long after, Antoninus paid for murdering his Brother, nor was the
person that slew him ever known. And then the Soldiery at Rome chose Macrinus,
who was Prefect of the Court (as Papinianus had been) Emperor, whilst those in
the Eastern Countries set up Emisenus, who was a kin to Antoninus's Mother. Now
therefore both Armies were so tenacious of what they had done, that there arose
a civil broil between 'em, and whilst Emisenus Antoninus's men were bringing
him to Rome, Macrinus's Army marched out of Italy. And when, at Antioch in
Syria, the two Armies had engaged, Macrinus was so totally defeated, that he
was forced to fly the Camp, but between Byzantium and Chalcedon was taken and
killed.

When Antoninus had gotten this Victory and punished all those that sided with
Macrinus, as Enemies, he lived such a dissolute; scandalous life, conversing so
much with Magicians and Juglers that the Romans, not able to endure his
excessive Luxury, murdered him, tore his body in pieces, and declared
Alexander, Emperor, who came likewise of Severus's Family. Who though he were
but young, yet he was a person of a good Nature, and put all people in hopes
that he would prove an easy Governor. For he made Flavianus and Chrestus
Prefects of his Court, who were men not only well versed in Military affairs,
but excellent also in the management of civil Business. But Mamaea the
Emperors Mother set Vlpianus as an Inspector or Overseer over them, and indeed
as a Partner in their Office, (because he was an incomparable Lawyer and one
that knew not only how to regulate the present Affairs, but to provide with
all prudence for the future) at which the Soldiers were so offended, that they
privately contrived his ruin. Which when Mamaea understood, she prevented their
Design by taking off the Conspiratours, and making Vlpian the sole Prefect
belonging to the Court. But after that being suspected by the Army (for what
cause I cannot well tell, since there are so many various reports concerning
his inclinations) he was murdered in a tumult, nor could the Emperor himself
save his life.

From this time forward the Soldiers, who by degrees forgot their former
kindness to Alexander, seemed very unwilling to execute his Commands, and lest
they should be punished for their sloth, made public mutinies, in which they
promoted one Antoninus to the Empire. But he not able to sustein the weight of
that great Trust, withdrew himself; which made 'em choose Vranius, a man of mean
and slavish condition, who being presently brought before Alexander in his
purple Robes, their hatred to the Emperor was thereby the more augmented. And
hence it was that Alexander seeing himself environed with so many difficulties,
was altered not only in the temper of his body but in the complexion of his
mind too; insomuch that he was seized with the Disease of Avarice and laid up
money with great care and solicitude, of which he made his Mother his
Treasurer.

But whilst his Affairs stood in this unhappy posture, the Armies that were in
Pannonia and Mysia, who had no great kindness for him before, were now more
inclined to a Revolt, and therefore being set upon Innovation, they raised
Maximinus, who was Captain of a Pannonian Troop, to the Empire. He therefore,
having got all his forces together, marched into Italy as fast as he could,
because he thought it easier to attaque the Emperor at unawares. But
Alexander, who was then in the parts about the Rhine, having intelligence there
of their designed Innovations, moved toward Rome with all speed. Where though
he offered pardon both to the Soldiers and Maximinus too, if they would desist
from their Attempts, yet he could not reconcile 'em, and therefore, in a
desperate humor exposed himself, as it were, to Death. His Mother Mamaea too,
who came out of the Palace with the Prefects to appease the Tumult, was
murdered together with the Prefects. By which means Maximinus was well settled
in the Empire, but all people were sorry that they had changed a moderate
Emperor for a cruel Tyrant. For he was of an obscure Family, and therefore
when he came to be Emperor, eclipsed those Virtues that he was naturally
endued with, by the excessive confidence of his own power: insomuch that he was
intolerable to all men in general, and did not only injure those that were in
places of Honor, but used all cruelty in the conduct of his Affairs, obliging
none but Sycophants, who informed against innocent, quiet men, as if they were
Debtors to the Imperial Treasury. At length he proceeded to murder men through
covetousness before he heard what they could say for themselves, made all the
Towns his own, and plundered the Inhabitants.

Now the Nations subject to the Romans being not able to endure his extravagant
cruelty, but mightily troubled at the open ravage which he committed, the
Africans declared Gordianus and his Son, of the same name, Emperors; and sent
Ambassadors to Rome, among whom was Valerianus a Consuls fellow, who himself
was afterward Emperor. At which the Senate was well pleased, and consulted how
to remove the Tyrant; inciting the Soldiers to Rebellion, and putting the
people in mind of the injuries done to them both in their private capacities
and also as they were members of such a Commonwealth. Then being all agreed
they chose twenty Men out of their whole Senate, who understood Military
Discipline, and from among them elected two, called Balbinus and Maximus, to
whom they committed the chief Command, and going toward Rome were ready to make
an Insurrection.

But Maximinus when he heard of these things, went in all haste toward Rome
with the Moors and Frenchmen that he had under him, and by the way besieged the
Garrison of Aquileia, because they shut their Gates against him; though his own
party who at last conulted the public good, with much ado consented to those
who had a mind to take him off, and thereby reduced him to such extremity of
danger, that he was fain to make his own Son a Petitioner in his behalf,
supposing that his tender years would rebate their anger and move them to pity.
But they were thereby the more enraged, and after they had killed the Boy in a
most barbarous manner, dispatched him also; upon which one of 'em came and
cutting off his head brought it along with him to Rome for a demonstration and
Trophy of their Victory. And thus being freed from all their fears, they waited
for the Arrival of the two Emperors out of Africa.

But they being cast away in a storm, the Senate conferred the universal
management of affairs upon Gordianus, who was Son to one of 'em. In whose Reign
the Romans remitted something of their former melancholy, because the Emperor
diverted 'em with Plays and other exercises. But when they were all awaked, as
it were, out of a dead sleep, they laid a private Plot against the Emperor, by
the advice of Balbinus and Maximus, who instigated certain Soldiers against
him. Which being found out, the Heads of the party, besides a great many of the
Accomplices, were put to death.

Not long after this, the Carthaginians fell out with the Emperor, and would
needs have put Sabianus in his room; but Gordianus raised the African forces,
which soon reconciled 'em; insomuch that they delivered up the Usurper (that
would have been) begged pardon for their Offenses and freed themselves from all
impendent dangers.

In the mean time Gordianus married the Daughter of Timesicles (who was a man
very much applauded for his learning) and made him Prefect of the Court; by
which action he seemed to supply the defects of his own nonage in the
administration of public Affairs. But when he had secured the Empire, he
looked every hour when the Persians would attaque the Eastern Nations, since
Sapores was King upon the Death of Artaxerxes, who restored the Government back
from the Parthians to the Persians. For after Alexander the Son of Philip was
dead, and other Successors of his in the Macedonian Empire (at that time when
Antiochus governed those superior Satrapies or Provinces) Arsaces, a Parthian,
being incensed at an injury offered to his Brother Teridates, levied War
against the Satrape of Antiochus, gave occasion to the Parthians to turn out
all the Macedonians, and make the Government their own. The Emperor therefore
made all the preparations that he could to go against the Persians. Now though
the Roman Army seemed to have gotten the Victory in the first fight, yet seeing
Timesicles, the Prefect of the Court, died, the Emperors great Confidence in
the security of his enterprise was very much abated. For Philip being chosen in
his place, the good will of the Soldiers toward the Emperor decayed by degrees
and grew insensible. For he being born in Arabia (which is a wicked Nation) and
no better than he should have been in the advancement of his Fortune, as soon
as he got into his Office, affected to be Emperor, obliged all the Soldiers
who were inclined to innovations, and seeing there was plenty of military
provisions brought in, whilst the Emperor stayed about Carrae and Nisibis,
commanded the Ships that brought such provisions to go up farther into the
Country, that thereby the Army, being oppressed with Famine and want of
necessaries, might be provoked to mutiny.

And indeed his Design took effect; for the Soldiers, under pretense of wanting
necessaries, came about Gordianus in a very rude manner, and having killed him
as the chief cause, that so many perished in the Army, they conferred the
Purple Robe upon Philip according to their Contract. He therefore made a Peace
with Sapores upon Oath; which when he had done and put an end to the War, he
marched toward Rome: and as he obliged the Soldiers with large gifts, so he
sent Messengers to Rome, to give out that Gordianus died of a Disease. But when
he came to Rome himself, and had made the Senatorian Order his Friends, he
thought it the best way to bestow the greatest preferments upon his nearest
Relations. Wherefore he made his Brother Priscus General of the Syrian Army,
committing the Mysian and Macedonian forces to the conduct of Severianus his
Son-in-law.

By this means thinking that he had established the Empire in his own
possession, he went upon an Expedition against the Carpi, who had plundered all
the Country about the Ister. But when they engaged, the Barbarians were not
able to sustein the vigorous shock of our party; and therefore fled into a
certain Castle, in which they were besieged. Yet when they saw their men, who
were dispersed some one way and some another, had rallied again into a body,
they resumed their courage, and sallying forth from the Castle attaqued the
Roman Army. But being unable to bear the impetuous onset of the Moors, they
treated for Peace; to which Philip easily assented and marched off. But since
at that time there were many disturbances in the Commonwealth, the Eastern
Provinces (who were vexed, partly by the exactions of Tributes, and partly upon
the account of Priscus, who was their Governor, but an intolerable ill man)
inclined to innovation and set up Papianus for Emperor, whilst those of Mysia
and Pannonia thought better of Marinus.

Now Philip being troubled at these things desired the Senate that either they
would assist him against such imminent dangers, or if they were displeased with
his Government, that they would suffer him to lay it down and dismiss him
quietly: to which seeing no body at all replied, Decius, (who was a person of
great birth and quality and adorned with all Virtues besides) said, He was
unwise to be so much concerned for those things; for they would vanish of
themselves and could not possibly subsist. And though the event answered
Decius's Conjecture, which he had made through long experience in the World, so
that Papianus and Marinus were taken off; yet Philip was still afraid, because
he knew how much the Soldiers hated the Officers in that Country. He
therefore desired Decius, that he would command the Legions that were in Mysia
and Pannonia. Which he refusing, because, he said, he thought it inconvenient
for him and Philip too, Philip used the Thessalian Rhetoric of Necessity (as
they call it) and forced him into Pannonia to chastise the accomplices of
Marinus's faction there. But the Soldiers in those parts seeing Decius punish
all those that had offended, thought it their best way both to avoid the
present danger and set up a Monarch at the same time, who would take more care
of the Commonwealth, and, being more skilful in Civil as well as Military
Affairs, might easily conquer Philip.

In order whereunto they clothed Decius in Purple, and, amidst all his fears
of future misadventures, compelled him to assume the management of public
Affairs. When therefore Philip heard, that Decius was thus set up for Emperor,
he mustered up all his forces, to subdue him. Now those that were with Decius,
though they knew the Enemy outdid 'em much in number, yet they had courage
still, because they trusted to Decius's skill and general prudence in all
matters. And when the two Armies fell to it, though the one was superior in
number, yet the other was above it in point of Discipline and Conduct, so that
a great many of Philips side were slain and he himself among the rest, together
with his Son, whom he had honored with the Title of Caesar. And thus did
Decius gain the Empire.

Now therefore seeing things were every where full of disorder through Philips
negligence, the Scythians marched over Tanais, and plundered the Countries
about Thrace. But Decius opposed 'em and proved not only victorious in all the
Battles that he fought, but recovered the spoils that they had taken,
endeavored to prevent and block up their passage home again, and intended to
kill 'em every man, lest they should rally any more. For which purpose he
posted Gallus upon the bank of Tanais with a competent number of men, and went
himself with the remainder of his forces against the Enemy. In which expedition
he had all the success that he could wish for; and therefore Gallus, who was
inclined to Innovation, sent Agents to the Barbarians, entreating them to join
with him in a Conspiracy against Decius. To which they very willingly agreed
and Gallus kept his Post upon the bank of Tanais; but the Barbarians divided
themselves into three Battalions, of which the first was planted behind a
certain Marsh. Now when Decius had destroyed a great many of the first
Battalion, the second came up, which he likewise defeated and discovered some
of the third, which lay near the Marsh. But Gallus sent him word, that he might
march against 'em through the Fenn, and therefore as he went on unwarily in a
strange place, both he and his Army were bemired, and in that circumstance so
pelted by the Barbarians, that never an one of 'em escaped alive. And thus did
Decius, that excellent Emperor, end his days.

Him Gallus succeeded; who when he had declared his Son Volusianus Partner in
the Empire, and made a Proclamation, as it were, that Decius and his Army
perished by his contrivance, the Barbarians began to be more prosperous than
before. For Gallus permitted them not only to return home with the spoil, but
promised to pay 'em yearly a certain sum of Money, and let 'em carry away all
the noblest Captives; who had been, most of 'em, taken at Philippopolis in
Thrace.

Now Gallus, when he had ordered his Affairs in this manner, came to Rome, and
was very proud of this Peace that he had made with the Barbarians. And though
at first indeed he spoke very kindly concerning Decius's way of Governing, and
adopted one of his Sons, who was then alive, yet in process of time being
afraid, lest some of them who used to study new Projects, might run back into
a recapitulation of Decius's Princely Virtues, and so one time or other give up
the Empire to his Son, he devised the young man's destruction, without any
regard either to his Adoption, or even to common honesty and justice.

But Gallus behaved himself so supinely in the Administration of the Empire,
that the Scythians first terrified their Neighbor Nations, and after, by
degrees, spoiled all the Countries even to the Seacoast. So that there was not
so much as one Nation, subject to the Romans, but what they wasted; taking
almost all the unwalled Towns, besides a great many of those that were
fortified. But besides a War on every side; which lay very heavy upon 'em,
there was a Plague in all the Cities, and Villages, which swept away the
remainder of Mankind in those parts, nor was there ever known such a mortality
in any former Age.

At this juncture of Affairs, seeing the Emperors were not able to defend the
Commonwealth, but neglected all things without the Walls of Rome, the Gotths,
the Borani, the Vrugundi, and the Carpi did once more plunder the Cities in
Europe of all that was left in 'em; whilst on the other hand the Persians
invaded Asia, wherein they possessed themselves of Mesopotamia, proceeded as
far even as Antioch in Sysia, took that City, which is the Metropolis of all
the East (killing some of the Inhabitants and taking the rest away Captives)
and went back home with an infinite quantity of spoils, when they had pulled
down all the private and public Buildings in it, without any resistance made
against 'em. And indeed the Persians were in a fair way to have gotten all Asia
into their hands, if they had not been so overjoyed at their excessive Plunder
as to be content to keep and carry home those things which they had taken.

In the mean time all the Scythians of Europe lived in great security, were
gone over into Asia, and had spoiled all the Country as far as Cappadocia,
Pesinus and Ephesus, till AEmilianus, General of the Pannonian Legions,
endeavoring all he could to encourage his Soldiers (who were disheartened, nor
durst withstand the prosperous success of the Barbarians) and putting 'em in
mind of the Roman Honor and Bravery, surpised the Barbarians, which he found
thereabout: And when he had killed a great many of them, put his men over into
their Country, removed whatever obstacle he met with, and, in fine, had freed
the Roman Subjects from their fury, He was chosen Emperor by his own Soldiers.
Thereupon he mustered up all the forces of that Country, who were grown more
courageous since his Victory against the Barbarians, and so marched for Italy,
with a design to fight Gallus, who was yet unprepared to engage him. For Gallus
had never heard what had been done in the East, and therefore made only what
accidental preparations he could, whilst Valerianus went to fetch the Celtick
and the German Legions. But Aemilianus came with all speed into Italy, and the
Armies were very near one another, when Gallus's Soldiers considering, that he
was much inferior to the Enemy in numbers and strength, as also, that he was a
careless, slothful man, killed him and his Son; and then going over to
Aemilianus's Party seemed to establish his Government.

But Valerianus brought a vast Army from beyond the Alps into Italy, with
which he thought himself sure to Conquer Aemilianus; and therefore Aemilianus's
own Soldiers, who saw him behave himself more like a private Sentinel than an
Emperor, took him off as a Person unfit for such a weighty Command.

By which means Valerianus was chosen Emperor with general approbation, and
made it his business to regulate all Affairs; But by the excursions of the
Scythians, and besides them, the Marcomanni, who made an inrode upon all the
bordering Countries, adjacent to the Roman Empire, Thessalonica was in extreme
danger: and though with much pains and difficulty the Siege was raised by the
brave defense which those within made, yet all Greece was in an uproar. Then
did the Athenians repair their Walls (which had never been thought worth their
care since Sylla pulled 'em down) and so likewise did the Peloponnesians
fortify the Isthmus, insomuch that there was a common Guard upon all Greece
set for their own security.

Valerianus, understanding what danger the Roman Empire was in on all sides,
chose Gallienus, his Son, as Partner with him in the Government; and seeing
things every where in such disorder, went into the East to oppose the Persians,
committing the care of the forces in Europe to his Son, whom he engaged with
that Army to withstand the Barbarians, who came in upon him from all quarters.
Now therefore Gallienus, since the Germans were more troublesome, than any other
Nation, and more vexatious to the Gauls that lived upon the Rhine, marched
against 'em in Person, and commanded his Officers, with what forces they had
there, to make a War against all others, who were resolved to plunder all
Italy, Illyricum, and Greece. In pursuit of which design, He kept and guarded
the passages of the Rhine, as well as he could; and as at one time he stopped
their going over, so at another he fought 'em just as they crossed it. But
being to resist a vast multitude with a small number, he was at a loss, and
thought he might be more secure by making a League with one of the German
Princes, who not only hindered the frequent passage of the other Barbarians
over the Rhine, but stopped the Career of new Auxiliaries. And this was the
condition of those, who lived upon the Rhine.

In the mean time the Borani, the Gotthi, the Carpi, and the Vrugundi (which
are Nations living upon the Ister) left no part of Italy or Illyricum
unpillaged, but without any opposition, made havoc of all. And indeed the
Borani attempted to go over into Asia, which they very easily effected by the
help of them that lived upon the Bosphorus, who more out of fear than any good
will supplied them with Ships and guided 'em in their passage. For though as
long as they had Kings of their own, who succeeded one another by descent, they
always kept the Scythians out of Asia, either for the love they bore the
Romans, or for the sake of their Trade and Commerce, or in gratitude for the
Presents sent 'em every year from their Kings; yet afterward, when the Royal
Line was extinct, and certain mean, abject Persons had gotten the Power in
their hands, they were afraid of themselves, and gave the Scythians free
ingress into Asia, nay carried them over and came back again in their own Ships.

But whilst the Scythians plundered all before 'em, the People, who inhabited
upon the Seacoast of Pontus, removed into the midland fortified Towns; and the
Barbarians at the same time made the first attaque upon Pityus, which is
enclosed with a very strong Wall and has a very convenient Harbor. But
Sucessianus, General of the Army there, made such resistance with what forces
he had, that he routed the Barbarians, and put them into a fear, lest if the
other Garrisons should hear what was done, they might join with those of Pityus
and quite destroy 'em; insomuch that they got as many Ships as they could, and
with great hazard returned home, though with the loss of many of their men who
fell in the Battle at Pityus. They therefore, who lived near the Euxine Sea and
were preserved by the conduct of Sucessianus (as I have told you) could never
hope (or rather fear) that the Scythians, who had been so repulsed, would come
over to 'em any more. But, whilst Valerianus sent for Sucessianus, made him
Prefect of the Court, and discoursed with him about the Affairs and the
repairing of Antioch, the Scythians got Ships of the Bosphorans, and crossed
the Sea. But the Inhabitants of the other side detein'd the Ships and would not
suffer the Bosphorans to take 'em home again (as they had done) whereupon they
travailed into the Country near Phasis, where, they say, is the Temple of
Diana (called from the place) Phasiana, and the Palace of King Aeeta; and
having in vain attempted to take that Temple, went straight to Pityus.

Where when they had taken the Castle, and turned out all the Guards that were
in it, they went on forward; and having a very numerous Navy, whereinto they
put all the Captives who knew how to handle an Oar, they sailed, in calm
weather, which continued almost all the Summer, toward Trapezus, which is a
great and populous City, and had in it some ten thousand men besides their
usual Complement. They therefore, when they first laid Siege to it, did not so
much as dream they should take it, because it was surrounded with two Walls;
but when they observed that the Soldiers were given up to sloth and
drunkenness, and did not continue upon the Wall, but were always in pursuit of
pleasures and debauchery, they piled up Trees which they had prepared for the
purpose against the Wall whereby to scale it, and so getting their men up by
degrees in the nightime they took the City; whilst the Soldiers within were
amazed at the sudden and unexpected invasion, but made a shift to escape
through several Gates of the City, and the rest were destroyed by the Enemy.
And when the City was thus taken, the Barbarians got an unspeakable quantity of
Money besides an infinite number of Slaves: for almost all the Country people
thereabout were fled into that City for refuge, as being a well-fortified
place. They therefore having demolished all the Temples and Houses besides
other things whatever they were that conduced either to the grandeur or beauty
of the Place, and over ran the adjacent Country too, returned home with a
great number of Ships.

When the Scythians, that were their Neighbors, saw what a booty they had
gotten, they had a mind to do something in imitation of 'em, and to that end
prepared a Fleet, which either their Captives or others that for want had mixed
themselves among them, helped 'em to build. But they resolved not to set out as
the Borani had done, because it was tedious and difficult to sail that way, and
they must pass through places that were already plundered. Wherefore they
stayed till Winter, and then leaving the Euxine Sea on the left hand, but
Ister, Tomes and Anchialus on the right (whilst their Landforces marched by the
shore as fast as they could) they arrived at the Lake of Phileatina, which lies
to the Westward of Byzantium near Pontus. But finding that the Fishermen of
that Lake had hidden themselves and their Vessels in the Fenns adjacent to it,
they went and made an agreement with 'em, put their Landforces into the
Fishermens Boats and so sailed forward in order to pass the straight, that lies
between Byzantium and Chalcedon. And though there was a Guard from Chalcedon
all along as far as the Temple which stands at the entrance into Pontus, that
was much too strong for the Barbarians who came against it, yet some of the
Soldiers marched off under pretense of meeting a General that the Emperor had
sent thither, and others were in such a fright that they ran away as fast as
they could when they first heard of it. Whereupon the Barbarians crossed over,
took Chalcedon without any opposition, and made themselves masters of Money,
Arms, and other provisions in abundance.

From hence they marched on to Nicomedia, a great and wealthy City, famed both
for the riches and general affluence of it: where though the Citizens had heard
of their coming and were run away with all the Money they could carry, the
Barbarians notwithstanding admired at the vast quantity of things that they
found there and paid Chrysogonus all Honor and service, who had formerly
advised 'em to Nicomedia. And when they had overran Nicaea, Cius, Apamea, and
Prusa and done the same in those places, they went toward Cysicus; but the
River Ryndacus was so mightily out by reason of the great Rains that had
fallen, they could not pass and so were forced to go back again. Then they
burnt Nicomedia and Nicaea, and putting up or stowing their Spoils in Carts or
Ships, begain to think of going home again; which put an end to their second
incursion, or inrode.

By this time Valerianus had heard of the disturbances in Bithynia, but durst
not trust any of his Captains with the defense of it, he was so diffident:
Wherefore he sent Felix to look after Byzantium, and went himself from Antioch
as far as Cappadocia, where having done some injury to every City as he passed
along, he returned homeward. But then the Plague happened among his Army and
destroyed most of 'em at what time Sapores made an Attempt upon the East and
reduced it all into his own Power. In the mean time Valerianus was so
effeminate and supine that he despaired of ever recovering out of the present
ill circumstances and would have put an end to the War by giving of Money; but
Sapores sent his Ambassadors whom he sent about that Affair away without their
Errand, desiring that the Emperor would come, and parley with him, in Person,
concerning those things that he thought requisite. To which he consented, like
an imprudent man as he was, and going without any consideration to Sapores with
a small Retinue, to treat forsooth about a Peace, was presently taken by the
Enemy; and so ended his days in the quality of a Slave among the Persians, to
the great dishonor of the Roman Name in all future times.

This being the State of the East, all things at that time, were in a confused,
helpless condition. But the Scythians were unanimous and therefore mustering
themselves into one body out of every Nation and Country within their
Dominions, they plundered Illyricum with some part of their Army, wasting the
Cities in those parts, and marched with the rest into Italy as far as Rome it
self.

In the mean time Gallienus continued still beyond the Alps, intent upon the
German Wars, whilst the Senate, seeing Rome in such extreme danger, armed all
the Soldiers that were in the City, besides the stronger sort of the Common
People, and gathered up an Army which for number out did the Barbarians. At
which the Barbarians were so scared, that they left Rome indeed, but pillaged
almost all Italy besides. But then, when Illyricum was in extreme danger from
the incursion of the Scythians, and the whole Roman Empire in such a tottering
condition, that they knew not what to do; there happened a Plague to break out
very rise in several of their Towns, the like was never known, that did
alleviate the Calamities which the Barbarians inflicted upon them, making the
sick esteem themselves happy, and the Cities too, that were already taken, but
by this means, turned into Deserts.

Gallienus was disturbed at all these things and therefore returned to Rome, to
relieve Italy from that War which the Scythians had levied there; when at the
same time Crecrops (a Moor) Aureolus and Antoninus with many others conspired
against him, of whom most part were punished for it and submitted, only
Aureolus continued in his animosity toward the Emperor.

After this Posthumus also, who was General of the Celtick Army, inclined
toward Innovation, and taking along with him certain Soldiers, that revolted at
the same time, went to Aprippina, which is the greatest City upon the Rhine;
where he besieged Salonius, Gallienus's Son, and threatened never to stir from
before the Walls, till he was delivered up to him. For which reason the
Soldiers thought it necessary to surrender not only him, but Silvanus too
(whom his Father had made his Guardian,) both of whom Posthumus put to death
and made himself absolute Lord of the Celtae.

And now the Scythians, who had most miserably harassed all Greece in general,
had taken Athens, when Gallienus came out to fight those who had already
possessed themselves of Thrace, and commanded Odonathus of Palmyra (a man whose
Ancestors the Emperors had always born a great respect to) to assist the
Eastern Nations, who were then in a very sad condition. Accordingly he, when he
had joined as many of his own men as he could to the remainder of an Army that
was left in that Country, attaqued Sapores very briskly, and having taken some
other Cities belonging to the Persians, he retook Nisibis also, which Sapores
had formerly taken (and was now for the Persians) and razed it at the same
time. Then going not only once, but a second time, as far as Ciesiphon, he
shut the Persians up in their own fortifications, and made 'em glad to save
their Wives, Children and themselves, whilst he disposed of the pillaged
Country as well as he could.

But afterward when he lived at Emisa, he was killed by Conspiracy as he was
celebrating some friends birthday, and then Lenobia took upon her the
administration of Affairs. Who though she were Odonathus's Wife, yet she had
the spirit of a man in her, and by the help of her Husbands familiar friends,
did every thing as well as he had done.

And this was the State of the East, when news was brought to Gallienus, who
was then engaged in the Scythian War, that Aurelianus [or rather, Aureolus] who
was General of all the Cavalry, that were posted about the City of Millain, to
observe what progress Posthumus made into Italy, had some new design on foot,
and was ambitious to be Emperor. At which being troubled he went immediately
for Italy, leaving Marcianus General of the War against the Scythians, who was
a Person very well experienced in Military Affairs: but whilst he carried on
the War with very good Conduct, Gallienus, in his journey toward Italy, had a
Plot laid against him, which was this. Heraclianus, Prefect of the Court, had
made Claudius privy to his design (who, next to the Emperor, managed every
thing in all appearance) which was to kill Gallienus: And having found a man
very ready for such a business, that commanded a Troop of Dalmatians, he
entrusted him with the Action. For the effecting whereof the party stood by
Gallienus at Supper-time and told him, how some of the Scouts had brought word,
that Aureolus and his Army were very near; and thereby put him in a great
fright. Whereupon immediately calling for his Horse and Arms, he mounted, gave
the Word to his men to come in their Armor after him, and rode away without so
much as his Guard du corpse; so that the Captain, seeing him all alone, killed
him.

Now therefore, when the Soldiers were quieted by Order from their Commanders,
Claudius was chosen Emperor, who had been formerly designed for that Honor by
universal agreement. Whereupon Aureolus, who had kept himself a good while out
of Gallienus's hands, sent Agents presently to Claudius, to make his Peace, and
then surrendering himself up was killed by the Emperors Guards, who had not
forgotten the hatred that they bore to him for his Treachery.

At this time the Scythians (all that were left of 'em) were so encouraged by
their former success, that they, together with the Heruli, Peucae and Gotthi,
made a Rendezvous near the River Tyra, which discharges it self into Pontus;
where having built six thousand Ships and put three hundred and twenty thousand
aboard of 'em, they sailed through Pontus, and attempted Tomes which is a
Walled Town, but were beaten off from it. From thence they went to Marcianople,
a City of Mysia, but failing there too in their attempt to take it, took the
opportunity of a fair Wind and sailed forward. But when they came to the
Streights of Propontis, the Ships were so numerous that they could not well
sail in such a violent swift stream [or Tide] and therefore fell foul upon one
another whilst the Yatchs were carried down without any order, and the Pilots
let go their Helms: insomuch that some were sunk, and some with, others without
men in them, were driven ashore, to their great loss both of Men and Vessels.
Upon which account the Barbarians receded from the Streights of Propontis, and
sailed toward Cyzicus. But coming from thence without success, and sailing by
the Hellespont, they came to the Mountain Athos; where when they had careen'd
or refitted their Ships, they besieged Cassandra and Thessalonica, having like
to have taken 'em with Machines that they built against the Walls. But when
they heard, the Emperor was acoming with an Army, they went up into the
Midland-Countrey, plundering all about Doberus and Pelagonia. And there they
lost three thousand men, whose fortune it was to meet with the Dalmatian
Cavalry, but with the rest they fought the Emperors Army. In which Battle
though many fell on both sides, and the Romans seemed to run, yet they
surpised the Barbarians from by-ways and Ambuscades so as to kill full fifty
thousand of them. Yet the [remaining] part of the Scythians sailed all about
Thessaly and Greece to pillage all the Country, and since they were not strong
enough to attaque the Towns which had taken care to fortify themselves with
good Walls and all other security, they took and carried away with 'em all the
men that they found in the Fields.

The Scythians therefore being thus dispersed, as I have told you, and having
lost a great part of their men, Zenobia began to think of propagating her
Dominions; and therefore sent Zabdas into Egypt, because Timagenes an Egyption
endeavored to make the Palmyrenians Governors of Egypt. For he had raised an
Army of Palmyrenians, Syrians and Barbarians to the number of seventy thousand,
which was opposed by fifty thousand Egyptians; between whom and their
Adversaries there was a sharp engagement, but the Palmyrenians got the day by
many degrees; and having settled a Garrison there of five thousand men, marched
off.

Whilst these things were transacted, Probus, whom the Emperor commanded to
clear the Sea of Pirates, having heard that Egypt was subdued by the
Palmyrenians, went against them with his own Army and as many of the Egyptians
as did not favor the Palmyrenians and turned out the Garrison. So likewise a
second time, when the Palmyrenians rallied with fresh forces, Probus who had
mustered up a company of Egyptians, and Africans, not only got the Victory,
but drove the Palmyrenians out of Egypt. But as Probus lay upon a Mountain near
Babylon, and thereby intercepted the Enemies passage into Syria, Timagenes, who
knew those parts very well, went with two thousand men and got atop of the
Mountain, where he killed the Egyptians by surprise, and Probus, who was taken
among the rest, killed himself.

When therefore as Egypt was now reduced into the power of the Palmyrenians,
the Barbarians, that were left alive after the fight at Naissus between
Claudius and the Scythians, defending themselves, as it were, with their
Carriages which went before 'em, marched toward Macedonia, but were so hard put
to it for want of necessaries, that both themselves and their Beasts perished
for mere hunger. And by the way too the Roman Horse met 'em, who killing many
of 'em forced the rest toward Haemus; where being surrounded by the Roman Army
they lost a vast number of their men. But afterward when the Horse and Foot
fell out among themselves, the Emperor having a mind that the Foot should fight
the Barbarians, the Romans, after a smart engagement, were worsted and many of
'em slain, though the Horse coming presently up to 'em made the miscarriage of
the Foot seem so much the less.

This Battle being over, the Scythians marched forward and the Romans followed
'em, whilst the Barbarians, who cruised about Crete and Rhodes went back
without doing any thing worth the speaking of; and being seized with a Plague
in their way home, some of 'em died in Thrace and some in Macedonia. But all
that escaped were either admitted into the Roman Legions, or had Land given 'em
to manure and so addicted themselves to Husbandry.

Nor did the Plague sweep away the Barbarians only but began to be rife among
the Romans also, who, many of 'em, died of it, and, among the rest, Claudius; a
Person adorned with all Virtues, whose death was a great loss to all his loving
Subjects, and he consequently very much missed among 'em.

Then Quintillus, Claudius's Brother, was declared Emperor, who lived not many
months (nor did any thing worth ones taking notice of) before Aurelianus was
advanced to the Imperial Throne: and some Writers say, that Quintillus was
advised by his Friends, as soon as they heard that Aurelianus was made Emperor,
to make himself away and voluntarily give place to a man much more deserving:
which, they report, he did, by opening a Vein and bleeding to death.

Aurelianus therefore having settled the Empire, went from Rome to Aquileia and
thence to Pannonia, which the Scythians, as he heard, were ready to invade. For
which reason he sent the Inhabitants of that Country word by his Scouts, that
he would have 'em carry all the Corn and Cattle which they had, and every thing
else, that might be of use to the Enemy, into their Towns; the more to afflict
them with famine, which was already very sharp upon them. But when the
Barbarians were got over the River into Pannonia they fought and came off
pretty equal; for the Night coming on, no one could tell which side had the
better on it. Yet the same Night the Barbarians crossed the River, and as soon as
it was Day, sent Ambassadors or Heralds to treat for Peace.

And now the Emperor hearing that the Alemanes with their Neighbor Nations
intended to overrun Italy, he was (as he had reason to be) more concerned for
Rome and the adjacent places, than any other: wherefore having ordered a
sufficient number of Guards to stay in Pannonia, he marched toward Italy; but
by the way, upon the borders of that Country, near the Ister, killed many
thousands of the Barbarians in one Battle. At which time several of the Senate
at Rome being accused of a Plot against the Emperor, were put to death for it;
and Rome was Walled about which before had no Walls. But though that Work was
begun in Aurelianus's time, it was finished by Probus.

At the same time also were Epitimius, Vrbanus and Domitianus suspected for
Innovators, and being immediately apprehended were punished for it.

But whilst Affairs were thus managed in Italy and Pannonia, the Emperor was a
thinking to go with an Army against the Palmyrenians, who had subdued all Egypt
and the East as far as Ancyra in Galatia, and would have gotten Bithynia, even
to Chalcedon, if the People of that Country had not heard that Aurelianus was
Emperor and so shook off the Palmyrenian yoke of Government. Wherefore as soon
as the Emperor was on his way thither, Ancyra submitted to the Romans, and
after that, Tyana, with all the Cities betwixt that and Antioch. Where finding
Zenobia with a great Army ready prepared for Battle, as he himself also was,
he, as he was in honor bound, met and engaged her. But seeing the Palmyrenian
Cavalry confided very much in their Armor which was heavy, strong and secure,
being also much better Horsemen than his Soldiers, he planted his Foot
somewhere beyond the River Orontes in a place by themselves, and gave the Roman
Horse a charge not presently to engage with the vigorous Palmyrenian Cavalry,
but to stay till they made the first attaque, and then pretend that they showed
to fly, and continue so to do, till they were sensible they had tired both the
men and their Horses through the excess of Heat and weight of their Armor, so,
that they could pursue 'em no longer. Which Project took effect, and the
Emperors Horse observed his order; so that as soon as they saw the Enemy tired,
and that their Horses were hardly able to stand under 'em, or they themselves
to stir, they reined in their Horses [stopp'd their Career] and [turn'd
[wheel'd about] set upon them, and trod them under feet as they fell of
themselves from their Horses back. By which means the slaughter of 'em was
promiscuous, some being killed with their Swords, and others partly by their
own and partly by the Enemies Horses.

Upon this Defeat as many as could, got into Antioch; therefore Labdas, who was
Zenobias's General, fearing lest the Antiochians should hear of it and mutiny,
picked out a Person somewhat hoary, much like the Emperor, and clothing him
in such a Garb as it was likely Aurelianus used to wear in time of War, led him
through the whole City, as if he had taken the Emperor Captive. With which
contrivance he imposed upon the Antiochians, stole out of the City by Night and
took Zenobia with the remaining part of the Army along with him to Emisa. In
the mean time the Emperor minded his business, and as soon as it was Day,
called the Foot-Souldiers about him again, with a design to attaque the routed
Enemy on both sides, though hearing of Zenobias's escape, he entered Antioch,
where the Citizens entertained him very kindly. But finding many had left the
City for fear they might suffer for being of Zenobias's side; he set forth
Edicts in all places to call 'em back and told 'em such things had happened
more out of force and necessity, than of his own inclination.

Which when the Fugitives saw, they came in whole droves, and were courteously
received by the Emperor; who having disposed of Affairs in that City went
thence to Emisa. Where when he found that a Party of the Palmyrenians had got
possession of a certain Hill above the Suburbs of Daphne (and thought by the
steepness of it to stop the Enemies passage) he commanded his Soldiers to march
up with their Bucklers so near to one another and in so close an order, as to
keep off Darts and Stones, if any were thrown down upon 'em, by the mere
contiguity of their Armor. And so they did. Nor were they sooner got up the
Hill, according to Command, but being in all points equal to their Adversaries
they put 'em to the run, [made 'em fly,] so that some of 'em were dashed to
pieces down from the precipices, others killed in the pursuit by those that
were upon the Hill and those that were a coming up. But let the Enemy escape as
they could, when the Day was theirs, they marched on with great satisfaction,
that the Emperor made his way with such success; whilst Apamea, Larissa and
Arethusa entertained him. He therefore seeing the Palmyrenian Army drawn up
before Emisa in a body of seventy thousand men, consisting of Palmyrenes and
their Allies, he opposed 'em with the Dalmatian Cavalry, the Mysians and
Pannonians, beside those of Noricum and Rhaetia, which are Celtick Legions. Nay
more than that, there were the best of all the Imperial Regiment, picked out
and chosen man by man, the Morisco Horse, the Tyaneans, the Mesopotamians, the
Syrians, the Phenicians, and the Palestinians out of Asia, all men of undoubted
courage: among whom the Palestinians, besides their other Arms, had Clubs and
Quarter-staves. Now when they fell to it, the Roman Cavalry seemed a little to
give way, lest the Palmyrenes who were too many for 'em and better Horsemen
should by some stratagem environ the Roman Army. But in truth the Palmyrene
Horse pursued 'em so hard (though they broke their Ranks) that the event was
quite contrary to what the Roman Cavalry expected. For they were pursued by an
Enemy much too strong for them; and therefore they were most of 'em slain, but
the fatigue of the Day lay chiefly, as it happened, upon the Foot. For seeing
the Palmyrenes had broken their Ranks when the Horse made their pursuit, they
wheeled about and set upon 'em whilst they were scattered and out of order.
Whereupon many were killed because the one side fought with usual Weapons, but
those of Palestine brought Clubs and Staves against Coats of Maile made of iron
and brass. And that in some sense was the chief cause of Victory; because the
Enemy was amazed to see 'em fight so strangely with Clubs. The Palmyrenes
therefore ran away as fast as they could, and in their flight trod one another
to pieces, though they were killed by the Enemy also; insomuch that the Field
was full of dead Men and Horses, whilst some that could get away, made into the
City.

Zenobia (as you may suppose) was not a little disturbed at this defeat of
hers, and therefore consulted what was best to be done. But all her friends
were of Opinion, that she had better relinquish the thoughts of any pretensions
to Emisa; because the Emisenes were disaffected to her and friends to the
Romans. But they advised her to keep within Palmyra, and, when they had secured
themselves in that strong City, they would deliberate about their grand Affairs
at leisure. Nor was this sooner said than done, by the concurrence of the whole
Assembly.

But Aurelianus, when he heard that Zenobia was fled away, went into Emisa,
where he was frankly entertained by the Citizens; and having found a Treasure,
which Zenobia could not carry along with her, he immediately marched with his
Army to Palmyra, which he besieged quite round; whilst the neighboring
Countries supplied his men with all kind of Provisions. In the mean time the
Palmyrenes jeered the Romans, as if they thought it impossible for them to take
the Town; and one Fellow in particular spoke very undecent words concerning the
Emperors own Person; whereupon a certain Persian, that stood by him, said, If
you please, Sir! you shall see me kill that impudent Rascal; To which the
Emperor consented; and so the Persian presently planting himself behind some
other men's backs, that he might not be discovered, shot at him just as he was
looking over the Battlements, and hit him, whilst he was yet uttering his
insolent language, so that he fell down from the Wall before the Soldiers and
the Emperor.

Yet the besieged stood it out, as hoping that the Enemy would draw off for
want of Provisions; and persisted in their resolutions, till they found
themselves want Necessaries. Whereupon they called a Council, in which it was
determined, that they would fly immediately to Euphrates and there desire aid
of the Persians in order to some new action against the Romans. Having so
decreed they set Zenobia upon a She Camel (which is the swiftest of that kind
of Beasts and much fleeter than Horses are) and so conveyed her out of the City.

Aurelianus was troubled at Zenobias's escape; and therefore employed all his
industry to send out Horsemen in pursuit of her. And they indeed took her, just
as she was going over Euphrates, out of the Boat, and brought her to
Aurelianus. At which surprising sight though he was very much rejoiced, yet
being naturally ambitious, and considering, that it would be no great honor to
him in aftertimes to have conquered a Woman, he seemed a little uneasy.

In the mean while some of the Palmyrenes, that were shut up in the Town
resolved bravely to expose themselves and run the risque of being taken, in
defense of their City against the Romans; as, on the other hand some of 'em
used humble, submissive gestures from off the Walls, and begged pardon for what
was past. Which seeing the Emperor accepted and bad 'em be of good cheer, they
came pouring out of the Town, with Presents and Sacrifices in their hands.
Whereupon Aurelianus having paid all due respect to their Holy Things,
received their gifts and sent them away uninjur'd.

But when he was once made Master of this Town, with all the Stores, Money and
Donaries in it, he went back to Emisa, where he called Zenobia and her
Accomplices to account by way of public Judicature. Zenobia therefore coming
into the Court pleaded much in excuse of her self and produced many Persons,
who seduced her as being a simple Woman; and among the rest, Longinus, (whose
Writings are very beneficial to all Lovers of Learning) upon whom (being found
guilty of the Crimes objected against him) the Emperor immediately passed the
sentence of Death; which he bore with so much courage, that he spoke
comfortable words even to his friends who were so much concerned for his
misfortunes. But besides Longinus there were others also that suffered upon
Zenobias's accusation.

Now it were worth while to tell you what happened before the sacking of
Palmyra; though I pretend only to write a transient History as I told you in
my Preface. For whereas Polybius gives us an account, how the Romans acquired a
vast Empire in a short time, I, on the contrary, am to show how by their own
ill management they in as short a time lost it. But of that when I come to that
part of the History; [I am now speaking of] the Palmyrenes: who having gained a
great share of the Roman Empire (as I told you) had several Declarations from
the Gods, which did portend that overthrow of theirs, which afterward fell out.
As for example. At Seleucia in Cilicia there was a Temple of Apollo (called
there Sarpedonius) and in that Temple, an Oracle. (But as to what is reported
of that God (That he used to give all those, who were infested with swarms of
Locusts, a certain kind of Birds, called Seleuciades, that used to be about his
Temple, and would send 'em along with all People who desired it; and that the
Birds would fly among the Locusts, take 'em in their mouths and kill an
infinite number of them in a moment, so as to free People from the trouble of
'em) I ascribe to the happiness of that Age; since our generation has rejected
such kindness from Heaven.) Now the Palmyrenes having consulted this Oracle, to
know, if they should ever get the Empire of the East, the Answer was this;
Avoid my Temple, Cursed, treacherous Nation!
Enough to put the Gods themselves in passion.
And when certain persons enquired there also about the success of Aurelianus's
expedition against the Palmyrenes, the God told them; One Falcon many Doves
commands, whose end
Upon his fatal pounces does depend.
Besides which, there goes likewise another story of the Palmyrenes, and that is
this: There is a place between Heliopolis and Biblis called Aphaca, where there
is a Temple dedicated to Venus Aphacitis, and near unto it a Pond much like an
artificial Cistern, and where likewise there is often seen, about the Temple
and in places adjacent, a fire in the Air, resembling a Lamp or of a round
Figure, which has appeared even in our time, as often as people met there on
such and such days. Which whosoever did, brought to the Pond some Present or
other for the Goddess, whether of Gold, Silver, Linen, Silk, or any other rich
thing. By whom if it were accepted, the Cloth, like things of far greater
weight, sunk to the bottom; but if they were rejected, you might see 'em float
upon the top of the Water; not only Cloth and such like, but even that which
was made of Silver and Gold or other materials which are not apt to swim but
sink. For an experiment of which Miracle the Palmyrenes, in the year before
their overthrow, met together upon an Holy Day, and threw into the Pond several
Presents of Gold, Silver and Cloth, in honor of the Goddess, which, all of 'em
sunk to the bottom, but the next year upon the same Festival, were seen to
float a top of the Water, by which the Goddess foretold what should afterward
come to pass.

Now in this manner was the kindness of Heaven shown to the Romans, as long as
they kept up their holy Rites. But I come to speak of those times, in which the
Roman Empire degenerated to a kind of Barbarity, and fell to decay; I will show
the reasons of such misfortunes, and set forth those Oracles, whereby such
things were predicted.

In the mean time I ought to return thither from whence I digress'd: lest I
should seem to leave the order of the History imperfect. Aurelianus therefore
marching toward Europe, and carrying Zenobia, her Son, and all the rest, who
were Confederates in the Rebellion along with him, they say Zenobia died either
of a Disease or for want of eating; but that all the rest were drowned in the
Straight between Byzantium and Chalcedon.

Nevertheless Aurelianus continued his Journey into Europe; when, by the way, a
Messenger came and told him, there were a parcel of men whom he had left in
Palmyra, that, having won Apsaeus (the great Author of all that was past) were
tampering with Marcellinus (whom the Emperor had made Prefect of Mesopotamia,
and Governor of the East) to take upon him the Imperial Robe. But he, under
pretense of taking time to deliberate, put 'em off so long, that they
importuned him again several times. Wherefore he was fain to frame ambiguous
answers to their Demands, till he had given Aurelianus notice what he designed
to do. But the Palmyrenes [in the mean time] having clothed Antiochus in a
purple garment, kept at Palmyra.

When Aurelianus heard that, he went into the East, just as he was, [without
any other preparations] and coming to Antioch surpised all the People, who
were then at an Horse-match, and mightily astonished to see him; but from
thence he went on to Palmyra. Which Town he took and razed without fighting for
it; but not thinking that Antiochus was worth the punishing upon the account of
his mean condition, he dismissed him. After which action of his, he quickly
reduced the Alexandrians, who were inclinable to a Rebellion, as being already
in a tumult. For which he rode in Triumph into Rome, where he was most
magnificently received by the Senate and People. At this time also he built
that sumptuous Temple of the Sun, which he adorned with all those holy spoils,
that he brought from Palmyra; setting up in it the Statues of the Sun and
Belus. Which having done, he easily subdued Tetricus, with his rebellious
Accomplices, whom he brought to condign punishment. He likewise called in all the
counterfeit money and gave out new, to avoid confusion in Trade. Besides which
he also bestowed a Dole of Bread, as a mark of his favor, upon the people: and
having settled all Affairs began his Journey from Rome.

But whilst he staid at Perinthus (now called Heraclea) there was a Plot laid
against him, which was thus: There was a certain Person in the Court called
Eros, whose place it was to carry forth the Emperors Answers. This man the
Emperor had threatened for some fault or other and put him in a fright; upon
which account he dreading, lest the Emperor should make good his menaces by
his actions, goes to certain of the Guard, whom he knew to be the boldest
Fellows in all the Court, tells 'em a plausible Story, and shows 'em a Letter
of his own Writing, just like the Emperors, (which he had learned to
counterfeit long before) and persuading them first, that they themselves were
to be murdered (for that was the plain meaning and scope of the Letter) he
endeavored to induce them to kill the Emperor. They therefore observing
Aurelianus to go out of the City without any great Attendance ran in upon him
with their naked Swords and murdered him. But he was buried there upon the
place very magnificently by the Army in token of the great Services that he had
done, and dangers that he had undergone for the good of the Public.

After him Tacitus got the Empire, in whose time the Scythians came over the
Fenn of Meotis and made their incursions through Pontus even into Cilicia, till
Tacitus set upon 'em; who partly in his own Person, and partly by Florianus,
Prefect of the Court whom he left in Commission for that end, killed and quite
routed 'em all; but went himself into Europe, where he was circumvented and
killed after this manner. He had committed the Government of Syria to his
Cousin, Maximinus, who treated the Nobility of the Country so roughly, that he
made 'em envy and fear him both together. And that begot such an hatred in
them, that they at last conspiring with them who had murdered Aurelianus,
assaulted Maximinus, and having killed him, slew Tacitus also as he was just
decamping.

Now therefore all things revolved into a civil Disturbance, whilst those of
the East chose Probus, Emperor, and those at Rome, Florianus. Of whom the
former was Governor of all Syria, Phaenicia, Palestine and Egypt; but the
latter had all the Countries from Cilicia to Italy: besides that to him
likewise all the Nations beyond the Alps, the Gauls, Spaniards, Britains, and
Africans in general, did homage.

Wherefore when they were both now ready for a War, Florianus came to Tarsus
and resolved to pitch his Camp there, leaving his Victory against the Scythians
at the Bosphorus unfinished, whereby he gave them an opportunity to recover
themselves and return to their own homes, though he had blocked 'em up. But
Probus protracted the time, because he came with less preparation for a War; by
which means it came to pass, that the Weather (in Summertime) being extreme
hot. Florianus's Soldiers, who were most of 'em Europaeans, and consequently
not used to such excessive heat, died of a pestilent Distemper. Which when
Probus understood, he thought it best to attaque the Enemy in time. Whereupon
Florianus's men attempting somewhat beyond their strength, made certain light
Skirmishes before the City, but seeing there was nothing done worth the
speaking of, the Armies being divided, some of Probus's Soldiers came and
deposed Florianus. Which when they had done, he was kept in custody for a time,
till his own men said, that was not done by Probus's order; and so Florianus
put on the Purple Robe again till they came back who were sent to know the
truth of Probus's resolution in the matter; who upon their return caused
Florianus to be slain by his own Soldiers.

When Probus had thus gotten the Empire he marched forward and did indeed a
very commendable act for the public good, as a prelude to what he afterward
would do. For he resolved to punish those that had murdered Aurelianus and
plotted against Tacitus; though he did not put his design openly in execution
for fear of an insurrection, but planted a Company of men, that he had
confidence in, at a convenient Post near which he invited the Murderers to a
Feast. Who when they came thither in expectation to be treated at the Emperors
Table, Probus went up into a kind of Gallery [or Balcony] from whence he might
see the action, (...)
and gave his men the signal when they should do the feat. Which they no sooner
received but they fell upon the Murderers naked as they were, and killed 'em
all but one, whom he afterward burnt alive, as being a very dangerous Fellow.

Whilst Probus did these things, Saturninus, a Moor, who was the Emperors most
familiar friend, and, for that reason, had the Government of Syria committed to
him, revolted from his Allegiance to the Emperor, and turned Rebel. Which when
Probus heard, he resolved to obviate his designs, but that the Eastern Soldiers
prevented him by destroying Saturninus with all his treacherous machinations.

He likewise suppressed another insurrection in Britain by [the assistance of]
Victorinus. a Moor, who had persuaded him to make that Rebel Governor of
Britain. For having sent for Victorinus to him, and reproved him for his
advice, he sent him to correct the miscarriage; who going forthwith into
Britain took off the Traitor by a wile.

Probus therefore having managed things, according as I have related, obtained
several Victories against the Barbarians also, in two several Wars; the one of
which he himself was present in, but left the other to the conduct of his
Lieutenant. But because he saw it necessary to assist the Cities of Germany
that lay upon the Rhine and were infested by the Barbarians, he marched with
his Army toward the Rhine. Where when the War began, there was a grievous
famine in all the Country thereabouts; but a mighty shower fell at the same
time of Rain and Corn together, insomuch that in some places there were great
heaps of it made by its own descent. At which strange sight, all People were so
much astonished, that at first they durst not touch the Corn to satisfy their
hunger; but being at last forced to it by necessity, which is above all fear,
they made Bread of it, which they ate; and thereby not only satisfied their
hunger, but got the Victory also with a great deal of ease, through the
Emperors good success. He also put an end to many other Wars with little or no
trouble; and fought sharp Battles, first against the Logiones, a German Nation,
whom he conquered, and took Semno their General with his Son Prisoners, but
pardoned 'em upon submission; though he took all their Captives and their
plunder from 'em, and so upon certain Terms dismissed not only common persons,
but even Semno and his Son.

Another Battle that he fought was against the Franks, whom when he had bravely
subdued by the good management of his Officers, He made War upon the Burgundi,
and the Vandili. But seeing his Forces were too weak, he contrived how to
single out and engage with some part only of the Enemies forces. And indeed
Fortune favored his design; for the Armies lying on both sides of the River,
the Romans challenged the Barbarians that were on the further side, to fight.
At which they were so incensed, that as many as could, got over; where they
joined Battle, and fought, till the Barbarians were partly slain, and partly
taken alive by the Romans: except some few that were left who desired Peace
upon condition to give up their Captives and their plunder; which they
obtained. But because they did not restore all they had, the Emperor was
therefore so angry, that he in justice fell upon 'em as they marched away, and,
killing many of them, took their General Igillus Prisoner. But as many of 'em
as he took alive, he sent into Britain; where they inhabited the Island and
were afterward very useful to the Emperor upon any Insurrection.

When he had in this manner perfected these Wars upon the Rhine, the Isaurians
did something about that time which we ought not to omit. For there was one
Lydius, an Isaurian, and a continual Robber from his Youth, who with a gang of
Rogues like himself had pillaged all Pamphilia and Lycia. Now when the Soldiers
came to take these Thieves, this same Lydius (because he could not oppose the
whole Roman Army) went to a place called Crymna, in Lycia, which stands upon a
Precipice and is fortified on the one side with mighty deep Ditches. Where
finding a great many that fled thither for refuge, and observing the Romans to
be very intent upon the Siege, in that they bore the fatigue of it very
stoutly; he for that reason pulled down the Houses, and making the ground fit
for Tillage sowed Corn in order to maintain those that were in the Town.

But seeing the number was so great that they wanted much more provisions, he
turned all those out of the Town who were of no use, both male and female. But
the Enemy perceiving his design forced 'em back again: whereupon Lydius took
and threw 'em headlong into the Trenches that were about the Walls, where they
died. Which having done he made a wonderful Mine from the Town outward beyond
the Enemies Camp, through which he sent certain persons out of the Town, to
steal Cattle and other forage. By which means he provided for the besieged a
good while, till a Woman discovered the matter to the Enemies. But for all that
Lydius did not despond; only he retrenched his men by degrees in their Wine and
gave 'em a something less allowance of Corn. Yet this way would not do neither,
but he was driven to such necessity, that he killed all who were in the Town,
except some friends of his that were enough (as he thought) to defend it; and
those he spared, as likewise some Women whom he ordered to be in common among
'em all for the necessary use of Nature.

But when he had resolved to stand it out against all dangers, there happened
at last this accident: There was a Man with him in the Town that knew how to
make Engines and to use 'em also very dexterously in slinging of Darts so
exactly, that when Lydius had bid him shoot at any one of the Enemies he would
never miss his mark. Now it happened, that Lydius had bid him hit such a
Person, whom he missed (either by chance or on purpose) for which he stripped
and whipped him most severely, and threatened him with death besides. The man
therefore was so enraged upon the account of the blows which he received, and
so affrighted at the menaces, that he took an occasion to steal out of the
Town: and falling into the company of certain Soldiers to whom he told whatever
he had done or suffered, he showed 'em a Window in the Wall, through which
Lydius used to spy all that was done in their Camp, and promised them to shoot
him as he, after his usual manner, was looking through it. Thereupon the
Captain or chief Officer in that Expedition received the man into his favor;
who when he had planted his Engine, and placed some men before him that he
might not be discovered by the Enemy, took aim at Lydius as he looked through
the hole [in the Wall] and with a Dart shot and gave him his mortal Wound.
Which he no sooner received, but he was very severe upon some of his own men;
whom when he had obliged upon Oath never to surrender the Town, he with much
struggling expired.

But seeing that Ptolemais, which is in Thebais, was revolted from the Emperor,
and had undertaken a War, though not likely long to endure; Probus forced both
that and its Allies the Blemmyae to a Surrender, by the good conduct of his
then present Officers. He likewise left the Basternae, a Scythian people, that
submitted to him, in Thrace, where he gave them room to inhabit: upon which
account they constantly observed the Roman Laws and Customs.

Another time when the Franks came to the Emperor and had a Country given 'em,
some part of 'em afterward revolted, and having gotten a great number of Ships
disturbed all Greece. From whence they went into Sicily, to Syracuse, which
they attaqu'd and killed a great many men in it. At length they arrived in
Africa, where though they were not entertein'd, but repelled by a body of men
out of Carthage, yet they returned home without any hurt or damage.

But then there was this one thing more that happened in Probus's Reign: There
were eighty Gladiators who conspired together, and having killed their keepers,
ran out into the City, and plundered all before 'em; not but that there were
many other men too (as it is usual in such cases) mixed among 'em. But the
Emperor sent a party, and suppressed 'em. Now when Probus, who was a brave, and
a just Prince, had done thus,. -- The end of this Book is wanting, but is
supplied hereafter.

A New HISTORY Written by Count ZOSIMVS, Sometime Advocate of the Treasury. The
Second Book.
Note.
THE beginning of this Book is lost (for there is no mention here of Carus and
his Sons) and therefore to supply that defect we must have recourse to other
Authors, which afford us this short account. -- Carus succeeded Probus, and
went against the Persians as far as Ctesiphon, where he gained the name of, The
Persian Emperor. But soon after he was taken off, as some say, by a Disease;
though others, by a Thunderbolt. He had two Sons, the one called Numerianus, a
very hopeful Youth, of whom the Commonwealth might have expected all happiness
and good imaginable, had he not been murdered by Aper; the other named
Carinus, an Adulterer, lecher, prodigal, and indeed a person utterly abandoned
to all kind of Vice, whom Diocletian, formerly called Augustus, slew. So far by
way of Supplement, and now ZOSIMUS begins abruptly, thus:

** Because the longest time that any man lives is only equal to the
intermediate space between these Games. For the Romans call that [Seculum]
which we call [(...)] [aevum] an Age, or the space of one hundred years. And it
is good to cure the Plague, Consumption, or several other Diseases; of whose
Original take this account. -- Valesus Valesius, from the family of the
Valeriani came, was a great man among the Sabines, and before his house there
was a Grove of wast tall Trees, which were burnt with Lightning and gave him
occasion to question what might be the portent of such an accident. Wherefore
his Children falling sick he consulted not only the Doctors but the
Southsayers also; who told him, that by the manner of the fires falling, the
Gods were angry; which made Valesius wisely use that assistance in sacrificing
to appease the Gods. And being in a fright, both he and his Wife, who expected
every minute when their Children would die, he fell prostrate before Vesta, and
promised to offer up two entire Souls instead of their Children, which was, his
own and that of their Mother. But turning to the Grove that was Thunder-burnt,
he seemed to hear a Voice, that bid him carry the Children to Tarentum, and
there warm some Tiber Water over the fire of Dis and Proserpine, and give it
the Children to drink. Which when he had heard quite out he then despaired the
more of his Childrens recovery. For Tarentum was a great way off, and besides
there was no Tiber Water to be had at it: and then it made him think the worse
of it, that he heard the Voice say the Water must be warmed upon the Altar of
Infernal Deities, or Demons. At which the very Southsayers also themselves were
startled; but however when he heard it the second time, he resolved to obey the
Gods command. And putting his Children in a small River Vessel, he carried the
fire along with him. Now the Children were almost ready to faint by reason of
the heat, whilst he made sail to that part of the River, where the stream is
most calm; and lodging at a Shepherds Cottage, together with his Children, he
heard a Voice say, he must stay at Tarentum (for so the place was called, and
had the same name with Tarentum which is near the Japygian Promontory, or Capo
di St. Maria.) Whereupon Valesius when he had paid due Adoration to the Gods
for that good fortune, he bad the Pilot put to shore, and landing told the
Shepherds all the whole Story. And presently after having drawn some Water out
of Tiber and warmed it upon an Altar of his own making, he gave it his Children
to drink: who as soon as they had swallowed it fell asleep and were perfectly
cured. But they fancied in that sleep that they saw something, which bad 'em
offer black Victims to Dis and Proserpine, and spend three Nights in singing
and dancing: which Dream they told to their Father, and that it was an huge
man, of a Godlike presence; that bad 'em do it in the Campus Martius, where the
Horse-Races use to be. But Valesius having a mind to build an Altar in that
place, he set the Stonecutters to dig, who found an Altar ready made, upon
which there was this inscription, To Dis and Proserpine. By which he was more
plainly instructed what to do, sacrificed the black Victims upon that Altar,
and kept the Vigils in that place.

Now this same Altar and the manner of Sacrificing upon it was occasioned thus:
The Romans and the Albanes were at War, and, being both Armed, there appeared a
monstrous Shape, clothed in a black skin, and crying out, That Dis and
Proserpine commanded them to sacrifice to their Deities before they engaged:
and when it had so said, it disappeared. Whereupon the Romans, who were
affrighted at the sight, made an Altar under ground, and when they had
sacrificed upon it, they buried it twenty feet deep, so that it might not be
discovered by any but Romans. Now Valesius having found it, he according to
order both sacrificed upon it, and kept the Vigils; from whence he was called
Manius Valerius Tarentinus. For the Romans call [the Infernal Gods,] Manes] and
[to be in good health] is [Valere]; and then he was called [Tarentinus] from
[Tarentum,] where he sacrificed. But some time after when a Plague happened in
the City, which was the year after their Kings were expelled, Pub. Valor.
Poplicola sacrificed a black Ox and a black Heifer to Dis and Proserpine
whereby he freed the City from the Disease, and wrote upon the Altar this
Inscription; -- I Publius Valerius Poplicola have dedicated Fire to Dis and
Proserpine in the Campus Martius, and have also made Shows in honor of them to
preserve the people of Rome.

But after this when Diseases and Wars lay heavy upon them, which happened in
the year 352, since the City was built, the Senate had a mind to rid themselves
of those Calamities out of the Sibylls Oracles, and therefore commanded them
whose business it was, to consult those Oracles. Who having so done, they told
the Senate, that if they sacrificed to Dis and Proserpine, it would put an end
to all their miseries. They therefore got a convenient place, which they
devoted to Dis and Proserpine according as they were commanded, when Marcus
Potitus was in his fourth Consulship. And when the Ceremony was over, they,
being delivered from their grievances, laid up the Altar again in some extreme
part of the Campus Martius. And after that this kind of Sacrificing was for
some years neglected, till some misfortunes befell them, and then Octavianus
Augustus renewed the Games, which had been celebrated before, when Lucius
Censorinus, and Marcus Manlius Puelius were Consuls, but were kept at that time
under the Consulate of Lucius Censorinus and Caius Sabinus, when Ateius Capito
had explained the Laws concerning them, and the fifteen Men, that had the
keeping of the Sibylls Books, had found out the time when the Sacrifice was to
be performed and the Shows made. When Augustus was dead, Claudius celebrated
those Games, without any regard to the due time. But after him, Domitian, who
did not mind what Claudius had done, computed the years from the time that
Augustus kept that Festival, and seemed to observe the original Institution.
And after them Severus, in the 110th year, restored those very Games, he and
his two Sons, Antoninus and Geta, when Chilo and Libo were Consuls. Now the
manner of these Games is said to be this: -- The Beadles went about at that
time and invited all the People to such a Sight as they never had seen, nor
ever were like to see any more. And in the Summertime, a little before the
Games began, the fifteen Men sat in the Capitol, in the Temple Palatine upon a
Tribunal, from whence they distributed a kind of purifying preparations to the
People (called Lustralia) which were Torches, Brimstone, and Pitch: of which
none participate but Freemen only. And when the People come together in the
places aforesaid and in the Temple of Diana, which is upon the Aventine Hill,
each one brings Wheat Barley and Beans, and keep Vigils in the Night to the
fatal Sisters. But when the time of the Festival is come, which they celebrate
three days and three nights together in the Campus Martius, the Victims are
consecrated near the bank of Tiber at Tarentum. And there they sacrifice to
several Deities; as Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, Latona, Diana; and, besides them to
the Parcae, Lucinae, Ceres, Dis and Proserpine, which is performed in this
Order. The first night that these Shows are made, about two of the Clock, the
Emperor, with the fifteen Men, sacrifices three Lambs upon three Altars that
are provided on purpose by the Rivers side, where having sprinkled the Altars
with blood he offers up the Victims whole. Then, when they have prepared a
Scene without a Theater, they set up a great many lights and make an huge fire,
by which they sing some new Hymn, to make the Games the more solemn. And those
that performed these things have the first fruits of their Wheat, Barley and
Beans for their labor. For those, I told you, are distributed among the
people. The next day they go up into the Capitol, where they offer the usual
Sacrifices, and thence coming to the place appointed for it, they celebrate
Games in honor of Apollo and Diana. The day after that, the great Ladies come
into the Capitol at the hour which the Oracle has prefixed, where they behave
themselves with all due reverence: and at the third hour in the Temple of
Apollo near the Palace, twenty seven fine Boys with as many Girls, whose
Parents are all alive, sing Hymns and speak in Greek and Latin, whereby the
Roman Dominions are preserved. But besides these there were other things done
according to the divine prescript; which as long as they were kept up, secured
the Roman Empire. And to confirm you that it was really as I say, I will add
the Sibylls Oracle, which others have mentioned before my time; and it runs
thus: But when an hundred years and ten are past
Which is the longest time Man's Age does last,
Romans! be sure (and see you don't mistake
In any point) due Offerings to make
To Heaven, and see you bring the Sacrifice
Into that Field which on the Tiber lies:
And do so, in that Season, when the Nigh.
Deprives Men least of the Diurnal Light,
After Sunset; Then to the Parcae pay
Your homage; and upon their Altars lay
Young Sheep and Goats: Next the Lucinae please,
With decent Rites, who childing Women ease.
After that offer a black Hog and Sow
To Tellus, for the product of the Plow.
But to Joves Altar bring the Bulls Milk-white
For Victims, in the Daytime, not by Night:
(For heavenly Deities accept of none
But what are offered in the Day alone.)
And so to Juno sacrifice a Cow
Spotless all o'r, and pure as falling Snow,
Then let Apollo, whom they call the Sun,
And Phoebus, have his equal honors done.
Whilst in the Temple Latin Girls and Boys
In sacred Hymns make a Triumphant noise.
But let 'em be apart, the Girls to stand
And sing on this, the Boys on the other hand:
Besides this caution I must farther give
That all the Parents of 'em be alive.
As for the married Women, let them pray
To Juno on their knees, that each one may
Have their desire, both Men and Women too
But chiefly Women. Then, Let all of you
Bring from your houses what is fit to bring,
(As the first fruits of every useful Thing)
To the immortal Gods an Offering.
And let all that upon your Altars lie,
Whence you may Men and Women both supply.
But to attend the Gods be sure there be
Both night and day a numerous company
Of Votaries both serious and free.
Observe these precepts, and you shall subdue
Not only Latium but all Italy too,
Who shall submit their supple necks to you.


Now that the Empire was secure and likely to continue Lords of almost all the
known World, whilst these things were duly performed, according to what the
Oracle directs and the thing it self requires: and on the other side, that when
these Ceremonies were neglected, about the time that Dioclesian laid down his
Imperial State, it fell to decay and insensibly degenerated most part into
Barbarism, experience it self assures us. And that I say nothing but what is
true I Will prove from Chronology. For from the Consulate of Chilo and Libo,
wherein Severus celebrated the Secular Games, or Ceremonies, it was an hundred
and one years till Dioclesian was the ninth time, and Maximianus the eighth
time Consul. And then Dioclesian from an Emperor turned a private person, and
Maximianus followed his Example. But when Constantinus and Licinnius were in
their third Consulship, the 110 years were completed, and they ought to have
kept the Festival according to custom; but it was neglected, and so things
consequently ran to that unhappy condition wherein they now are.

But Dioclesian died in three years after, and the Emperors that were at that
time, that is to say, Constantinus and Maximianus Gallerius declared Severus
and Maximinus (who was Gallerius's Sisters Son) to be the rightful Cesars,
giving all Italy to Severus and the Eastern Provinces to Maximinus. But when
things were all settled, and the Barbarians at quiet since the Romans had been
so successful against 'em, Constantinus, who was begotten by Constantius of a
Concubine, and had formerly an ambition to be Emperor, but was enflamed the
more with that desire, since Severus and Maximinus had gotten the name and
honor of Cesars, was now resolved to leave the place where he dwelt, and go to
his Father Constantius, who was beyond the Alps, most commonly in England. But
fearing, lest he might be taken by the way (for a great many knew very well,
how much he was in love with Dominion) he maimed all the Horses that were kept
for public Service, as fast as he came to any Stable where they were, and took
the next for his own use. And so he did continually; by which means he stopped
those that pursued him from going farther, whilst he himself went on toward the
Country where his Father was.

But it happened that the Emperor Constantius died just at that time, and
therefore the Guards, who thought none of his legitimate Children fit for the
Imperial Dignity, as soon as they considered that Constantinus was a person
capable of it, conferred the honor upon him, in hopes of great Presents by way
of remuneration. But when his Image was shown at Rome as the custom is,
Maxentius, the Son of Maximianus Herculius could not endure to see, that
Constantinus should succeed so well, who was born of an Harlot, whereas he
himself who was Son of such an Emperor, lay at home and idle, whilst others
enjoyed his Fathers Empire, wherefore he made Marcellianus and Marcellus, two
Tribunes of the Soldiers, and Lucianus (who distributed the Swines flesh, which
the Treasury provided for the people of Rome) and the Court-Guards, called the
Praetoriani, his Accomplices in the Attempt, and by them was promoted into the
Imperial Throne, having promised to reward all those that assisted him in it,
very liberally. Now the first thing, that they did in order to it, was the
killing of Abellius, because he being Prefect of the City, seemed to resist
their Enterprise.

When Maximianus Gallerius heard this, he sent Severus Caesar with an Army to
fight Maxentius.. But whilst he came from Millain with several Legions of
Moors, Maxentius corrupted most of his Soldiers with Money, even to the Prefect
of the Court, called Anullinus, and thereby conquered him with great facility.
Upon which Severus fled to Ravenna, which is a very strong and populous City,
furnished with provisions enough for him and his Soldiers. When Maximianus
Herculius knew that, he was mightily concerned for his Son Maxentius, no
question, and therefore leaving Lucania,, where he then was, he went for
Ravenna. And seeing Severus could by no means be forced out of the City,
because it was well fortified and stored with all necessary provisions, he
cheated him with false Oaths and persuaded him to go to Rome. But as he was
agoing, and came to a place, called the Three Taverns, he was taken by a Trick
of Maxentius's contriving and hanged. But Maximianus Gallerius could not well
bear those injuries done to Severus, and so resolved to come out of the East to
Rome, and punish Maxentius according to his demerits. But when he was come into
Italy, he found the Soldiers about him so false, that he went back into the
East without fighting so much as one Battle.

At that time Maximianus Herculius, who could not endure the tumults which
disturbed the public peace, came to Dioclesian, who lived then at Carnutum, a
Town in Gallia Celtica; and endeavored to persuade him, that he would resume
the Empire, and not suffer that Government, which they had preserved so long
with so much difficulty, to be exposed to the madness and folly of those who
had possessed themselves of it, and made it shake already. But Dioclesian did
not hearken to him; for he preferred his quiet before all business in the World
(and perhaps he foresaw the trouble that would ensue, being a man much
conversant in religious matters) and therefore Herculius seeing he could do no
good upon him, came as far as Ravenna and so back to the Alps, to meet
Constantinus who lay thereabout. And being naturally a busy, faithless man, he
promised Constantinus his Daughter Fausta (which he performed) but withal
persuaded him to pursue Maximianus Gallerius who was going out of Italy, and
lay wait for Maxentius. To all which Constantinus consented, and then he left
him, with a Design if possible to recover the Empire, because he hoped to set
his Son-in-law Constantinus and his Son Maxentius together by the Ears.

But whilst he attempted these things, Maximianus Gallerius, made Licinnius,
his old acquaintance and friend, Emperor, by whose assistance he designed to
cope with Maxentius. But whilst Gallerius was consulting about these things, he
died of an incurable Wound, and then Licinnius also claimed the sole Dominion.
But Maximianus Herculius, as I told you, endeavored to recover the Empire by
alienating the Soldiers affections from Maxentius. In order whereunto he
wheedled 'em with gifts and pitiful addresses, and having brought 'em over to
him, he would have laid a Plot against Constantinus, in which his Soldiers
should have conspired. But Fausta discovered it to Constantinus; and so
Herculius, who was now at his Wits end through so many disappointments, died of
a Distemper at Tarsus.

Maxentius having escaped this Danger, and being now of Opinion that he had
settled the Empire well enough, he sent certain Persons into Africa, to Carthage
in particular, to carry his Image about that Country. But the Soldiers that
were there, forbad it, out of their love to Gallerius Maximianus, and their
honor to his memory, till they heard that Maxentius was coming to make War
against 'em upon the score of that insurrection, and then they went to
Alexandria: but meeting with a great Army which they were not able to deal
with, they returned to Carthage. Hereupon Maxentius being disturbed, resolved
to sail for Africa, and punish those that occasioned such commotions. But when
the Soothsayers had sacrificed and told him ill signs, he was afraid to go,
not only because the entrails appeared in that manner, but also lest
Alexander, who was the Prefect of the Court in Africa, should be his Enemy; and
therefore to secure his passage thither from all suspicion, he sent to
Alexander to desire him, that he would send him his Son for an Hostage. For
Alexander had a Son of a good bigness, and very personable. But he suspecting
that Maxentius did not desire his Son, to make an Hostage of him, but to
deceive him, he denied his request. But after that, when Maxentius sent other
Agents to him to take him off by Stratagems and Wiles, the Plot was discovered;
and then the Soldiers having gotten a good opportunity to rebel, conferred the
Purple Robe upon Alexander, though he were not only a Phrygian born, but a
fearful, cowardly man, and one that was unfit for any difficult undertaking,
besides his being Old.

At that time there happened a fire at Rome (whether it came out of the Air, or
the Earth, is uncertain) which caught in the Temple of Fortune; and whilst the
People ran together to put it out, a certain Soldier that was there speaking
blasphemy against the Goddess, the Commonalty killed him out of their zeal:
which caused a mutiny among the Soldiers, who were like to have destroyed the
whole City, had not Maxentius soon appeased their fury.

After these things Maxentius sought all occasions to wage a War with
Constantinus; and pretending grief for his Fathers death, which Constantinus
was the cause of, he designed to go toward Rhetia, which is near both to Gallia
and Illyricum too. For he dreamed that he should subdue Dalmatia and Illyricum
by the assistance of the Generals in those parts, and with the help of
Licinnius's Army. But though he had these Affairs in his thoughts, yet he
conceived it was better for him to settle matters in Africa first. Whereupon
having raised an Army of men, and made Rufius Volusianus, Prefect of the Court,
their General, he sent 'em into Africa; but sent Zena also, along with Rufius,
who was a Person not only well skilled in Military Affairs, but also cried up
for an extraordinary affable, courteous man. And upon the first Onset
Alexanders men gave way toward another body of Soldiers, to whom they and
Alexander at last ran away together: nor did that other Party go off
unconquered by the Enemy, or he himself either, for he was taken and strangled.

The War being thus ended, there was room enough for Sycophants or Informers to
impeach (I had almost said) all the men of Africa, who were either of good
Families or Estates, as friends of Alexander: nor were they any of 'em spared,
but some of them were put to death, and others lost all they had. And after
that he triumphed at Rome for the mischief which was done at Carthage. -- Now
this was the state of Maxentius's Affairs, who did what I have told you,
behaving himself like a Lecher and a Tyrant to all the Inhabitants of Italy and
even Rome it self.

In the mean time Constantinus who had suspected him long before, was then much
more inclined to fight him; therefore when he had raised an Army out of the
Barbarians, Germans and Celtae whom he had conquered, and gotten some out of
England too, to the number of 90000 foot and 8000 Horse in all, he marched from
the Alps into Italy, and those Towns that surrendered, he passed without doing
'em any damage, but those that stood out he took by storm. But whilst he
proceeded thus, Maxentius had mustered up a far stronger Army; for he had
eighty thousand Romans and Italians, all the Tuscanes upon the Seacoast, and
forty thousand men from Carthage, besides what the Sicilians sent him; insomuch
that his whole Army consisted of 170000 foot and 18000 Horse.

When they were both so provided, Maxentius made a Bridge over the Tiber, which
was not all of a piece from one side to the other but divided into two parts,
so that in the middle of the River, that which filled up the middle of the
Bridge was made to fasten with iron Buttons, as it were, which might be drawn
back as often as a man had a mind to disjoyn it. And he gave the Workmen Order,
that as soon as ever they saw Constantine's Army upon the juncture of the
Bridge, that they should draw back the Buttons and dissolve the Bridge, so that
the Enemy who stood upon it might fall into the River. And this Maxentius
devised.

But Constantinus marching on with his Army to Rome he pitched his Camp in a
field before the City, that is broad and therefore convenient for Horsemen.
Whilst in the mean time Maxentius shut himself up within the Walls and
sacrificed to the Gods, besides that he consulted the Soothsayers and the
Sibylline Oracles too about the event of the War. And finding a Prediction,
that said, Whoever Designed any harm to the Romans, should die a misetable
Death, he took it upon himself, because he kept out those that came against
Rome, and would have fain taken it. And indeed it proved true. For when
Maxentius brought forth his Army before Rome, and was going over the Bridge that
himself had made, an infinite number of Owls flew down and covered the Wall.
Which when Constantinus saw, he bad his men stand to their Arms. And as the two
Armies stood one against the other, Constantine sent in his Horse upon that of
the Enemy: who made such a brisk attaque that they routed 'em. And when the
sign was given to the Foot, they likewise marched in good order toward the
Enemy. And having engaged in a smart Battle; the Romans themselves and their
Allies out of Italy were very loath to hazard themselves, because they wished to
be delivered from that bitter Tyranny which they were then under: though the
other Soldiers were slain in great numbers, being either trod to pieces by the
Horse, or killed by the Foot. For, though as long as the Horse stood their
ground, Maxentius had some hopes, yet when they gave way, he ran along with the
rest over a Bridge into the City. But the Rafters being not strong enough to
bear so great a weight, they broke, so that Maxentius and all the others were
carried by the stream down the River.

When the news of this Victory came into the City, no man durst show any joy
for what was done, because some thought the report was false. But when
Maxentius's head was brought in upon a Spear, they turned their fear and
dejection into all joy and pleasure. And upon this occasion Constantinus
punished but very few and they were some of Maxentius's best Friends; but he
took off all the Praetorian Soldiers and demolished the Forts where they used
to keep. At last when he had settled all things in the City, he went toward
Gallia Celtica. But by the way he sent for Licinnius to Millain and gave him
his Sister Constantia in marriage, whom he had promised him formerly, when he
had a mind to make him join with him against Maxentius; And when that Solemnity
was over, Constantine marched on toward the Celtae. Nor was it long before the
Civil Wars broke out between Licinnius and Maximianus, who had a sharp
engagement in Illyricum, wherein at first Licinnius seemed to have the worst of
it; but presently afterward he rallied again, and put Maximianus to the run:
Who traveling through the East into Egypt, in hopes to get men enough to renew
the War, he died at Tarsus.

The Empire being thus devolved upon Constantine and Licinnius, they two in a
little time fell out: not that Licinnius gave any occasion for it, but
Constantine, as he used to do, showed himself unfaithful in what he had agreed
to, by his endeavor to alienate some Nations that belonged to Licinnius's
Dominions. And by that means they broke out into an open quarrel, and both
prepared their Armies for a fight. Licinnius made his Rendezvous at Cibalis,
which is a City of Pannonia, lying upon an Hill: to which the way is steep and
narrow, and five furlongs in breadth. In which Road or Avenue there is a deep
Fenn that lies very near the greatest part of it; and the rest of it is
mountainous, wherein there is an hillock, upon which the City stands. But from
thence there is a spacious Plain, which entertains the Eye with an infinite
Prospect. Now upon this did Licinnius encamp, and spread the body of his Army
all along under the Hill, lest he should seem too weak for the Enemy, in the
Wings. And Constantine in the mean time drew up his men near the Mountain,
placing the Horse in the Front. For he thought that the best way, lest the
Enemy should fall upon the Foot, who moved but slowly, and hinder their
marching forward. -- When he had so done, he presently made the attaque, gave
the signal and went against the Enemies. And so the fight began, which was the
fiercest (I had almost said) that ever was. For when each side had shot their
Darts, they fought a long time with Spears and Javelins; and after they had
fought from Morning to Night, the right Wing, which Constantine commanded, had
the better on it. And thereupon the Enemy being put to flight, Licinnius's men,
when they saw him mounted, and ready to run away, durst not stay to eat their
Suppers; but left their Cattle and all their other provisions behind: only
they took as much Victuals as would satisfy their hunger for one Night, and so
marched along with Licinnius in all haste to Sirmium; which is a City of
Pannonia, by which there runs a River on both sides of it, and discharges it
self into the Ister. And as he passed this Town, he broke down the Bridge over
the River, and so marched on, with an intention to raise men in Thrace.

When Constantinus had taken Cibalis, and Sirmium, and all the other Towns that
Licinnius ran away from, he sent five thousand men in pursuit of him. But they
being ignorant what way he took, could not overtake him. Yet Constantinus
having rebuilt the Bridge over Saus, which Licinnius had broken down, was with
his Army almost at his heels. And when he was got over into Thrace, he arrived
at the Plain where Licinnius lay encamped. Where, the same Night that he came,
he marshalled his Army and gave Orders, that his Soldiers should be ready to
fight as soon as it was Day. But when it was light, Licinnius, seeing
Constantinus with his Army, put his men also in array, having Valens, whom he
styled Caesar for his Ally, ever since he fled from Cibalis. And when the two
Armies engaged, they first fought with Bows at a distance: but when their
Arrows were spent, they fell on with Javelins and Ponyards. So that the fight
continued very fierce for a good while, till those whom Constantinus had sent
to pursue Licinnius, came down from a rising ground upon the Armies whilst they
were at it. But they wheeled about an Hill, before they got to them, because
they thought it best to join their own Party from the higher ground, and so
begird the Enemy. But Licinnius's men were aware of 'em, and fought it out
bravely against 'em all; so that many thousands were slain on both sides, and
the Battle was equal, till the sign was given for 'em both to draw off.

The next Day they made a Truce, and thought fit to enter into League and
Alliance one with the other; upon Condition, that Constantinus should have the
Government of Illyricum, and all the Nations beyond it, and Licinnius should
have Thrace, the East, and all beyond that: but that Valens, whom Licinnius had
made Caesar, should be put to Death, because (I suppose) he was said to be the
author of all the mischief which had happened. Which when they had done, and
taken Oaths on both sides to observe those Conditions, to make the Obligation
of keeping their promises the stronger, Constantinus made Crispus (his Son by a
Concubine called Minervina) who was yet but a Youth; and also Coustantinus, who
was born but a few days before at Arelatum, Caesar's. And at the same time
Licinnianus, Son to Licinnius, who was twenty years of Age, was declared
Caesar. And this was the end of the second War.

But when Constantinus heard, that the Sauromatae, who lived upon the Fenn,
Meotis, had passed the Isther in Boats, and pillaged his Territories, he led
his Army against 'em. And the Barbarians on the other hand met him, with their
King Rausimodus; and first the Sauromatae attaqued a Town, which had a
sufficient Garrison in it, but the Wall of it was built partly of stone (from
the ground upward) and partly (toward the top) of Wood. Wherefore the
Sauromatae thought they might easily take the Town, if they burnt all the
wooden part of the Wall; and to that end put fire to it, whilst, in the mean
time, they shot at those that stood upon the Walls. But they that were upon the
Walls threw Darts and stones down upon the Barbarians and killed 'em; so that
when Constantinus came, and fell upon 'em from an higher ground, he slew many
of 'em, took more alive, and put the rest to flight. Upon which occasion
Rausimodus having lost most part of his Army, took shipping and crossed the
Ister, with an intention once more to plunder the Roman Dominions. Which when
Constantinus heard of, he followed him over the Ister, and set upon 'em in a
thick Wood upon an Hill to which they were fled, where he killed many of 'em,
among whom Rausimodus was one. But he also took many alive, and gave quarter to
the rest that were willing to comply; so that he returned to the Headquarters
with a great number of Captives.

But he distributed them into the several Cities, and then came to
Thessalonica, where having made a Port or Harbor (for there never was one in
that place before) he made new preparations for a War against Licinnius. In
order whereunto he fitted out two hundred Ships or Galleys of War with thirty
Oars apiece, besides above two thousand Ships of burden, raised one hundred
and twenty thousand Foot, and of Horsemen and Seamen ten thousand. Licinnius
hearing that Constantinus was so well prepared, sent Messengers into all
Nations, to command 'em to prepare a sufficient number of men for the Navy,
besides their Horse and Foot. And thereupon the Egyptians immediately sent out
eighty Galleys; the Phaenicians, as many more; and the Jonians and Dorians of
Asia, sixty: the Cyprians, thirty, the Carians, twenty, the Bythinians, thirty,
and the Africans, fifty. And of Foot Soldiers he had near 150000. but of Horse
only 15000. which were sent him out of Phrygia and Cappadocia. Now
Constantine's Ships lay at Piraeeus, and Licinnius's in the Hellespont. And
when they had both thus settled the Affairs of their Sea and their Land Forces,
Licinnius was encamped at Adrianople in Thrace; whilst Constantinus sent for
his Navy from Piraeeus, which was built and manned, for the most part, out of
Greece. And marching with his Foot Army from Thessalonica, he encamped upon the
bank of the River Hebrus, which runs by Adrianople on the left hand. And at the
same time Licinnius set his men in Battalia from a Mountain which is above the
Town the length of two hundred furlongs, even to that place where another River
joins with the Hebrus, and so the Armies continued one against another for many
days. But Constantinus observing where the River was narrowest, he found out
this contrivance. He ordered his Soldiers to bring Trees from the Mountain, and
tie Ropes about 'em, as if he designed to make a Bridge upon the River, whereby
to get over his Army. With which invention he outwitted his Enemies, and going
up into an Hill, where there were thick Woods, enough to hide any body that was
in 'em, he planted there of foot Bowmen five thousand, and eight hundred Horse.
And having so done, he took twelve Horsemen, and with them marching over the
Hebrus in the narrow place, where it is most fordable, he surprised the Enemy;
insomuch that some were killed and many fled as fast as they could, whilst
others who were amazed at his unexpected approach, stood gaping with Wonder,
how he should come so suddenly over. But in the mean time whilst the Horse, and
the rest of the Army passed the River for security, there was a great slaughter
among 'em. For there fell near thirty four thousand men; and about Sunset
Constantine took their Camp, whilst Licinnius with all his Forces that he could
muster up, hastened through Thrace to his Navy.

As soon as it was Day, all Licinnius's Army, or as many of 'em, as had fled
into the Mountain, or the Valleys thereabout, surrendered themselves to
Constantinus, together with those that Licinnius, for haste, had left behind
him. But when Licinnius was got to Bizantium, Constantinus followed him, and
besieged the City, when his Navy was now come from Piraeeus (as I told you) and
lay in Macedonia. Wherefore he sent to his Admirals, and ordered that the Ships
should sail into the Hellespont. And when they came, according to his command,
Constantinus's Sea Officers thought fit to engage with not above eighty of
their best Sailers (which were Galleys of thirty Oars apiece) because the place
was too narrow to receive a greater number. But Abantus, who was Licinnius's
Admiral, set out with two hundred Ships, and despised the smalness of his
Enemies number, whom he thought he could easily surround. But when the Signals
were given on both sides, and they came stem to stem; Constantinus's Seamen did
manage their Ships so as to engage in very good order. But Abantus sailing
without any method against the Enemy, his Ships being in such a straight place
fell foul upon one another, and were exposed in some measure to the Enemy,
partly to be drowned and partly to be otherwise destroyed. In fine, a great
many men were thrown overboard, till night came and put an end to the fight. So
the one Navy put in at Eleus in Thrace, and the other at the Aeantian Harbor.
And the next Day whilst the Wind blew hard at North, Abantus put forth from the
Aeantian Port and made ready for a Sea fight. But because those Galleys of
fifty Oars apiece, which lay in the mouth of the Hellespont, were come to Eleus
by Order of the Admirals, Abantus was affrighted at the number of Ships and
stood debating, whether he should set Sail against the Enemy or no. But about
Noon the North Wind was allayed, and the South Wind blew so violently, that
when Licinnius's Navy lay upon the Asian Coast, it ran some on ground, bilg'd
some against the Rocks, and sunk others, men and all: so that five thousand men
were lost, besides one hundred and thirty Ships full of men, which Licinnius
had sent out of Thrace into Asia with part of his Army, because Bizantium was
too little to contain all those who were besieged with Licinnius. But when
Licinnius was fled into Asia with four Ships and the Sea fight was thus at an
end: as also, that the Ships were come into the Hellespont, and had brought all
sorts of Commodities, and great store of provisions to Constantine's Officers,
they weighed Anchor with the whole Navy, to go and join with those that
besieged Bizantium, and enclose the City even by Sea also. But Licinnius's Foot
were not able to endure so much as the very sight of such a Navy, and therefore
got 'em Ships and sailed away for Eleus.

In the mean time Constantine continued close at the Siege, and made a Mound as
high as the Wall (upon which he planted Wooden Towers, higher than the Wall,
from which his Soldiers shot those who defended the Wall) that he might with
more security bring Rams and other Engines of War near to it, and by that means
he thought sure enough to take the City. At which Licinnius being startled and
not knowing what to think, he resolved to leave Bizantium and the weaker part
of his Army in it, and only take along with him such men as were fit for
service, and had given him demonstrations of their love to him, and so make
what haste he could into Chalcedon in Bithynia. For he believed he might raise
an Army in Asia and try another Engagement with his Enemies. Wherefore arriving
at Chalcedon, and having made Martinianus who was Captain of the Court Guards
(whom the Romans call Magister Officiorum) his Accomplice and Partner in the
dangerous Enterprise, he declared him Caesar and sent him with an Army to
Lampsacus, to hinder the Enemies passage from Thrace into Hellespont, whilst he
himself posted his own men upon the Hills, and Avenues about Chalcedon.

And whilst Licinnius was intent upon these matters, Constantine who had a
great number of Ships for burden as well as War, and had a mind with them to
cross over and possess himself of the other shore, fearing lest the Bithynian
Coast might be inaccessible to Ships of burden especially, he immediatey built
Skiffs and other Boats, and with them he sailed to the holy Promontory, as they
call it, which lies upon the mouth of Pontus, two hundred furlongs from
Chalcedon. And there he landed his Army; which when he had done, he went upon
certain Hills hard by to set 'em in Array. At which time Licinnius, though he
saw that Bithynia was already in the Enemies hands, yet was a man so hardened
by Danger that he sent for Martinianus from Lampsacus, and to encourage his men
to fight, told 'em he himself would lead 'em. And when he had said what he
thought necessary to 'em, he drew 'em into Battalia, and marching out of the
City he met the Enemy who were ready for him. And after a sharp Engagement
between Chalcedon and the Holy Promontory, Constantines side had much the
better on it; for they fell upon the Enemy with such vigor and made such a
slaughter of 'em, that of an hundred and thirty thousand men, scarce thirty
thousand escaped. Which when the Bizantines heard of, immediately they threw
open their Gates to receive Constantinus, as the Chalcedonians also did. But
Licinnius having received this Overthrow went for Nicomedia with what Horse he
had left him, and some few Thousands of Foot.

Just at this time a certain Persian called Hormisdas, of the Royal Family,
came over to Constantine for refuge upon this account. -- His Father had been
King of Persia, and on a time was celebrating his own Birthday after the
Persian way, when Hormisdas came into the Palace and brought with him a great
deal of Venison. But the Guests that were at the Feast not rising up and paying
him the respect and honor due to him, he was very angry and told 'em, he would
punish 'em with Marsyas's Death. Which saying a great many of 'em did not
understand, because it related to a Foreign Story: but only one Persian among
'em, who had lived in Phrygia, and heard the story of Marsyas, explained the
meaning of Hormisdas's Menace to 'em, as they sat at Table. Wherefore they
laid up Hormisdas's Menace in their memories, and when his Father happened to
die, they remembered what he had threatened, and so chose his younger Brother
King, though the elder should have had the preference according to Law above
all the Kings Children: Nor only that; but they shackled Hormisdas and kept him
upon a certain Hill which lies before the City. But when some time had passed,
his Wife contrived his escape in this manner. She got a great Fish, and put a
File into his belly, and then solving him up again delivered it to the most
faithful Eunuch that she had, with a strict charge to tell Hormisdas, he must
eat that Fish when no body was by, and use that which he found in his belly in
order to his escape. And when she had thus contrived it, she sent out several
Camels laden with Wine, and a deal of Provision, to entertain her Husbands
Keepers. And whilst the Keepers were merry at the Feast which she made for 'em;
Hormisdas cut up the Fish and found the File; with which when he had cut off
the shackles that were upon his Legs, he put on the Eunuchs Robe and went away
through the middle of the Keepers, who were by that time Drunk; and taking one
of the Eunuchs along with him he fled to the King of Armenia who was his Friend
and Host. And by this means he got away safe to Constantine, who thought fit to
show him all the respect and kindness imaginable. And so much for that.

But when Constantinus besieged Licinnius at Nicomedia also, he knew not what
to do, because he was sensible he had not an Army fit to fight, and therefore
going out of the City, he submitted himself to Constantine and brought him the
Purple Robe, proclaimed him Emperor and Lord, and asked pardon for what was
past. For he presumed he should certainly escape with life, because
Constantinus had sworn to his Wife that he should. But Constantinus delivered
Martinianus to the Guards for them to kill, and sent Licinnius into
Thessalonica, as if he were to live there in security; but not long after he
broke his Oath (which -- If all be true that others say of Constantine, then
Zosimus has no reason to fix the Crime of Perjury upon him; because he did not
seem so much to break an Oath and Promise, as to punish the breach of it in
Licinnius, who after so many Victories gained by Constantine, when he was in a
desperate low Condition, let slip no occasion to recover that Empire which he
was deprived of by the just sentence of Victory, but contrived all ways he
could to make ill returns for Euergetes kindness, as Eusebius. says in his life of
Constantine, l. 1. c. 43. and Theodor. l. 1. c. 7. To which you may add this
also, that Licinnius hated Christians, as much as Constantine loved 'em, and
consequently could not endure to see them exposed to injuries whom he favored.
Nor let any one Object, that these Authors are not to be credited, because they
were partial; because Zosimus himself cannot be excused in that Point, as being
a sworn Enemy to Christianity, and a great bigot in the Heathenish Religion.
was an usual thing with Constantine) and caused him to be hanged.

But when the whole Empire was solely in Constantine's hands, he no longer
concealed his ill Nature, and vicious inclinations, but did what he pleased
without control. But he used indeed his former Country way of Worship, though
not Among the Imperial Laws or Edicts this is one which Eusebius. mentions, l. 10.
c. 5. -- That every one may apply himself to what way of Worship he thinks
suitable to his own reason. -- And therefore though he did not abolish the old
Heathen Ceremonies of his Country at that time, yet he favored the Christians
most, and gave 'em their liberty which almost all other Emperors before him had
used to deprive 'em of.
out of honor or veneration so much as necessity. And therefore he believed
the Soothsayers, who were expert in their Art, as men that had told him truth
concerning all the great Actions that ever he did. But when he came to Rome, he
was full of Pride and Arrogance, but thought fit to begin his impious pranks
first at home. For he killed his Son Crispus, styled (as I told you) Caesar,
upon suspicion that he lay with his Mother-in law Fausta, without any
consideration of natural Duty. And when his Mother Helena expressed much sorrow
for what he had done, lamenting most bitterly the young man's Death,
Constantinus, under pretense of comforting her, made the Remedy worse than the
Disease. For having caused a Bath to be heated more than ordinary, and shut
Fausta up in it, he in a while after took her out dead. Of which being
conscious to himself, as also of breaking his Oath, he went to the Priests to
be purged from his Crimes. But they told him there was no manner of Lustration
or Purgation that was sufficient to clear him from such enormities; and then a
Spaniard, called Aegyptius, who was there at Rome, very familiar with the Court
Ladies, coming to discourse with Constantine, assured him, that the Christian
Doctrine would teach him how to cleanse himself from all his offenses; and
would promise him, that all wicked men who received it, were immediately
absolved from all their sins. Which Constantine had no sooner heard, but he
easily believed what was told him, and leaving his own Country Ceremonies,
received those that Aegyptius offered to him, and for the first instance of his
Impiety he suspected the truth of Divination. For since a great many fortunate
Chances were thereby foretold him, and really came to pass according to the
Prediction, he was afraid, lest that others might be told one thing or other
that should fall out unluckily to him; and for that reason applied himself
toward the abolishing of all such things. And upon an usual Feast Day when the
Army was to go up into the Capitol, he reproached that Solemnity of their going
up very impudently; and treading the holy Ceremonies, as it were, under his
feet, incurred the hatred of the Senate and People.

But being unable to endure the Curses of almost all the City, he looked out
for another City as big as Rome, where he might build himself a Palace; and
therefore when he was between Troas and old Ilium, he found a place convenient
to build a City in, where he laid a foundation, and made some part of a Wall to
a pretty height, which is to be seen to this Day by those that sail toward the
Hellespont. But afterward thinking better of it, he left that Work unfinished
and went to Byzantium; where he admired the situation of the place, and
therefore resolved when he had enlarged it exceedingly, to make it a fit Seat
for an Emperor to live in. For the City lies upon a rising ground, which is
part of that Isthmus, which Ceras and Propontas, two arms of the Sea on each
side enclose. And it formerly had a Gate just at the end of the Porticos which
Severus the Emperor built after he was reconciled to the Byzantines, who had
provoked his anger by admitting his Enemy Niger into their City. At which time
also the Wall went down from the West side of the Hill as far as Venus's
Temple, even to the Sea side, which is opposite to Chrysopolis. And so, on the
North side of the Hill it went down after the same manner to the Port, which
they call the Dock, and farther even to the Seaside, which lies directly
against the passage that carries you into the Euxine Sea. And this narrow neck
of Land between that and Pontus is near three hundred furlongs in length. And
this was the bigness of the old City. But Constantinus built a round
Marketplace where the old Gate was, and encompassed it with double-roofed
Porticoes, making two great Arches of Praeconesian Marble one against another,
through which there was a passage into Severus's Porticoes, and out of the old
City. But having a mind to make the City a great deal larger, he made a Wall
about it that was fifteen furlongs beyond the old one, and took in all the
Isthmus from Sea to Sea. And when he had made the City in this manner much
larger than before, he built a Palace not much inferior to that of Rome: and
made likewise the Hippodrome (where the Horses ran) very fine: taking the
Temple of Castor and Pollux into it, whose Statues are now to be seen standing
in the Porticoes of the Hippodrome, or Horse Race. Besides which he likewise
placed the Tripos, that belonged to Apollo of Delphi, in one part of the
Hippodrome, which had on it the Image of Apollo himself. And because there was
a very great Marketplace at Bizantium consisting of four Porticoes, at the end
of one of them, to which there are a great many steps going up, he built two
Temples, and in the one of 'em he put the Statue of the Mother of the Gods,
called Rhea, which Jason's Mates had formerly set up in Mount Dindymus, which
lies about the City of Cyzicum. But they say, that through his neglect of
Religion he had impaired it, by taking away the Lions on both sides, and
changing the figure of the Hands. For whereas it formerly seemed to have a Lion
in each hand, it was now altered into a praying posture, looking upon the City
and observing as it were, what men did: In the other Temple he set up the
Statue of Romes Fortune. And after that he built convenient Houses for certain
Senators that followed him from Rome. But he engaged in no more War, insomuch
that when the Thaifalians, which are a Scythian Nation, came upon him with five
hundred Horse, he did not only not lead forth his Army against 'em, but when
he had lost the greater part of his Soldiers, and saw the Enemies plunder all
before 'em even to their Trenches, he was glad to save himself by flight.

But when he was delivered from the distractions of War he gave himself to
voluptuousness, but distributed a Dole of Corn among the people of Bizantium,
which is continued even to this Day. And as he laid out the public Treasure
upon unnecessary and unprofitable Structures, so he built some, that in a short
time were pulled down again, because they were erected in haste and
consequently not like to last long. He also made a great bustle and changed the
ancient Magistracy. For whereas before that time there had been two Prefects of
the Court, whose power was equal, not only the Court-Soldiers were under their
care and conduct, but those also who had the charge of the City with them that
lay in the outparts. For he that had the Office of Court-Prefect, which was
esteemed the greatest place of Honor next being Emperor; gave out the Doles of
Corn, and corrected all Offenses in point of military Discipline with what
convenient Penalties he thought good.

But Constantine altered that good Constitution, and out of one Office, or
Magistracy he made four of it. For to one of those Prefects he committed all
Egypt and Pentapolis in Libya, besides all the East as far as Mesopotamia, with
Cilicia, Cappadocia, Armenia, and all the Seacoast from Pamphilia to Trapezus
and the Castles near Phasis: and to the same person was given all Thrace and
Mysia which reaches as far as Hemus, Rodope, and the Town of Doberus. He
likewise added Cyprus, and the Cyclades (Islands) only Lemnos, and Imbrus, and
Samothrace were excepted. -- To another he gave Macedonia, Thessaly, Crete and
Greece with the Islands thereabout, both Epiruses, the Illyrians, the Dacians,
the Triballi and the Pannonians as far as Valeria, besides the upper Mysia. --
To the third Prefect he gave all Italy, and Sicily with the adjacent Isles,
besides Sardinia and Corsica together with all Africa from the Syrtes or
Quicksands as far as Cyrene. To the fourth he committed the Celtae, who lived
beyond the Alps, as also the Spaniards and the British Island which is England.
And Zosimus throws the envy of that insensible decay by which the Roman Empire
fell to ruin upon Constantine; but indeed he ought to have been more cautious
in what he said; if he would but have considered with himself how apt men are,
who have gained the greatest place next to their Sovereign, to endeavor all
they can to engage the Soldiers affections, and out of hopes to be Emperors
themselves to put all things out of order. And indeed where the care of both
the Military Discipline, and distributing the public money is committed to one
single person, it is odds, but he one time or other takes an occasion to possess
himself of the Empire, because he has every thing in his power that the fear of
punishment or hopes of reward will induce the Soldiers to do. Wherefore
Constantine fortified himself with that political saying, Divide and Rule.
having thus divided the Power of those Prefects, he studied other ways also to
lessen their Authority. For whereas there used to be in all places Centurions,
Tribunes, and Generals, he made certain Officers called Magistri Militum, one
over the Horse, and another over the Foot, to whom he gave Authority to
Discipline the Soldiers, and punish those that offended, whereby the power of
the Prefects was in some measure diminished. Now that this was a great damage
to the public Affairs both in Peace and War, I Will prove immediately. For
whilst the Prefects gathered the Tributes in all places by their Ministers and
laid them out in Warlike expenses, having the Soldiers also in subjection, who
suffered for offenses according to their discretion, it is very probable the
Soldiers who considered that the same person who gave 'em their pay, inflicted
their punishment too whenever they offended, durst not do contrary to their
Duty, out of fear, partly, lest their allowance should be taken off, and partly
of present correction. But now since one is Paymaster, and another to look
after the Discipline, they do what they please; not to say, that the greatest
part of the Corn or other provisions goes into the General's or his Servants
Pockets.

But besides this Constantine did another thing too, that gave the Barbarians a
free passage into the Roman Dominions. For whereas the Roman Empire, by the
care of Diocletian was fortified (as I told you) in the most remote parts of it
with Towns and Castles and Forts, where the Soldiers lived, and consequently it
was impossible for the Barbarians to pass, because there was always a
sufficient number of Enemies to withstand 'em; Constantine destroyed that
Security, by removing the greater part of the Soldiers out of those Frontier
Places, and putting them in Towns that wanted no assistance. For he stripped
them whom the Barbarians oppressed of all defense, and plagued the Towns that
were quiet with a multitude of Soldiers, insomuch that some were quite forsaken
of their Inhabitants. He likewise caused his Soldiers to grow effeminate by
giving themselves to public Shows and Pleasures. And to tell you plainly, he
was the first cause, why things were brought into that miserable state they now
are in.

But I must not omit to tell you, that when he had given his Son Constantinus,
as likewise his other two Sons, Constantius and Constans the Title of Caesar's,
he increased the City of Constantinople to such a vast bigness, that many of
the Emperors that have come after him, and lived in it, have drawn more men
thither than are necessary, who flock to it from all parts, either as Soldiers,
or Merchants, or something else. Upon which account they have made the Walls
about it more capacious than those that Constantine built, and have permitted
the buildings to be so contiguous, that the Inhabitants whether at home or in
the streets are streighten'd for room, and walk in danger by reason of the
multitude of men and beasts. Besides, a great deal of the Sea is turned into
dry Land, where Piles are driven into the ground, and Houses built upon 'em,
enough to make a good big City of themselves.

And truly I have often wondered, since the City of Byzantium is grown so
great, that no other can compare with it either in happiness or bigness, why
our Fathers had no prophecy concerning its good Fortune. And having employed
my thoughts a long time about it, turned over a great many Historians and
collections of Oracles, and spent some time in the explanation of them. I at
last with much ado light upon an Oracle, which is attributed to Sibylla
Erythraea, or Phaello of Epirus (for they say that she being inspired gave out
some Oracles, upon which Nicomedes, the Son of Prusias relying and interpreting
to his own advantage, he by the advice of Attalus, made War against his Father
Prusias) and it is this:

Thou among Sheep; Oh! King of Thrace, shall dwell,
But breed a savage Lion, fierce and fell,
Who all the product of thy Land shall spoil,
And reap thy fruitful harvest without toil.
But thou shall not enjoy thy Honor long,
Torn by wild Dogs, which shall about thee throng.
Then a mad, hungry, sleeping Wolf shall thou
Awake, to whom thy conquered neck shall bow.
Next a whole herd of Wolves Bythinias Land
Shall vex by Joves permission, and that hand
To whom the Byzantines Obedience yield
Shall in short time her royal Scepter weild.
Blessed Hellespont! whose buildings by the hand
Of Heaven were raised, and by their order stand.
Yet shall that cruel Wolf my forces fear,
For all Wights know me, who inhabit here.
My Sires mind I no longer will reveal
But Heavens intent in Oracles reveal.
Thrace shall e're long a monstrous birth produce,
Baneful to all by tract of time and use:
And a swollen Ulcer by the Sea shall grow,
Which when it breaks, with putrid gore shall flow.
Now this same Oracle does, though obscurely, point out (I had almost said) all
the particular mischiefs which were to befall Bythinia through the heavy
Impositions that were laid upon 'em: as also how the Government was to be
devolved upon them to whom the Byzantines were then in subjection, in that
Distich -- and the Hand
To whom the Byzantines Obedience yield
Shall in short time her Royal Scepter weild.
And though the things foretold did not fall out till many Ages after; let not
any man for all that suppose that it was spoken of any other place. For all
time is short in respect of God, who always is and always will be. And this is
my conjecture both from the words of the Prophecy, and the event also. But if
any one believes there is any other meaning in it, let him enjoy his own
thoughts.

When Constantine had done thus, he not only perpetually wasted the Revenue of
the Empire in unnecessary Expenses, and Presents, which were bestowed upon
unworthy and vile Persons: but he likewise oppressed those that paid the
Tribute, and enriched those that were of no use or service in the Government.
For We must confess that Constantine was extravagant in his Expenses; from
whence arose that Jeer of Julian in his Book called Caesares, where he brings
in Constantine as if he were asked by Mercury -- And what do you think is a
commendable thing? That a Man, says Constantine, who has a great deal should
give a great deal away.
he mistook Prodigality for Magnificence.

He also laid a Tax of Gold and Silver upon all Merchants, and Tradesmen even
to the meanest of all: See Evagrius l. 3. Hist. Eccl. c. 39. where he mightily
commends Anastasius, in whose Reign this Tax was taken off. But he inveighs
against Zosimus, for saying that Constantine was the Author of it, in these
words: -- Who would wonder that this should be done in the very infancy of
Christianity, when his Holiness the Pope suffers the very same things even now
it is grown to riper years?
nor did he spare so much as the poorest Whore. Insomuch that upon the return
of every fourth year, when the Tax was to be paid, a man could hear nothing but
lamentation and complaints through all the whole City. And when the time came,
there was nothing but Whips and Torments provided for them who by reason of
their extreme poverty could not pay the money. Nay, Mothers were fain to part
with their Children, and Fathers to prostitute their Daughters, for money to
satisfy the Collectors of this Gold and Silver exaction. And because he had a
mind to invent some plague for the richer sort of People, he called 'em all
forth and made 'em Praetors, for which Dignity he demanded of 'em a vast sum of
money. For which reason, when they whose business it was to manage this Affair
came into any of the Cities, you might see the People run all away into other
Countries, for fear of gaining that honor with the loss of all they had. Now
he had a Particular of all the best Estates, and so imposed a Tribute upon each
one of 'em, which he called, a Purse. And with such Exactions he exhausted all
the Towns: for they endured so long even after Constantine's time, that the
Money was all drained clear out of the Cities and many of 'em forsaken by the
Inhabitants.

When Constantine had oppressed and plagued the Government all these several
ways, he died of a Distemper, and his Sons succeeded him who were three of 'em
(not begotten of Fausta the Daughter of Herculius Maximianus, but of another
Woman, whom he had put to Death for Adultery) but they devoted themselves to
the pleasures of Youth more than to public Service. For in the first place
they divide the Nations among 'em, of which Constantine the eldest and Constans
the youngest had all beyond the Alps together with Italy and Illyricum, for
their share: as also all the Countries upon the Euxine Sea, and whatever
belonged to Carthage in Africa: whereas Constantius had all Asia, the East and
Egypt. But there were also others that were a kind of Partners in the
Government, as Dalmatius, whom Constantine made Caesar, Constantius his Brother
and Anaballianus, who all wore a Purple Robe with golden Guards, and were
promoted to the Order of Nobilissimate (as they call it) or Nobility by
Constantine himself, out of respect to their being of his Family.

But when the Empire was thus divided, Constantius who seemed to take pains not
to fall short of his Fathers impiety, began at home to prove himself a Man by
spilling the blood of his nearest Relations. And first he caused Constantius
his Fathers Brother to be murdered by the Soldiers: next to whom he served
Dalmatius Caesar in the same kind; as also Optatus, whom Constantine had raised
to the honor of being a Patrician. For Constantine indeed first introduced
that Order of Men and made a Law, that whoever was a Patrician should sit above
the very Prefects of the Court. At that time also was Ablabius the
Court-Prefect put to death; and fate was just in his punishment, because he
contrived how to murder Sopatrus the Philosopher, out of envy that he was so
familiar with Constantine. But as he was unnatural to all his Relations, so
likewise he put Anaballianus among the rest, suborning the Soldiers to cry out,
that they would have no other Governors but Constantine's Children only. And
these were Constantius's exploits.

In the mean time Constantine and Constans had a dispute concerning that part
of Africa that belonged to Carthage, and Italy. And Constans who had a mind to
surprise his Brother, concealed his ill will for three years together, till on
a certain time when he was got into a Province that loved him, he sent Soldiers
to him, upon pretense to assist him in the War against the Persians, but in
reality to assassinate him before he was aware: which accordingly they did, and
so killed Constantine.

When Constans had thus removed his Brother out of his way, he exercised all
manner of cruelty toward his Subjects, exceeding the most intolerable Tyranny.
For he bought some well-favour'd Barbarians, and had others with him as
Hostages, to whom he gave the liberty to do what they pleased to his Subjects,
in order to gratify his lewd Eyes; and thereby brought all the Nations that
were under him into extreme misery. At which the Court-Guards were troubled,
and seeing him much given to Hunting, they put themselves under the conduct of
Marcellinus Prefect of the Treasury, and Magnentius who commanded the Joviani
and Herculiani (two Legions so called) and laid a Plot for him in this manner.
Marcellinus gave out he would keep his Sons Birthday, and therefore invited a
great many of the Superior Officers of the Army to the Feast, and among the
rest Magnentius. And when it was midnight (for so long the Banquet lasted)
Magnentius rose from Table as if he had been going about some necessary Affair,
and was not gone long before he came again, as it had been in a Play, clothed
in a Royal Robe and stood before 'em. Whereupon all the Guests there saluted
him by the name of King, and all the Inhabitants of Augustodunum (for there it
was that this was done) were of the same Opinion. But when the report of it was
gone abroad, the Country people also flocked into the City: Whilst at the same
time a party of Illyrian Horse that came to supply the Celtick Legions, were
joined with those that were concerned in this Enterprise. And to speak plainly,
when the Officers of the Army came together, and heard the Heads of the
Conspiracy cry out first, they scarce knew what the meaning was, but however
they all set up their Throats and saluted Magnentius by the name of Augustus.
Which when Constans heard, he endeavored to escape to a certain little Town,
called Helena, that lies near the Pirenaean Mountains. But he was taken by
Gaison who was sent with some other select Men upon that Errand, and being
destitute of all assistance, was killed.

When therefore Magnentius had gotten the Empire, and was Lord of all the
Nations beyond the Alps, besides all Italy, Vetranio, General of the Pannonian
Army, when he heard that Magnentius was promoted to be Emperor, was enflamed
himself with the same desire, and declared Emperor by the Legions that he had
there with him, residing at Mursa, a City of Pannonia. But whilst Affairs stood
thus, the Persians plundered the Eastern Country, in Mesopotamia especially.
But Constantius though he was worsted by the Persians, yet he resolved to
subdue the factions of Magnentius and Vetranio.

But whilst he was considering of these things, and mighty intent upon his
Warlike preparations ( Magnentius being yet in Gallia Celtica) Nepotianus,
Constantius's Nephew by his Sister, whose name was Eutropia, mustered up a
Company of mad Fellows, addicted to Robbery and all kind of debauchery, with
whom he came to Rome, and appeared in an Imperial Garb: But Anicetius, whom
Magnentius had made Prefect of the Court, armed some of the common people, and
drew 'em out of the City, as if he designed they should engage with Nepotianus,
and a sharp Conflict indeed they had. But the Romans, who were undisciplined
and observed no Order, were easily routed: and when the Prefect saw 'em fly, he
shut the Gates, for fear the Enemy should pursue 'em into the City: so that
Nepotianus's men followed 'em, and because they had no way to escape, killed
'em every man. But in a few days after Magnentius sent out an Army under the
Command of Marcellinus, who was Commander of the Court-forces (whom they call,
Magister Officiorum) and killed Nepotianus.

In the mean time Constantius came out of the East against Magnentius, but
thought fit first to oblige Vetranio some way or other, because he knew it
inconvenient to have to do with two Traitors at a time. And on the other side
Magnentius did what he could to make Vetranio his friend, and thereby put an
end to the War against Constantius. So they both sent Agents to Vetranio, who
chose to be of Constantius's side rather than that of Magnentius. Whereupon
Magnentius's Ambassadors went away without their Errand, and Constantius
desired that both the Armies might meet, to consult publicly how to manage the
War against Magnentius. To which Proposal Vetranio easily agreed, and they two
seated themselves upon a Throne provided for that purpose. Where Constantius
according to his Dignity, speaking first, took all occasions in his Speech to
'em, to mind the Soldiers of his Fathers Munificence, and of the Oaths which
they had taken to be true to his Children. And then he told 'em, they ought not
to let Magnentius pass unpunished, who was the murderer of Constantine's Son,
with whom they had fought many Battles, and been most generously rewarded for
it. Which when the Soldiers heard, who had been before hand engaged by rich
Presents, they cried out, They would have no mock-Emperors; and thereupon they
presently stripped Vetranio of his Purple and pulled him from the Throne; with
resolutions to make him live a private life. But Constantius would not suffer
'em to do him any harm, and therefore sent him into Bithynia where he gave him
enough to live upon. But he had not lived there long without any employment,
before he died.

Constantius seeing his Design against Vetranio took so good an effect, he went
against Magnentius, but first made Gallus his Uncles Son, who was the Brother
of Julian (that afterward came to be Emperor) Caesar, and gave him his Sister
Constantia in Marriage; either in order to his opposing the Persians, or (which
was the truth of it) to get an opportunity of taking him off. For he and his
Brothers were the only persons left of Constantius's Family, who had killed
all the rest, as I have told you. When therefore he had clothed him in a
Cesarian Robe, and made Lucillianus General for the Persian War, he marched
toward Magnentius with his own and Vetranio's Soldiers all in one body. And
Magnentius on the contrary, who thought fit to meet him with more Forces,
declared his kinsman Decentius (who was to govern the Nations beyond the Alps)
Caesar. But when the Armies met in Pannonia, and came very near one another at a
Town called Mursa, Magnentius planted an Ambuscade in the avenues near Adrana
and sent a Messenger to Constantius's Officers to retard their motion, that
they might march into Siscia, because he intended to fight thereabout, where
the fields were open and spacious. Which when Constantius heard he was very
glad of it, that he was to fight in a place where there was room enough for the
Horse, of which he had more than the Enemy, and so led his Army toward Siscia.
But as they went along, unarmed and out of order (not thinking what would
happen) the Troops who lay in Ambush fell upon 'em and stopped their passage
with stones which they threw upon 'em in such vast quantities as that they
killed most part of 'em.

And now seeing many of his Enemies slain, Magnentius was so proud of this
Exploit, that he mustered up his Forces, and would not suffer the War to be
delayed any longer, but marched immediately into Pannonia. And when he came to
the Plains before (that which was formerly) Cius, (through the middle of which
the River Draus runs, and passing by Noricum and Pannonia discharges it self
into the Ister) he led his men into Pannonia, intending to engage near Sirmium.
But they say his Mother forbad him to go that way, or over into Illyricum,
though he would not observe her directions, notwithstanding that he knew she
had proved a true Prophetess to him upon many former occasions. In the mean
while Magnentius deliberated whether he should cross the Saus by a Bridge of his
own making, or join his Boats together and so pass over: and at the same time
Constantius sent Philip, who was one of the greatest Men about him, as likewise
a Person of extraordinary prudence, with a pretense of treating concerning
Peace and an Alliance, but in reality, to observe the state of Magnentius's
Army, and how they stood affected to fighting, or which way they were like to
move. Who, when he came near to the Camp, met Marcellinus, who was Magnentius's
greatest Favorite, and went along with him to Magnentius. Where after the Army
was drawn up, Philip was desired to tell the reason of his coming. Nor had he
sooner received the Order, than applying himself to the Soldiers, he told 'em,
it was not fit for them who were Roman Subjects to wage War against Romans,
especially when Constantine's Son was Emperor, with whom they had erected many
Trophies against the Barbarians. And as for Magnentius, he ought to remember
Constantine, with all the kindness he had shown to him and his Parents. For it
was Constantine that entertained him and promoted him to the greatest
Dignities, when he was in imminent danger. And having so said, he desired that
Magnentius would depart out of Italy, and be content to govern all the Nations
beyond the Alps.

This Speech of Philip had like to have made a mutiny through the whole Army:
and therefore Magnentius, who was in a fright and had much ado to get the
Soldiers to hear him speak, told 'em he would willingly conclude a Peace too;
but said, he would dismiss the Assembly for that present time, till he had
considered what to do, and would tell 'em his Opinion the next day. Whereupon
the Assembly being dissolved, Marcellinus entertained Philip, like one that he
had a mind to be obliged to by the Laws of Hospitality; Whilst in the mean time
Magnentius debated with himself, whether he should send Philip away without the
intended effect of his coming, or keep him there, contrary to the Law of
Embassies. And as he was in dispute about it, he thought fit to invite all the
Officers of his Army to sup with him, and tell 'em his Opinion at Table. Which
when he had done and that it was Daylight, he called the Army together once
more, and put 'em in mind, what Constans had done against 'em when he was drunk
and mad: and that the Soldiers could not endure those Enormities, wherewith he
oppressed the Commonwealth against all Law and Justice, but inclined to that
which was most advantageous to the public; and when they had freed the Cities
from such a savage beast, they forced him to be Emperor.

Nor had he made an end of speaking before they all rose up and showed their
readiness for carrying on the War; by arming themselves immediately in order to
pass the Saus. Of whose approach the Sentinels that were upon the Watch in
Siscia (a Town that lies upon the Saus) were aware, and gave notice to the
Garrison; who shot some of 'em as they were landing upon the bank of the River,
and others, that were acoming over, they stopped: so that many of 'em were
slain, but more were trampled into the River, either by one another or by the
Enemy. By which means there was a great slaughter made among 'em; and whilst
the one party fell off the Bridge as they endeavored to escape, the other
pursued with all speed; so that Magnentius, who was reduced to his last shift,
had only this way to avoid the present danger. He stuck a Spear in the ground,
and with his right Hand becken'd to the Enemy as if he had a mind to treat for
a Peace. Which when he saw they listened to, He said he would not pass the Saus
without the Emperor's leave. Which he had no sooner said, but Philip told him,
he must leave Italy and Noricum and go into Illyricum, if he would treat of
Peace. And then Constantius, having heard what they said, commanded his
Soldiers not to pursue 'em any longer, and permitted Magnentius to bring his
men over into the Plains between Noricum, Pannonia, Mysia and Dacia: because he
had a mind to get out of those rough, cumbersom places, and fight where his
Horse might have room enough to show themselves; for he had more than the
Enemy. And his Design took effect; so that he pitched upon Cibalis, which he
thought a convenient place for his business, it being the same place where
Constantine formerly conquered Licinnius. For that Town having the above
situation, which I have told you in my Account of those times, he kept part of
his Army in it. And when he had raised a Bu^wark between the Hill where the
City stands and the Plain where the River Saus runs, he enclosed all that part
of it which is not encompassed by the River, with a deep Ditch and a thick
Mound. And then he made a Bridge of Boats over all that part that was surrounded
by the River, which Bridge he could disjoin when he pleased, and put it together
again with as much ease. And here he set up Tents for his Army, and in the
middle of all a Tent-Royal which was inferior to none of the Towns thereabout
either for bigness or Ornament. But at that time the Emperor invited his
Officers to a Feast, at which all but Latinus and Thalassius were present; but
they were not there, though they were the Emperors greatest favorites, because
they were taking care for Philip, whom Magnentius detein'd, notwithstanding he
was an Ambassador.

But whilst they were consulting about this Affair, Titianus, a person of the
Senatorian Order at Rome, came and brought a saucy Message from Magnentius. For
he used many absurd expressions against Constantine and his Children, and
charging the destruction of the Cities upon the Emperor's negligence; he
commanded Constantius to make way for Magnentius by quitting the Empire, and be
content to have his life saved. But he only desired the Gods and Fate to be
the revengers of Constans's Death, saying that he would fight with their
assistance, and so let Titianus go back again to Magnentius, though Philip were
still in his custody, At which time Magnentius drew out his Army and taking
Siscia upon the first attaque he razed it down to the ground. And when he had
over run all the Country near the Saus and carried away great sp^^^, he
marched toward Sirmium, which he hoped likewise to take without bloodshed. But
failing of his attempt (for he was beaten off by the Inhabitants and Soldiers
that were set to guard the Town) he went with all his Army to Mursa. Where
seeing those that were in the Town had shut the Gates against him, and got upon
the Walls, he could not tell what to do in the case, (because he had no
Engines, nor any other way to get near the Wall.) For he was pelted with stones
and Darts by those that stood and fought from the Battlements. Besides which,
when Constantius heard the Town was besieged, he came with all his Forces to
relieve it, having passed by Cibalis and all that Country through which the
River Draus runs.

In the mean while Magnentius got nearer unto Mursa and set fire on the Gates;
thinking that if he could consume the Iron that covered the Wood (which would
soon yield to the slames) he might make a passage wide enough for his Army to
enter the City. But this did not succeed as he would have had it, because those
men that were upon the Wall put out the fire with Water which they threw down
in a great quantity. When therefore he heard that Constantius was near Mursa,
he found out another stratagem, which was this: There was a certain Stadium or
place of Exercise, before the City (assigned formerly for those that used to
fight Prizes) which was all covered over with Woods: in which he hid four
Companies of Celtae, and bad 'em, that, when Constantius came up, and they were
ready to engage before the City, they should set upon the Enemies at unawares,
so as to encompass and kill 'em every man. But this being discovered by them
that stood upon the Wall, Constantius sent Scolidoas and Manadus two of his
Captains immediately thither. But first they picked out all the choice of their
Soldiers (as well such as wore heavy Armor as Bowmen) out of all those that
they commanded, and taking them along with 'em shut up all the Doors belonging
to the Stadium. And then having possessed themselves of the upper steps going
up to the Stadium, and enclosed the Soldiers that were in it on every side,
they threw Darts at 'em. And seeing some of 'em put their Shields over their
heads whilst they endeavored to break open the Doors, they fell upon them too,
nor did they cease to throw Darts or cut 'em with their Swords till they had
killed 'em every one. And thus Magnentius's project being frustrated, and
falling out contrary to expectation, the Armies met and fell to it in the Plain
before Mursa; where there was such a Battle fought as was not known before in
the whole course of this War, and many fell on both sides.

But Constantius considering that, this being a Civil War, even Victory it self
would scarce be pleasant to him, now that the Romans were so much weakened, and
not able to withstand the Barbarians (that attaqued 'em on every side) after so
great a slaughter, he began to think that this War might be ended by some
Proposals of a Peace. And whilst he was ruminating upon it, the Armies were
still engaged; among whom the Magnentian party grew more furious than ever; nor
would they give over fighting though Night came upon 'em, but even their
Captains continued doing all that became common Soldiers, and encouraging the
Soldiers to stand up stoutly against the Enemy. And so on the other side,
Constantius's Captains called to mind the ancient courage and glory of the
Romans. And so they fought on till it was dark Night; nor did they give over
for all that, but wounded each other with Spears, Swords, or any thing else
that came to their hands: insomuch that neither the darkness, nor any thing
else, that uses to cause some respit in War, could make them cease to kill each
other, but they thought it the greatest happiness that could befall 'em to
perish by one another sides. And of the Captains, who showed themselves very
stout and brave in this Battle, there fell among the rest Arcadius Captain of
the Legion called Abulci, and Menelaus who commanded the Horse Bowmen of
Armenia.

Now it is worth ones while to tell you what they say of this Menelaus; and
it is thus: They say that he would have taken three Darts at one time, and at
one shot have hit not only one but three men's bodies. By which way of shooting
he killed a great many of the Enemies, and was himself almost the cause of
their flight. But he was killed by Romulus who was Generalissimo of all
Magnentius's Army; and Romulus also himself fell at the same time: Who though
he were wounded by a Dart that Menelaus shot at him, yet he did not give over
fighting after he had received the Wound, till he had killed the man that gave
it him.

And now that Constantius had the better on it, by reason that Magnentius's Army
ran away, there was a great slaughter of Men, Horses, and other Cattle.
Wherefore Magnentius who was destitute of all hopes, and feared lest the
remaining part of his Army should deliver him to Constantius thought best to
leave Pannonia, resolving to make an excursion into Italy, and there raise men
to try his fortune once more. But when he heard that those of Rome were all of
Constantius's side, either out of hatred to him, or because they had heard what
had happened in the fight, and concluded to go over the Alps, and seek some
sanctuary for himself among those Nations, that live thereabouts. But hearing
that Constantius had obliged the Barbarians about the Rhine to be his Enemies,
by great Presents that he had made to 'em, as likewise that there was no going
into France, by reason that some Officers had stopped his passage that way to
gratify Constantius, (nor could he go through Spain into the Moors Country,
because of those Roman Allies there who studied to oblige Constantius) he was
in such a confusion, that he preferred a voluntary death before a dishonorable
life, and chose rather to die by his own than his Enemies hand.

And thus died Magnentius when he had been Emperor three years and six months.
He was of Barbarian extract, but lived among the Leti, a people of Gallia. He
understood Latin; was bold when Fortune favored him, but cowardly in
Adversity; ingenious in hiding his naturally ill inclination, and thought, by
those that did not know him, to be a plain-hearted, good Man. And thus much I
thought fit to say of Magnentius, because some have been of Opinion that he did
a great deal of good in his time, that the World may know the truth of him, who
never did any thing with a good intention in all his life.

But Decentius, whom Magnentius sent for to assist him, being now upon the Road
to Italy, as soon as he heard what had befallen him, and lighting upon certain
Legions and Troops, from whom he saw no hopes to escape, he hanged himself.

After these things, when the whole Empire was now in Constantius's hands, he
began to be more arrogant than formerly, and could not behave himself with any
moderation in his prosperity. And then the Offices for Calumny that use to be
about such men, and are designed for the ruin of those that are in prosperity,
were augmented. For Sycophants when they go about to pull a great Man down, in
hopes to share in his Estate, or Honor, they study some false Accusation
against him. And this was the case in Constantius's time. For such kind of
Rogues who had made the Eunuchs about Court their Accomplices in the cursed
Affair, flocking about Constantius, persuaded him, that Gallus who was his
Cousin-German, and a Caesar, was not content with that Honor, would needs be
Emperor. And indeed they persuaded him that it was true so far that they made
him resolve upon Gallus's destruction. Now those that laid this Design were
Dynamius and Picentius, men of mean condition, that endeavored to raise
themselves by such ill Actions. Lampadius also was in the Conspiracy, who was
Prefect of the Court, and a Person that desired always to be more in the
Emperors favor than any body else. Since therefore Constantius gave ear to
such false Informations, Gallus was sent for, but knew nothing of that which
was intended against him. And as soon as he came Constantius in the first place
degraded him from the Dignity of being a Caesar, and when he had made him a
private person, delivered him to the public Executioners to be put to death:
which was not the first time Constantius had stained his hands in the blood of
his kindred, but only an addition to many former instances.

A New HISTORY Written by Count ZOSIMVS, Sometime Advocate of the Treasury. The
Third Book.
WHEN Constantius had done what I have told you against Gallus Caesar, he went
out of Pannonia into Italy. But seeing all the Roman Territories infested by
the incursions of the Barbarians; and that the Franks, Alemans and Saxons had
not only gotten possession of forty Cities near the Rhine, but also destroyed,
and ruined 'em, by carrying away an innumerable company of the Inhabitants, and
a proportionable quantity of Spoils; as likewise, that the Quadi and Sarmatians
without any obstruction over ran Pannonia and the upper Mysia; besides that the
Persians were perpetually vexatious to the Eastern Countries, though they had
formerly been quiet out of fear, lest Callus Caesar should have set upon 'em:
considering (I say) those things, and doubting what to do, he scarce thought
himself able alone to manage Affairs in this critical juncture, and yet he was
afraid to take a Partner in the Government, because he so much affected to
rule alone, and thought no man could be his Friend. And indeed in these
circumstances he was at a great loss: but it so fell out, that when the Roman
Empire was in the greatest danger, Eusebia, Constantius's Wife, who was an
extraordinary learned Woman, and had more Wisdom than is usually found in her
Sex, advised him to make Julianus Caesar (who was Brother to Gallus, Grandson to
Constantius and made a Caesar by Diocletian) Governor of the Nations which lie
beyond the Alps. And because Eusebia knew that the Emperor Constantius
suspected all his kindred, she circumvented him in this manner: He, said she
(meaning Julian) is a young Man, that understands no Tricks of State, but has
devoted himself to his Book all his lifetime, being altogether unexperienced
in Worldly affairs; upon which account he will be the more fit for our purpose
than any other Person; for either he will have good luck, and so all his
success will be ascribed to the Emperors Conduct, or he will miscarry and die
for it; after whom Constantius will have no body of the Imperial Race to
succeed him.

When Constantius had patiently heard what she said, he presently sent for
Julianus from Athens, where he lived among the Philosophers, and excelled all
his Masters in every sort of Learning. Who when he accordingly came out of
Greece into Italy, Constantius declared him Caesar, gave him his Sister Helen in
Marriage, and sent him into the Nations beyond the Alps. But being naturally
diffident, he could not believe that Julian would be true and faithful to him,
and therefore he sent Marcellus and Salustius along with him, to whom, and not
to Caesar, he committed the whole administration of that Government.

And now Constantius having thus disposed of Julian, he marched himself into
Pannonia and Mysia, where when he had suppressed the Quadi and the Sarmatians,
he went into the East, and was provoked to Battle by the inrodes of the
Persians. By which time Julian was gotten over the Alps into the Gallick
Nations that he was to Rule; upon whom seeing the Barbarians committed as much
violence as ever, Eusebia, for the same reasons as before, persuaded
Constantius to put the sole management of those parts into his hands. Now of
Julian's actions from that time through the whole course of his life, you may
read at large in the Historians and Poets; though never an one of 'em that have
written of him, has wrote the height of his Character. But he that has a mind
may see his own Orations and Epistles, and in them take a prospect of all that
he did through the whole World. And indeed I would give you a full account of
him, but that I ought not to interrupt the Order of my History. However I shall
take notice of each particular relating to him in its due place; especially of
such things as others have seemed to omit. -- When therefore Constantius had
given Caesar power to do what he thought fit in those Nations that were under
his Command, he marched into the East, to make War against the Persians. But
Julian finding the Militia of Gallia Celtica in a manner quite ruined, and that
the Barbarians passed the Rhine without any resistance even almost as far as
the Seaport Towns, he took a view of the remaining part of the Army. And
understanding that the men of those parts were frighted at the very name of
Barbarians, whilst those whom Constantius had sent along with him (who were not
above three hundred and sixty in number) knew nothing more (as he used to say)
than how to say their Prayers, he listed as many more as he could and took in
abundance of Volunteers. He also took care for Arms, and found a parcel of old
ones in a certain Town, which he fitted up with all convenient speed and
distributed among the Soldiers. But when the Scouts brought him word that an
infinite number of Barbarians had crossed the River near the City of
Argentoratum (Strasburgh) that stands upon the Rhine, he no sooner heard of it,
than he went forth with his Army in all haste, and engaging with the Enemy
gained such a Victory as is above all expression; for there were sixty thousand
men killed upon the spot, besides as many more that were tumbled into the River
and drowned. So that if a man compares this Battle with that of Alexander
against Darius, he will find this Victory to be no way inferior to that.

But we ought not silently to pass over that which Caesar did after he had
gotten the Victory, which was thus. He had (you must know) a Regiment of six
hundred Horse, that were well disciplined men; to whose strength and experience
he so far trusted, that he ventured a great part of his hopes upon their
performances. And indeed when the fight first began, the whole Army fell upon
the Enemy with all the briskness they could show: but some time after though
the Roman Army had much the better on it, these were the only men that ran
away, and left their station so dishonourably, that when Caesar rode up to 'em
with a small Party and called 'em back to share in the Victory, he could not
prevail with 'em by any means. Upon which account Caesar was very angry with
them, that they (as much as in them lay) had betrayed their Countrymen to the
Barbarians. But yet he did not inflict upon them the legal and usual
punishment. For he put 'em in Women's Cloths, and led 'em through the Camp
toward another Province, because he thought such a Penalty would be worse than
Death to Soldiers that were Men. And truly this happened to prove very good
both for him and them: for in the second War against the Germans, they
remembered the ignominy, that was formerly laid upon them, and were almost the
only men, who behaved themselves bravely in that Action.

When Caesar had done thus, he raised a great Army by degrees, to make War upon
the whole German Nation. But the Barbarians opposed him in very vast numbers,
and therefore Caesar would not stay till they came up to him, but crossed the
Rhine; as judging it more advantageous that the Barbarians Country should be
the Seat of War rather than that of the Romans; for thereby the Cities would
escape being pillaged by the Barbarians any more. So therefore to it they fell,
and very briskly too, insomuch that an infinite number of Barbarians were slain
in the Battle; whilst others fled, whom Caesar pursued into the Hercynian Woods,
and killed a great many of 'em, but took Vadomarius, the Barbarian Generals
Son, alive, and brought his Army home, singing triumphant Songs, and Praises to
Caesar for his Exploits in the atchieving of those Victories. But Julian sent
Vadomarius unto Constantius, believing that he owed the success of that Victory
to his good Fortune.

In the mean time the Barbarians, who were in very dangerous circumstances,
fearing, upon the account of their Wives and Children, lest Caesar should go
into those places where they lived, and quite destroy their whole Generation,
they sent Ambassadors to treat of an Accommodation, by which they would be
bound never to fight against the Romans any more. But Caesar told 'em, He would
not treat of Peace upon any terms, unless he first received back the Captives
whom they had formerly taken in the several Towns which they conquered. To
which seeing they consented and promised to deliver up all that were alive;
Caesar, to make sure that no single Captive should remain among the Barbarians,
took this course: He sent for all those that were fled out of each City and
Village, and required 'em to tell him by their Names what Captives the
Barbarians had taken from each of their Cities or Villages. And when they had
severally named the Persons, whom they knew either upon the score of Kindred,
Neighborhood, Friendship, or upon some other account, he ordered the Imperial
Notaries to take a Catalogue of them: which they did so privately that the
Ambassadors knew nothing of it. And then Caesar crossing the Rhine, commanded
them to bring back the Captives: which in a short time they obeyed. But because
they said, that those were all the Captives, Caesar who was seated upon an high
Throne, and had planted the Notaries behind him, he gave Order, that the
Barbarians should produce their Captives, according to their Articles. So when
the Captives came before him one by one and told their names, the Notaries that
stood hard by Caesar, looked into their Papers to see whether they were right.
But afterward comparing those which they had taken down, with those that
appeared before Caesar, and finding that the Inhabitants of the several Cities
and Villages had named many more than were there present, they stood behind
Caesar and told him of it. Whereupon he threatened the Ambassadors to make War
against the Barbarians, for not delivering all the Captives, and by the
suggestion of the Notaries named certain Persons of such and such Towns that
were yet lacking. Which the Barbarians hearing, they presently imagined that
Caesar had all the most abstruse and secret things in Nature revealed to him by
some Divine Intelligence, and therefore they promised to deliver up all that
they found alive, and Bound their Promise with the accustomary Oaths of their
Country.

Which when they had done, and had restored as many Captives as it was probable
might be taken out of forty Cities which they sacked, Caesar was at a loss what
to do, because he saw the Cities quite ruined, and that the Land had been for a
considerable time untilled, which caused a great scarcity of provisions among
those that were delivered up by the Barbarians. For the neighboring Cities
could not supply 'em, because they themselves had been very sensible of the
Barbarian violence, and consequently had no great plenty for their own use. He
therefore, being in a doubt what to resolve on, contrived it thus: The Rhine
discharges it self into the Atlantic Ocean at the utmost limits of Germany,
where some of the Galls live: and from that shore the British Isle lies nine
hundred furlongs distant. For which reason he got Timber out of the Woods that
lie upon the River and built eight hundred Vessels, bigger than Skiffs; which
he sent into Britain for Corn, and invented a way how to carry that Corn up the
Rhine in Boats. And this he did so often (because the Voyage was but short)
that he abundantly supplied them, that were restored to their Cities, so that
they had meat enough, Seed-corn, and what they lacked between that and Harvest.
And these things he did when he was hardly entered into the five and twentieth
year of his Age.

But seeing the Soldiers loved him for his frugality at home and courage in the
Wars, and also for his Command that he had of himself in respect to Riches with
his other Virtues, wherein he excelled, I had almost said, all the men of his
Age, Constantius was full of envy to see Julian do such great things; and
thought that Salustius who was one of those Counselors that were allotted to
him, had been the Author of all that Policy which gained him so much Honor
both in his Warlike and Civil Affairs. Wherefore he sent for Salustius, as if
he would have made him Governor of the Eastern Countries. And Julian as
readily dismissed him, because he was resolved to be obedient unto Constantius
in all points. But though Salustius were now removed, yet all that was
committed to Julian's charge increased every day (as I may say) in a great
measure, and the Soldiers were improved in military experience, as well as
augmented in their numbers, whilst the Towns enjoyed Peace and the fruits of it.

And now almost all the Barbarians thereabouts began to despair, and expected
little less than the utter ruin and destruction of all them that were lest
alive, when at the same time the Saxons (who are the stoutest Barbarians in all
those parts both for courage, strength and hardiness in a Campaign) sent out
the Quadi, who are a part of themselves, into the Roman Dominions. But they
were hindered from passing the River by the Franks (who lived upon their
Confines, and were afraid of giving Caesar a just occasion to make another
inrode upon them) and therefore built themselves a convenient number of Boats,
in which they sailed upon the Rhine beyond the French Territories, and got into
the Roman Empire. And when they arrived at Batavia, which the Rhine by being
divided makes an Island, much bigger than any River-Island besides, they drove
out the Salii, who are a Nation descended from the Franks and turned out of
their own Country into this Island by the Saxons. For this Island though it had
been formerly subject to none but the Romans, yet it was now in possession of
the Salii. Which when Caesar knew, he endeavored to countermine the Quadi; but
first commanded his Army to engage them briskly, but kill never an one of the
Salii or hinder their passage into the Roman Countries, because they did not
come as Enemies, but were forced thither by the Quadi.

As soon as the Salii heard how kind Caesar was to 'em, some of 'em went over
out of the Island with their King into the Roman Confines, and others fled to
the utmost borders of the Country, but all of 'em came and humbly committed
both their lives and fortunes to Cesar's gracious protection.

But Caesar by this time observing that the Barbarians durst not fight with him
any more, they were so intent upon their secret incursions and sly Thieveries
(by which they did a great deal of damage to the Country) he could not tell
what to do, till at the last he invented this Stratagem to baffle the
Barbarians. There was a man, much bigger than any body else, and one that had
courage proportionable to his bulk. Which Person, being by Nation a Barbarian,
and having used to rob with the other Barbarians, thought fit to leave his own
Country and go into Gallia Celtica, which was under the Romans. But whilst he
sojourned sometime at Treves (which is the greatest City in all the Nations
beyond the Alps) and saw the Barbarians beyond the Rhine overrun the Cities
that are situate upon this side of the River, and pillage all places without
control (which was before that Julian was made a Caesar) he was resolving with
himself to defend those Towns. But because he durst not do that for want of Law
to back him in it, he at first went alone into the thickest part of the Woods
and waited till the Barbarians made their incursions, and so in the Nightime
when they were Drunk and asleep, he set upon 'em and cut off as many of their
heads as he was able, which he brought and showed to those that were in the
Town. And this he did continually; insomuch that he rebated the keenness of the
Barbarians, who though they could not tell how it came to pass, yet they were
sensible of a prejudice done to 'em by the Armies decreasing almost every Day.
But after other Robbers had joined with this same Person and of a great many
single Persons had made a considerable Company, then Charietto (for that was
the man's Name; who first found out this way of Ambuscade against the
Barbarians) came to Caesar and told him all the story, which few People knew
before that time. -- And thereupon Caesar who could not easily restrain the
nocturnal and clandestine inrodes of the Barbarians (for they robbed in small
Companies straggling from each other: and when it was Day, you could not see
one man of 'em, because they hid themselves in Woods adjacent to the fields,
and lived upon that which they had gotten by robbing) Caesar therefore (I say)
considering how difficult it was to subdue such an Enemy, was forced to oppose
these Thieves not with an Army of Soldiers only, but Moss-Troopers also.

For this reason he took Charietto and his men along with him, besides a good
many of the Salii which he added to 'em, and sent 'em forth in the Night
against the thievish Quadi, who though they lived at that time upon what they
stole, yet might be less skilled in the Art of Robbing which these men had
studied. And then in the Daytime he kept Guard in the open field, and killed
all that escaped his Robbers. And thus he did for a great while together, till
the Quadi were reduced to such a straight, and so small a number that they and
their General surrendered themselves to Caesar, who had taken a great many
Prisoners in the former excursions and engagements, had got among the rest, the
Kings Son, whom Charietto took. For that was the cause that when they made such
miserable Petitions for Peace, and Caesar demanded some of their Nobility for
Hostages; amongst whom he required the King's Son should be one; the General
[or King] broke out into a most lamentable Complaint and swore, with tears in
in his Eyes, that he had lost his Son too among the rest. Which Caesar seeing,
he had compassion upon his sorrow and showed him his Son who was kept very
nobly: but told him withal, that he would keep the Youth for an Hostage, as
well as others of the Nobility whom he had upon that account; for he
condescended to make Peace with 'em upon Condition that they should never more
lift up their hands against the Romans.

When Caesar had settled things in this manner, he added the Salii, some part of
the Quadi and of them that live in the Isle Batavia, to his Legions, whose
Discipline we seem still to retain. But in the mean time the Emperor
Constantius was in the East disposing only of the Persian Affairs and intent
upon the Wars in those parts. For all the Nations beyond the Alps were in good
order, as being managed by Cesars Conduct: nor were either Italy or Illyricum
in any danger, by reason that the Barbarians who dwelt beyond the Ister were
afraid lest Caesar should come through Gallia, pass the Ister and set upon 'em,
and therefore contained themselves within the bounds of modesty. Wherefore
Constantius being thus employed, the Persians whose Kings name was Sapores, at
that time pillaged the Country of Mesopotamia, and when they had wasted all
places about Nisibis, they besieged the City it self with all their Forces. But
Lucillianus the General was so well provided for a Siege that partly by the
happy occasions which he prudently made use of, and partly by his own
contrivances the City escaped those mischiefs that beset it, and was delivered
from extremity of danger. But how it was brought about I thought supersluous to
tell you, since Caesar himself has given an account of all the transactions of
those times in a peculiar Treatise; which whosoever reads, will find a great
deal of Oratory in that Man.

But at this juncture when the Affairs of the East seemed now to be in a quiet
posture, and Cesars mighty deeds were the public Discourse, Constantius was
seized with bitter envy. And being stung with the prosperous success of all
that was done in Celtica and Spain, he devised pretenses, under which he by
degrees, and with out any dishonor might lessen Cesar's Power and so deprive
him of his Dignity. To which end he by a Messenger commanded Caesar to send him
two Legions of the Celtick Soldiers, as if he wanted their assistance. And
Julian in obedience to his Order immediately dispatched 'em away, partly
through ignorance of his Design, and partly because he would not give him the
least occasion to be angry. But when he had so done, he took all care
imaginable of the Celtick Affairs, whilst the Army increased daily and the
Barbarians even in the remotest parts of the Country were so terrified at it
that they did not so much as dream of making War. But after that Constantius
required some other Legions to be sent him from Caesar: and having obtein'd his
desire, he commanded four Companies more to be transmitted to him. According to
which Precept Caesar gave notice to the Soldiers that they should prepare to
march. But whilst Julian was at Parisium (a little Town in Germany) the
Soldiers being ready to march were at Supper till Midnight in a place near the
Palace which there they so called, but knew not a word of what was intended
against Caesar; when certain Tribunes, who had found that to be really true
which was formerly contrived against him, dispersed a great many Notes without
any Name to 'em privately among the Soldiers, in which they gave 'em to
understand, how Caesar, who by his Policy had so ordered the matter, that almost
all of them had erected Trophies against the Barbarians, and had always fought
like a private Soldier, was in extreme danger from the Emperor, who would
shortly rob him of all his Army, if they did not all get together and hinder
the Soldiers marching. And when some of the Soldiers, having read those Notes,
had discovered the Intrigue to the whole Army, it made 'em all very angry.
Whereupon they arose from the place where they were in a great hurli-burly,
whilst the Cups were yet in their hands and went to the Palace, where breaking
open the Doors without any Ceremony at all, they brought Caesar forth, and
lifting him up upon a Shield declared him Emperor Augustus, and put a Diadem
upon his Head whether he would or no.

It Is true, Caesar was troubled at what they had done, but did not think it safe
for him to reverse it, because Constantius would not abide by any Oaths, or
Covenants, nor observe any other Obligation which binds mankind to keep their
words; and yet he would try him. So he sent Ambassadors to tell Constantius
that he had been declared Emperor without his seeking, and if he pleased he
was ready to lay aside his Diadem and keep to his honor of being Caesar only.
But Constantius was so enraged and so arrogant, that he told the Ambassadors,
That if Julian loved his life, he must lay down the very Garb of a Caesar as
well as his Imperial Dignity, and in a private capacity submit himself to the
Emperors pleasure. For he should come to no harm, nor suffer what his audacity
deserved. Which when Julian was informed of by the Ambassadors, he openly
showed what his Opinion was of the Deity, and declared before 'em all, He had
rather trust the Gods than Constantius with his life and fortune. And from this
time it plainly appeared what a grudg Constantius bore to Julian; for
Constantius presently prepared for a Civil War. When at the same Julian was
troubled that such things should fall out; because if he fought with him who
had conferred upon him the Honor of a Caesar, he should be esteemed by many
People but an ungrateful Man.

But whilst he was considering of these things, and revolving within himself,
as being very loath to undertake a civil War, the Deity told him what should
come to pass, in a Dream. For when he was at Vienna, the Sun seemed in a Dream
to show him the Constellations and to speak these Verses: When Jupiter the
extremity commands
Of moist Aquarius, and Saturn stands
In Virgo, twenty five, Constantius shall,
Though Emperor of Asia, surely fall.


Now therefore relying upon this Dream, he was very diligent (as he used to be)
in public business. And because it was yet Wintertime he took all necessary
care of what related to the Barbarians, that if he should have been forced to
undertake any new Enterprise, the state of Celtica might have been secure. But
at the same time, whilst Constantius continued in the East, Julian prepared to
frustrate his Design. For it being pretty far in the Summer, he had no sooner
settled matters among the Barbarians beyond the Rhine, (whom he had partly
forced into good manners with his Sword, and partly persuaded 'em by
experience, from what was past, to love Peace rather than War) he put his Army
in such a posture as if they had been just a going a long Journey. And when he
had constituted both Civil and Military Officers to govern the Towns and the
Borders, he marched with his Army toward the Alps. And when he came into
^^^tia, where the River Ister rises that runs though Noricum, all Pannonia,
Dacia, Mysia in Thrace and Scythia, till it discharges it self into the Euxine
Sea, he built a company of Boats, and with three thousand of his men went down
the Ister, commanding twenty thousand of 'em to go by Land to Sirmium. And
because they rowed continually with the stream (besides that they had the
benefit of the yearly Winds called Etesiae) he arrived the eleventh day at
Sirmiam. Where when it was reported that the Emperor was come, almost all
People thought it had been Constantius that was meant; but seeing it was
Julian, they all stood amazed, as if they had taken him for an Apparition.

But not long after when his Army that followed him out of Celtica was come, he
wrote to the Roman Senate and to the Forces of Italy, to have a care and keep
their Cities, since he was Emperor. And whereas Taurus and Florentius, the two
Consuls for that year who were of Constantius's side, left Rome as soon as they
heard that Julian was got over the Alps into Pannonia, he ordered them to be
termed Fugitive Consuls in all public Instruments. But he behaved himself very
obligingly to all the Towns that he passed by, though in all haste, and put 'em
all in good hopes of him. He likewise wrote to the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians
and Corinthians, to let 'em know the reason of his coming. And when he was at
Sirmium there came Ambassadors out of almost all Greece to him; to whom when
he had given such answers as became him, and granted 'em all that was their
due, he marched forward with his Celtick Army and another which he raised both
out of Sirmium and the Legions which lay in Pannonia and Mysia.

But when he came to Naisus he consulted the Soothsayers to know what he had
best to do. And seeing the Entrails signified that he must stay there some
time, he did so, observing withal the time that was foretold to him in his
Dream. Which when it was come according to the motion of the Stars, there
arrived a party of Horse from Constantinople, whilst (...) was at Naisus, who
told him that Constantius was dead; and that the Armies desired Julian should
be Emperor.

Whereupon he accepted of what the Gods had bestowed upon him, and so went on
his Journey forward. But when he came to Byzantium, the People all received him
with joyful Acclamations, calling him their Fellow-Citizen and their Darling
(because he was born and bred in that City) and gave him all other kind of
respect, as a Person that was like to be the Author of very much good to
Mankind. And here whilst he took care both for the City and the Army, he gave
the City the privilege to call a Senate like that in the City of Rame. He also
made a large Port to it, to secure the Ships from the South-winds; together
with a Portico (resembling the Letter Sigma more than a ^height figure) which
leads to the Port. (...) this, he built a Library in (...), wherein he put all
(...) he had; and having so (...) prepared for the Persian War. But when he had
tarried ten months in Byzantium he made Hormisdas and Victor Generals, to whom
he committed the Tribunes and the Armies, and so went to Antioch. It is not
necessary to tell you with what pleasure and zeal the Soldiers went this
Journey. For it is not likely that they should do any thing that was unseemly
when they were under such an Emperors Conduct as Julian was. So when he came to
Antioch the People received him very kindly. But being by nature great lovers
of Shows and public Sports, and more addicted to pleasure than serious
matters, they did not very probably so well like the Emperors prudence and
modesty in all sorts of things; because he would refrain from coming into the
public Theaters, nor would he often see Plays, or when he did, not sit at 'em
all Day. Upon which account they spoke very strange words of him that vexed
him. But he was revenged upon 'em, not by inflicting any real punishment, but
by composing a very gentile Oration upon them and the City; which has so much
of Satyr in it mixed with Gall, that it may serve for a Lampoon upon the
Antiochians through the World. But they were sorry for their faults: and
therefore the Emperor when he had done for the City as much as in equity he was
able, and granted to it a great number of Senators who should succeed in that
Office by descent from Father to Son; and likewise admitted those that were
born of Senators Daughters to be of the same number, (which is a privilege that
few Cities have) and done many other just and good Actions, he prepared for the
Persian War.

And when the Winter was over, having mustered his Forces together, and sent
'em before him in the regular way of marching, he went out of Antioch though he
had no encouragement from the Oracle. But what the reason of that was I can
tell; though I had rather hold my Tongue. Now therefore when he was come to
Hierapolis upon the fifth day, where he had ordered all the Ships to meet, both
Men of War and those of Burden too, from Samosata and other places that used
to sail in Euphrates; and having made Hierius, a Captain of Foot, his Admiral,
he sent him before, but stayed himself three days and no more in Hierapolis.
After which time he went to Batnae a little Town in Osdroena, where the
Edesenes met him in whole Droves, presenting him with a Crown, and bidding him
welcome into their City with joyful acclamations. He accepted of their
kindness, and coming into the City, made what Orders he thought good and so
went on to Carrae. But because from hence there were two ways; the one through
the River Tigris and the City of Nisibis, till you come to the Provinces of
Adiabene, and the other by Euphrates and Circesium (which is a Castle
encompassed by the River Aboras and Euphrates it self, and lies upon the
Confines of Assyria) the Emperor was at a stand which way to take, and in the
mean time news was brought that the Persians had made an incursion upon the
Roman Dominions. At which the Camp was somewhat disturbed; But the Emperor
understood they were Robbers rather than any others, who took what came next to
their hands and went their way with it; and therefore he resolved to leave a
competent Guard upon the places near the River Tigris, lest if all the Army
should go along with him the other way through the Persian Territories, the
Persians should pillage Nisibis and all those parts without being discovered,
especially when they found 'em destitute of all Defense. He therefore thought
fit to leave in that Country eighteen thousand men, of whom Sebastianus and
Procopius should be the Chief Commanders, whilst he himself with the main Body
of the Army went over Euphrates with his Forces divided into two Parties; that
they might be ready to resist the Enemy as soon as they saw 'em, and not suffer
'em so licentiously to overrun whatever came in their way.

When he had thus ordered his Affairs at Carrae, (a Town that parts the Roman
from the Assyrian Dominions) he had a mind to view the Army from some more
eminent place, and admire the Foot Companies as well as the Troops of Horse,
which were in all full sixty five thousand men. And therefore marching out of
Carrae, he presently passed the Castles between that and Callinicum, from
whence arriving at Circesium (of which I told you before) he crossed the River
Aboras and so sailed over Euphrates. The Soldiers also followed him who had
brought provisions along with them, and they likewise took shipping who were
enjoined so to do. For by this time the Navy was arrived, in which there was a
great many ships; that is to say, six hundred made of Wood, and five hundred
made of Skins. Besides which there were fifty ships of War, and others also
that followed along with 'em, to make Bridges, if occasion were, for the Army
to pass the Rivers on foot. There were also a great number of other Ships or
Vessels that followed, which served partly to carry provisions for the Army,
partly Timber to make Engines, and partly battering Engines for a Siege, that
were ready made. Now of all this Navy Lucilian and Constantius were Admirals.
And when the Army was thus disposed of, the Emperor sat upon a Throne, and
from thence spoke to 'em all that was requisite for him to say or them to do;
which when he had done, he gave each of 'em an hundred and thirty pieces of
Silver, and so marched toward Persia, where Victor commanded the Foot, but
Hormisdas and Arintheus together, the Horse. Of that Hormisdas I told you
before, that he was a Persian and a Kings Son; but persecuted by his Brother
and fain to run away to the Emperor Constantine, from whom his approved
fidelity and friendship deserved the greatest honors and preferments.

When therefore the Emperor was come into Persia, the Horse was placed in the
left Wing, and marched along the bank of the River, whilst part of the Foot
attended upon the right, and the rereguard of them was seventy furlongs off.
Between whom and the foremost marched the Beasts of Burden, that carried the
heavy Armor with other Provisions and Attendants; that they also might be
secure, as being enclosed on every side by the Army. And now having so
contrived his march forward, he thought fit to send one thousand five hundred
of his men before him, to scout and see whether any Enemy approached either in
open view or by way of Ambuscade, of whom he made Lucilianus Captain. Then
moving forward sixty furlongs, he came into a place called Lautha; and from
thence to Dura, where you might have seen the ruins of a City, which was at
that time deserted, as likewise the Sepulcher of King Gordianus. In which place
also the Soldiers found a multitude of Deer, which they shot and eat with great
satisfaction. From thence he went seven Days march to a place called Phathusae,
over against which there was an Island in the River, whereon stood a Castle
that had a great many men in it. He therefore sent Lucilianus thither with a
thousand of his Vanguard under his Command, to besiege the Castle. And though
as long as it was dark the besiegers went undiscovered, yet as soon as it was
Day, being espied by one that came out of the Castle to fetch Water, they put
those that were within into a grievous fright. Upon which immediately they all
got up upon the Wall, till the Emperor came over into the Island with his
Engines and the other part of his Army, and promised those that were within,
that if they would deliver up themselves and their Castle they should escape
certain Death. Accordingly they did surrender, and the Emperor sent them, Men,
Women and Children into the Roman Dominions with a Guard of Soldiers to conduct
'em: and made Puseus, their Captain, not only a Tribune in his own Army, but,
for his fidelity, made him one of his familiars ever after.

Some distance from this, he arrived at another Island in the same River, where
there was another very strong Castle; which the Emperor attaqued but found it
impregnable on every side, and therefore demanded of 'em that they would
surrender, and not run the risque of being sacked. To which they replied, That
they would do as others did; and so he went forward to other Castles, which he
passed by, as being satisfied with the like promises. For he did not think it
worth his while to spend too much time about small things, but looked upon it
as his best course to hasten and prepare for the main business of the War. So
then after some days march he came to Dacira which is a Town on the right hand
as you sail along Euphrates. Which when the Soldiers found forsaken of its
Inhabitants, they took away a great deal of Corn that was laid up there, and no
small quantity of other things. And when they had killed all the Women that
were left in it, they razed the Walls so low, that no one who saw the place
would think there ever had been a Town there. But to conclude the account of
this place and the parts adjacent, give me leave to tell you by the by, That
upon the opposite shore there was a Fountain, that flowed with Pitch or
Bitumen. From thence he came to Sitha, Megia and the City Zaragardia; in which
there was a lofty Throne, made of Stone; which the Inhabitants used to call,
Trajans Throne: where when the Soldiers had easily plundered and burnt the
City, they spent that Day and the next in Recreations.

In the mean time the Emperor wondered that his Army had marched so far and met
no Persians either in Ambuscade or the open Field; wherefore he sent Hormisdas
with his Scouts to look out, because he knew that Country best. In which
Expedition Hormisdas and his Soldiers had all been like to have perished if it
had not been for one lucky accident that unexpectedly saved 'em. For a Person
called Surenas (which is a Title of Honor among the Persians) had planted an
Ambuscade in a certain place, expecting Hormisdas and his men to come that way,
and designing to surprise 'em as they passed by. And indeed that hopes had
taken effect, if Euphrates had not broken out of its usual course and running
between the Enemy and Hormisdas impeded the passage of him and his Soldiers.
And upon this account being forced to defer their Journey, the next Day they
discovered Surenas and all his Accomplices in the Ambuscade, with whom they
wheeled about and engaged. And having killed many of 'em, they put some to
flight, but mingled the remaining part among their own Army. From thence they
went on to an Arm of Euphrates, which reaches as far as Assyria, and all along
till you come to Tigris. Where being the Soldiers met with a stiff Clay and
marshy ground, in which the Horses had the worst on it, nor could they
themselves swim the River in their Armor, or wade over either, it was so deep
and muddy, they could not imagine what to do. And that which made the danger
greater, was, that they saw the Enemy on the other side, who were ready to stop
their passage with Darts and Stones which they threw out of Slings. But when no
body else could think of an Expedient to free them from those imminent dangers,
the Emperor himself, who was a man of great sagacity in all things and very
well versed in Military Affairs, resolved to order Lucillianus and his fifteen
hundred Scouts to go and attaque the Enemy behind, thereby to give 'em a
Diversion, till he and his Army had passed the River. To which end he sent
forth Victor, one of his Captains, with a competent number of men: who lest the
Persians should see him set out, began his Journey in the Nightime, and when
he had gone so far, that the Enemies could not see what he did even in the Day,
he crossed the Channel to seek Lucillianus and his Party. And going on still
forward but finding no Enemy by the way, he called out to his Countrymen not
only with a loud Voice, but gave 'em notice also with Trumpets to come to him.
But indeed he met him according to his desire, and Lucillianus who guessed what
his business was, joining his with Victors Forces, went and surprised the Enemy
behind. Who being taken so unprepared were either slain or made their escape
which way soever they could. By this means the Emperor, seeing his stratagem
succeeded, passed over the River without any resistance. And having got his
Horse over in Boats that he light upon there, and the Foot in other Vessels,
which he found in many parts of the River, he continued his Journey forward,
without any dread of an Enemy, till he came to a certain City called Bersabora,
whose bigness and Situation he took a view of. For it was enclosed with two
round Walls, and in the middle of it there was a Castle, with another Wall
about it, much like the Segment of a Circle; to which there was a Way from the
inner Wall of the City, that one could hardly get up to. And then upon the
South and West side of this City there was a crooked winding way out: whereas
upon the North part they had made a broad Water-graff out of the River, from
whence they conveyed Water for the use of the Inhabitants. And lastly upon the
East side it was encompassed with a deep Ditch and a Mound born up with strong
cross pieces of Timber; about which Ditch great Towers stood, which were built
from the ground half way with Brick cemented by a kind of bituminous Loam; but
above the middle they were made of the same kind of Bricks and Plaster.

Now the Emperor having resolved to take this City, he encouraged his Soldiers
to the attempt, who were so far from being backward that they obeyed his Order
with all alacrity. Whereupon the Citizens desired that the Emperor would please
to receive 'em into his favor and friendship; begging one while that he would
send Hormisdas to treat of Peace with them, and anon reviling the same Person
as a Fugitive, a Renegado, and a betrayer of his Country. At which the Emperor
having good cause to be angry, he commanded all his Men to mind their business,
and carry on the Siege with all their vigor. Nor did they fail each one to do
his part, till the besieged seeing themselves unable to defend their Walls fled
all into the Castle. Which when the Emperor saw, he sent his Soldiers into the
City that was now bereft of its Inhabitants; who pulled down the Walls, burnt
the Houses, and planted Engines upon the most opportune places, from which they
threw both Darts and Stones upon them that were got into the Castle. But
because the besieged from the Castle kept off the besiegers with Darts and
Stones which they continually threw back; insomuch that there was a great
slaughter on both sides, the Emperor either by his own ingenuity upon
consideration how the place was Situated, or out of his extraordinary
experience, made this kind of Engine: He fastened great pieces of Timber
together with Iron, in form of a square Tower, which he placed against the
Castle Wall, till by degrees it was made as high; and into that same Tower he
put Bowmen with Engineers that use to sling Darts and Stones. So that the
Persians who were pelted on all sides, both by the besiegers, and those that
were upon the Engine, were forced after a short resistance, at last to promise,
they would surrender the Castle, if the Emperor would offer any reasonable
Terms. And thereupon they agreed, that the Persians, every man of 'em, which
were within, should pass through the middle of the Roman Army untouched, and
each of 'em have a certain sum of money, besides a Coat upon their surrendering
the Castle to the Emperor. Which being performed, there were about five
thousand men dismissed, besides what escaped in Long-Boats over the Water; and
among the rest their Captain Momosirus went out at the same time. And when the
Castle was thus taken, the Soldiers who sought for what might probably be left
in it, found an immense quantity of Corn, all kind of Arms and Engines,
together with Household furniture and other Provisions in abundance. All which
they disposed of as they thought fit, only the greatest part of the Corn was
put into the Ships to maintain the Soldiers, and the rest they divided among
them over and above their ordinary allowance. And as for the Arms, as many of
'em as were fit for the Roman use were distributed among the Army; but those
that were only adapted to the Persian manner of fighting were partly burnt and
partly thrown down the River.

From this Action did the Roman glory receive no small addition; That so great
a City, even the greatest in Assyria next to Ctesiphon, and so well fortified,
should be taken by storm in only two days. And for that reason the Emperor was
very kind to his Soldiers, as he showed by a laudatory Speech that he made in
their commendation, as much as it was convenient for him to say, and by the
hundred pieces of Silver which he gave to each one of 'em. And so much for
these Affairs: whilst in the mean time Surenas, coming with a great Army out of
a Town in Assyria, surprised the Roman Scouts that went before the rest of the
Army, killed one of the three Tribunes with some of his Soldiers, and put the
rest to flight, so that he carried off an Ensign Military, which was like a
Dragon, and such as the Romans use to carry in War. Which when the Emperor knew
of he was very much troubled, and in a rage, just as he was, fell upon
Surenas's men, made 'em all run that could get away, re-took the Ensign which
the Enemy had taken away, and coming immediately to the City, where Surenas had
surprised the Scouts, he stormed, took, and burnt it. And as to the Captain of
the Scouts; because he left his Ensign with the Enemy, preferring his safety
before the bravery and honor of a Roman, he took away his Girdle from him, and
looked upon him as a scandalous, pitiful Fellow, as well as all the rest that
ran away along with him.

But going forward over the River he came to a place near which there is a City
called Tissenia: about the Walls whereof there was a Ditch, which though it
were very deep the Persians filled with a great deal of Water which they
derived into it out of the neighboring River, which is called the Kings River.
But they passed this City without any stay (because there was nothing in it
that had the face of hostility) and went through a place where there was an
arrificial Fenn, made out of a fancy which the Persians conceived, that if they
cut a Sluice for the River to come in, it was impossible for an Army to pass
that way. Yet the Emperor running before (as much as men use to do over such a
wet ground) the Army followed him, though they were up to the knees. For they
could not for shame but do what they saw the Emperor did before 'em. But when
the Sun was set, the Army rested hard by; whilst the Emperor commanding some of
his Soldiers and several Artificers to follow him, cut down Trees and Wood
wherewith he made a Bridge over the Sluices, and throwing earth into the Fens
filled up the deep places, and in some measure widen'd the straight passages.
After which coming back he led his Army through with great facility, till he
came to a Town called Bithra, in which there was a Palace and room enough to
receive not only the Emperor but his Army also.

But he departed thence too, and with the same pains as before, went before his
men, making the way thereby more tolerable to 'em. And by this means he carried
'em all over with him, till he came to a place, where there was never a House,
but only a Grove of Palm Trees; in which there were also Vines growing, that
ran up to the top of the Palm Trees, and presented their Eyes with the sight of
Palm-fruit mixed with Grapes. And when he had spent the ensuing Night in this
place, the next Morning he went forward. But coming too near to a certain
Castle he had like to have received his Deaths-wound. For a Persian that came
out of the Castle with his Sword in his Hand struck full at the Emperors Head;
which he foreseeing clapped his Shield upon his Head and so broke the blow. Upon
which the Soldiers immediately fell aboard the Persian and killed him together
with all his Companions, except some few, that by chance escaped through the
Enemies and fled into the Castle. And now the Emperor being extremely enraged
at this bold action, walked round the Castle to see if it were any where
pregnable. But whilst he was busy about this Affair, Surenas set upon the
Soldiers that remained in the Palm-grove before they were aware of him, as
hoping by that means not only to get all their beasts of Burden and Carriages,
but to divert the Emperor from besieging the Castle, as soon as he heard of it;
though he was deceived in both parts of his Project. For the Emperor thought
it a matter of great consequence to take the Castle; because there was a City
near it called Besuchis, which was very populous; besides a great many other
Castles, whose Inhabitants were fled away into that which the Emperor was a
besieging because their own were not strong enough to protect 'em; excepting
some that fled to Ctesiphon, or hid themselves in the thickest part of the
Grove.

Upon this account the Emperor laid close Siege to it; whilst in the mean time
that part of the Army which was sent out to Scout or assist their own Party, if
any Enemy appeared, did not only defeat all those that opposed 'em, but killed
some and made others shamefully run for their lives, insomuch that they secured
the Emperor whilst the Siege lasted. And because some of those that fled had
gotten into the Fens that are in the Grove, the Scouts did not spare even them
neither, but killed some and took the rest Prisoners: whilst those that were
besieged in the Castle kept off the Enemy with Darts of all sorts which they
threw at 'em. And because they had no Stones within, they made Balls of Pitch
which they set fire to and flung upon them; nor was it hard to hit them they
aimed at, because they threw from above and at a great multitude together. Yet
notwithstanding the Roman Soldiers, though they had the disadvantage of the
lower ground, omitted no kind of Warlike Policy, or true Valor. For they threw
and shot great Stones and Darts at the Enemy, not only out of Bows but Engines
also; and those so contrived, that they would hit not only one, but two,
three, or more at a time. But seeing the Castle stood upon an Hill, and was
fortified with two Walls, sixteen great Towers and a deep Ditch about it, which
at one part of it brought in Water for them that were in the Castle to drink,
the Emperor bad the Soldiers get Earth enough and fill up the Ditch, and then
raise a Mound upon it as high as one of the Towers. He likewise resolved to dig
in another place through (under) the Wall toward the middle of the inner Wall,
with intention to surprise the Enemy out of a Mine. But the Enemy hindered them
that were to raise the Mound by continual flinging of Darts upon 'em; and
therefore the Emperor himself undertook the main Battery by several
contrivances for defense against either Darts or Fireballs: but he left the
care of the Mines and raising of the Mounds to Nevita and Dagalaiphus. Then
giving Victor the Command of so many Foot and so many Horse, he ordered him to
Scout out in all places betwixt that and Ctesiphon: and if any Enemy appeared,
with design to divert the Emperor from his Siege, that he should frustrate any
such attempt by the help of those he had with him: and likewise that he should
make the way from thence to Ctesiphon, by Bridges and other Methods more easy
for him and his Army.

Having thus given his Captains their several Charges, he planted his Rams
against a certain Gate, which he did not only shake but broke to pieces. And
seeing those that had the care of the Mines committed to them, were lazy and
did not mind their business, he removed them by way of Disgrace for their
remissness, and substituted others in their places. After which he brought a
second Ram before another Gate, which was not strong enough to bear the shock
of it; when at the same time there came a Messenger to tell him, that they who
were ordered to dig a Mine from the Ditch into the Town had done their work,
and were just ready to spring in. Now the men concerned were three Companies,
that is to say, the Mattiarii, Laccinarii, and the Victores. But the Emperor
kept a little in suspense, whilst he commanded an Engine to be brought with all
speed against another Gate, where he planted all his Army: to make the Enemy
believe, that on the morrow with that Engine he would take the Castle. For his
Design indeed was, to keep the Persians from any thoughts of being surprised
through a Mine. And therefore all those that were in the Castle were wholly
intent upon destroying that Engine; whilst at the same time the Parties, who
had the care of the Mines having dug quite through even to the Surface of the
Earth, they came forth at midnight in the middle of an House, where there was
a Woman a grinding Corn; whom he that first appeared immediately killed,
because she was a going to cry out. His name, that did so, was Superantius, a
notable Soldier in the Regiment of the Victores: and next to him came Magnus;
then Jovianus a Tribune in the Regiment of the Notarii, with many more that
followed 'em. And when by degrees the passage was made wider they were all got
presently into the middle of the Town. From whence they ran to the Wall and
surprised the Persians, who were singing after their Country fashion in praise
of their own King's Valor, but condemning the Roman Emperors vain attempt: for
they said he might sooner take Jupiter's Palace than their Castle: till the
Romans came upon 'em, and killing all they met with, by tumbling 'em down from
the Wall, they pursued the rest and cut 'em off with all manner of Deaths; nor
did they spare either Women or Children, except some few that they had a mind
to make Slaves of. But Anabdates, the Governor of the Castle, being taken, as
he ran through it, together with all his Guards which were eighty in number,
was brought to the Emperor with his Hands bound. Now the Castle being thus
taken by force and all the People in it, of what age soever, slain, except a
few that were unexpectedly preserved, the Soldiers fell to plundering; and when
they had taken all they could find they razed the Wall to the very ground with
Engines which they planted against it. Nor did they stop there, but pulled down
and burned all the Houses in such a manner that no body could imagine there had
been ever any there.

From hence he marched on and passed by other Castles of no great Note, till he
came to an enclosed Place which they call the Kings Hunting [Chase,] where
there was a Wall, containing within it a large space of ground, planted with
all sorts of Trees, in which there were all kinds of wild Beasts, which wanted
no food, because it was brought in to 'em, and they were only kept for the King
to Hunt when he pleased. Which when Julian saw, he ordered the Wall to be
broken down in several places; and by that means the Soldiers shot the Deer as
they ran by 'em. But besides this place he saw somewhere nigh unto it a Palace
magnificently built after the Roman fashion: which when he heard was erected by
the Romans, he left it, and would not suffer the Tribunes to spoil any part of
it, out of respect to the Romans who were said to be the Founders of it.

From hence when the Army had passed by several Castles, they came to a City of
Armenia called Sabatha, which is thirty furlongs from that which was formerly
called Zochasa, but is now Seleucia. And whilst the Emperor tarried with most
part of his Army in a place near to it, the Scouts that went before had stormed
the Town. The next Day the Emperor walking about the Walls of it, he saw
several Bodies hanging upon gibbets before the Gates; whom the Natives said
were the kinsmen of one that had been accused for betraying a Town of the
Persians which the Emperor Carus had taken. And that put the Emperor in mind to
summon Anabdates the Governor of the Castle, to his Trial; who though he had
often deceived the Roman Army, by his pretenses to assist 'em in the War
against Persia, yet he had then a fresh Crime laid to his Charge, for speaking
scandalously of Hormisdas, as, calling him Traitor before a great many People,
and saying he was the cause of that Expedition against the Persians: for which
he was taken and put to death.

Soon after his Execution, the Army marching on Arintheus searched all the Fens
and finding a great many men in 'em, he took 'em Prisoners. But it was here,
that the Persians first mustered up their Forces and set upon the Scouts that
went before the Army; though they were soon routed, and glad to save their
lives by flying into a neighboring City. But the Persians on the other side
the River attaquing the Servants that looked to the Beasts of Burden, and
others also as many as they found with 'em, killed part of 'em and took the
rest alive: which was the first loss the Romans happened to have had, and
therefore put the Army in some kind of consternation. From thence they removed
to a certain Sluice or Channel which was very large, and cut (as the Country
People say) by Trajan, when he made War against the Persians: Into which the
River Narmalaches runs and discharges it self into the Tigris. This therefore
the Emperor caused to be cleans'd and searched, to make way for his Vessels to
pass into the Tigris, and, if possible, to make Bridges for the carrying of his
Army over. And whilst these things were in agitation there, a great Body of
Persians upon the opposite Bank, both Horse and Foot, were got together, to
hinder their passage if any such thing were attempted. Which preparation of the
Enemy when the Emperor discovered, he was extremely eager to be over with 'em,
and in a sury commanded his men to go aboard the Vessels. But they seeing the
other Bank somewhat higher than ordinary, and besides that a kind of an Hedge
along it, which was formerly made for a fence to the King's Garden, but at that
time served for a Wall, they said they were afraid of the Darts and Fireballs
which were thrown down from it. Whereupon the Emperor being very earnest with
'em, two Ships full of Foot Soldiers went over; which the Persians presently
set on fire by throwing a great quantity of flaming Darts upon them. At which
the Army was so much more dismayed, that the Emperor was fain to tell a lie to
hide his error; They, says he, are got safe over and have made themselves
masters of the Bank: I know it by the fire that is in their Ships, which I
ordered the Soldiers, that went over, to make in token of Victory. Nor had he
sooner told 'em so, than, just as they were, they went into the Ships and over
as fast as they could; till they came where they could wade, and then leaping
into the Water, they engaged the Persians so briskly that they not only got
possession of the Bank, but also retrieved those two Ships which came over
before, being now half burnt, and saved all the men that were left in them. And
then the Armies fell upon each other so fiercely, that the Battle continued
from twelve a Clock at Night till twelve a Clock at noon next Day; till at
length the Persians gave way, and fled as fast as their Legs would carry 'em,
their Captains being the first that began to run; that is to say, Pigraxes (who
was a Person of greatest Birth and Quality next to the King,) together with
Anareus and Surenas himself. But the Romans and the Goths ran after 'em and
killed a great many, from whom they took a deal of Gold and Silver, besides all
kind of Ornaments either for Men or Horses, with Silver Beds and Tables,
whatever they found which the Officers had left upon the Rampires. Now they
reckon that in this Fight there fell of the Persians twenty five hundred, and
of the Romans not above seventy five. But Captain Victor seemed in some measure
to abate the Armies joy for their Victory, by being wounded from an Engine.

The next Day the Emperor got his Army over the Tigris without any difficulty,
and the third Day after the fight both himself and his Guards went after 'em.
And coming to a certain place (which the Persians call Abuzatha) he stayed
there five days, whilst he consulted concerning his Journey forward, and found,
it was better to march farther into the Country than to lead his Army by the
Rivers side, because there was now no necessity of their going by Water. And
having considered of it, he imparted his mind to the Army, whom he commanded to
burn the Ships: and they accordingly were all consumed, except eighteen Roman
and four Persian Vessels, which were carried along in Wagons, to be made use
of upon occasion. And now, their way lying a little above the River, when they
came to a place called Noorda, they made an Halt, where they killed and took a
great number of Persians. But from thence going forward to the River Durus,
they made a Bridge over it for their own passage: and seeing the Persians had
burnt up all the forage of the Country, so that the Roman Cattle were ready
to starve for want of it; as also, that they were gathered into several
Companies to wait for the Romans, whom they imagined to be but few; and then,
soon after, drawn up into one Body, they made toward the River. Where whilst
the Scouts that went before the Army engaged with a Party of the Persians, one
Macamaeus, a stout, brisk Blade, got among 'em and killed four, though they
were naked. But for that bold act they all fell upon him and slew him. Which
when his Brother Maurus saw, he ventured to rescue at least his dead Body from
amidst the Persians; and killed the Man that gave him the first Wound; nor did
he give out, though he were frequently shot at, until he had brought his
Brother off and delivered him to the Army, yet alive.

Afterward when they came to the City Barrophtha, they found the forage (as
before) burnt up by the Barbarians: and seeing a Party of Persians mixed with
Saracens, who durst not so much as look upon the Roman Army, but were
immediately gone, the Romans could not tell what to think of it, till the
Persians by gathering themselves into a considerable Body, made the Romans
believe they had a design upon their Cattle of Burden. Whereupon the Emperor
was the first that putting on a Coat of Mail marched toward 'em with more speed
than all the rest of the Army. But the Persians, not able to endure the shock
of his Charge, thought best to fly into such places as they well knew. And so
the Emperor went on to a place called Symbra, that lies between two Towns
whose names are Nisbara and Nischanabe, which are separated from each other by
the Tigris; though the Townsmen have frequent and easy intercourse by a Bridge
over that River. But that Bridge the Persians burned down, lest the Romans by
help of it should do 'em both as much injury as they pleased. And here it was
that the Scouts who went a foraging before the rest, defeated the Persian
forces as soon as they saw 'em; whilst the Army finding great plenty of
provisions (...) the Town, took what they had occasion for and destroyed the
rest.

From thence they marched to a place between the Cities of Danabe and Synca,
where the Persians set upon the Rear of their Army and killed a great many, but
lost more and ran away, as having the worst of it upon several accounts. For in
this fight one Daces, a great Satrape [a Nobleman of Persia) was killed: being
the same Person that formerly had gone Ambassador to the Emperor Constantius,
to treat of Peace and make an end of the War. But when the Enemies saw, that
the Romans came near to a Town called Acceta, they burned up the fruits of the
Country; till the Romans ran in and by quenching the fire, saved what was left
for their own use.

In their march from this place they came to a Town called Maronsa; where the
Persians again attaqued the Rere-guard of their Army, and in the Engagement
killed one Brettanio (among the rest) who was Captain of a Troop and fought
bravely. They also took several Ships, which fell in their way by being a great
deal behind the Army. But from thence the Romans passing hastily along by
certain Villages, came to a place called Tummara; where they all repented the
burning of their Ships. For the Cattle were not able to carry all their
necessaries, they were so tired with traveling in an Enemies Country; and then
the Persians got all the forage that they could, and laid it up in their best
fortified places that the Roman Army might not come at it. And when they were
in this condition they saw the Persian Army; with whom they engaged, and having
much the better of it, they killed a great many of the Persians. But the day
after about the time when it was full Change [about noon] the Persians drew up
in a great Body and fell upon the Rear of the Roman Army once more; who being
at that time out of their Ranks, were surprised and startled at the suddenness
of the attaque, but yet they made a very brisk defense, whilst the Emperor went
round about the Army (as he used to do) encouraging them to stand boldly to it.
And when by that means they were all engaged, the Emperor who went one while to
the Captains and Tribunes, and another while was among the common Soldiers,
received a Wound with a Sword in the very heat of the Battle, and being laid
upon a Shield was carried to his Tent, where he lived till Midnight and then
died, after he had almost ruined the Persian Empire.

Now whilst the Emperors death was concealed, the Roman Army had so much the
better of it, that fifty of the greatest Satrapes [ Persian Nobles] were slain,
besides an infinite number of ordinary men. But when the Emperors death was
discovered, and the Soldiers came back to the Tent where his dead Body lay,
some few of the Romans indeed fought on, and conquered their Enemies; whilst
certain Companies coming out of a Persian Garrison engaged with them that were
under the Command of Hormisdas. And after a smart Battle, Antonius fell, who
was Captain of the Court-Guards, and called by the Romans [Magister
Officiorum.] And at the same time Salustius, the Prefect of the Court, who fell
from his Horse, had like to have been killed by the Enemies, who were just upon
him, if one of his Servants had not alighted and made way for his escape. With
whom also those two Legions that were about the King and are called the
Scutarii [Shield-men] gave way. But out of those that turned their backs there
were only sixty Men, who being concerned for their own and their Countries
honor exposed themselves to death, till they had taken that Castle, from
whence the Persians sallying out upon the Romans had seemed to have gotten the
Day. And though it was after besieged three days together by the Enemies, yet
those within were preserved by a considerable Party that set upon the
besiegers. But afterward there was an Assembly summoned, both of the Nobility
and Soldiery, to consult, who ought to succeed in the Empire; because it was
impossible for 'em to avoid those dangers that might happen in the middle of an
Enemies Country without a Governor. Where they Voted that Jovianus should be
Emperor, who was the Son of Varronianus, Tribune of the Domestici Forces.

Now all that was done till Julian's death is just as I have told you. But when
Jovian had put on the Purple and the Diadem, he went homeward as fast as he
could. And when he came to the Castle of Suma, the Persian Horse fell upon him
not only themselves, but also with Elephants that they brought thither in
great numbers, and did a deal of hurt in the Right Wing of his Army, where the
Joviani and the Herculiani were posted. Which two appellations of Joviani and
Herculiani belong to two Legions that were so called from Diocletianus and
Maximianus, the one of whom surnamed himself Jove, and the other Hercules. And
though at first they could not sustein the shock of the Elephants, but were
forced, many of 'em, to fly and fall by the way, yet when the Persians came up
against 'em with their Horse and Elephants together, they happened to come into
a rising ground where the Roman Carriages lay and those that looked after 'em:
who being now made sharers in the danger assisted 'em by throwing Darts from
above upon the Persians, wherewith they wounded their Elephants. Which when the
Elephants felt, immediately as their manner is, they ran away roaring and put
the Horse all out of order: so that the Soldiers killed not only the
Elephants, as they fled, but many also of the Enemies died in the Conflict.
There died also of the Roman side three Tribunes, who had fought bravely, to
wit Julianus, Maximianus, and Macrobius. And when they had sought among the
dead, and found the body of Anatolius, they gave him as honorable a Funeral as
the time would then permit, when the Enemy was round about 'em.

And having so done they marched on four days, being continually harassed by
the Enemy, who followed 'em if they went forward, but fled away if the Romans
made any resistance; till at length having got a good way from 'em they
resolved to cross the Tigris. To which purpose they tied bottles together in
rows like Yokes, and upon them went over. And when they were most of 'em gotten
upon the opposite Bank, then the Captains came safe over with the rest. Yet for
all this the Persians would not leave 'em, but followed close with a great Army
wherever they went; so that the Romans were in perpetual danger both from their
ill circumstances, of Place and Persons, and also from their want of
Provisions. But though this were the state of the Roman Army, yet the Persians
were willing to treat for a Peace, and sent Surenas with other Officers to the
Roman Camp about it. Which when Jovian heard of he sent Salustius, Prefect of
the Court together with Arinthaeus to 'em, who after some mutual Discourses
about the Affair, made a Truce for thirty years. But it was agreed between 'em
both that the Romans should deliver up the Country of the Rabdiceni to the
Persians, as also that of the Cardueni, Rhemeni, and Zaleni, beside fifteen
Castles that were there, with their Inhabitants, Lands, Cattle and all their
Goods: but that they should surrender Nisibis without its Inhabitants, because
they were to be transplanted into what Colony the Romans pleased. But the
Persians also took away from the Romans a great part of Armenia and left 'em
but small share in it. Now therefore when the Truce was made upon these terms
and confirmed by Instruments on both sides, the Romans thereby had opportunity
to return home in quiet, so that the two Parties neither offered nor received
any damage one to or from the other, by open force or Ambuscade.

But now that I am come to this part of the History, it puts me in mind of
looking back into former Ages, to enquire, whether the Romans ever gave away
any of their Dominions to other Nations, or ever suffered any one to possess
what they had once Conquered. For when Luc. Lucullus had defeated Tigranes and
Mithridates, and had first made the whole Country even to the middle of
Armenia, and Nisibis it self an addition to the Roman Empire, besides the
adjacent Castles; then Pompey the Great to Crown all his great Deeds,
established and confirmed the possession of them to the Romans by a Peace which
he made. And when upon another Commotion in Persia, the Senate chose Crassus
for their Plenipotentiary and General, who by his ill Conduct has left a blot
ever since upon the Roman Name, because he was taken Prisoner and died in
Persia, Antonius was made the General; but being in love with Cleopatra, he was
very remiss and careless in all Warlike Affairs; insomuch that he also went off
with some things charged upon him unworthy of the Roman Name. And yet though
the Romans had all these mischances, and miscarriages they did not lose so much
as one of those Provinces. Nay when their Republic was turned into a Monarchy,
and Augustus made Tigris and Euphrates the limits of the Roman Empire, even
that did not deprive them of this Country: But so far it was from that, as on
the contrary, a great while after when Gordianus the Emperor fought against the
Persians, and was killed in the middle of the Enemies Country, the Persians
were not able even after that Victory to gain any thing upon the Roman
Dominions; no not when Philip was Emperor, who made a most dishonorable Peace
with the Persians. And not long after, when the Persian Fire had enflamed all
the East, and that great City Antioch was taken, so that the Persian Army
marched as far as Cilicia, Valerianus the Emperor undertook an Expedition
against 'em, and though he were taken by 'em yet they durst not pretend to be
Masters of these Countries. Only the death of the Emperor Julian was cause
enough for us to lose 'em, and that so irrevocably, that the Roman Emperors
could never recover any part of 'em even to this day, but by degrees have lost
more and more still, of which some have made themselves perfectly free, others
have surrendered themselves to Barbarians, and others have been almost quite
deserted: all which I will demonstrate in the progress of this History as they
severally happened.

But to return from whence I have digress'd. -- When this Peace was made with
the Persians in the manner that I have told you, Jovianus the Emperor and his
Army were coming home securely, but met with many difficulties through the
roughness of the Way and want of Water, besides his loss of many Men in the
Enemies Country through which he passed; wherefore he sent Mauricius, a
Tribune, and commanded him to bring Provisions for his Army from Nisibis, and
meet 'em with it as far off as he could. He also sent others into Italy to tell
of Julian's death and how he himself was declared Emperor. And when he was come
with a great deal of pains and much ado near unto Nisibis, he would not go into
the Town because it was surrendered to the Enemy, but lay all night in a Piazza
before the Gate, and the next morning received the Crowns and Complements that
were offered to him, whilst all the Townsmen besought him, that he would not
forsake them, and force 'em to degenerate into Barbarism, who for so many Ages
had lived under the Roman Laws. Besides, they told him it was a dishonor to
him, that Constantius, who had been engaged in three Persian Wars and was
defeated in every one of 'em, had notwithstanding always protected Nisibis, and
even when it was besieged and in extreme danger, done all he could to save it,
and yet that he, when there was no such necessity for it, should give up the
city to the Enemy, and show the Romans such a day, as they had never seen
before, as being forced to suffer such a Town and such a Country to be
surrendered to an Enemy. Which when the Emperor heard, he excused his not
complying with their desires by telling 'em what Articles he had entered into:
and then Sabinus, who was the chief Man of their Council [their Recorder] went
on with what the People had said before by way of Petition, and told him
farther, That they wanted neither Money to carry on a War against Persia, nor
any foreign Aid, but that they were able with their own Bodies and their own
Purses to defend themselves from any War that should be waged against 'em: and
likewise assured him, that whenever they were Victorious and had regained their
Liberty, they would again be subject to the Romans and obey their Commands as
formerly they had done. To which when the Emperor replied, that he could not
break his Covenants, the Townsmen begged of him a thousand times that he would
not deprive the Roman Empire of such a Bulwark as that was. But all was in
vain, and away the Emperor went in a fury; whilst the Persians desired to have
possession of the Countries, Castles, and of that City according to the
Conditions agreed upon. And thereupon the Inhabitants of some Countries and
Castles, that could not privately escape, let the Persians do with them what
they pleased; but the Nisibini, having gained some time to prepare for their
removal, they went, most of 'em, to Amida, though some few inhabited in other
Towns. But all places were full of lamentation and mourning, because they
thought themselves exposed to the incursions of the Persians, now Nisibis was
surrendered to them. And among others the Carreni were so sorry when they heard
of Julian's death, that they stoned him to death who brought the news, and
threw a great heap of Stones upon his Carcass; so great an alteration of
Affairs was one man's death then able to create.

But Jovianus therefore marched through the Towns with all speed, because they
were so full of grief that they could not give him one pleasant look, (which is
the custom and nature of those People) and along with him as many Soldiers as
belonged to the Imperial Guard, he went to Antioch; whilst the whole Army
attended upon Julian's Body, which was carried into Cilicia and buried in a
Royal Sepulcher in the Suburbs of Tarsus; upon whose Tombstone there is this
Inscription; Julian has Tigris left and here he lies
A Warlike Prince, just, valiant, and wise.


And now Jovian, being mindful of his Imperial Affairs, disposed of other
matters, and among the rest sent Lucillianus his Father in law, Procopius, and
Valentinian (who was afterward Emperor) to the Armies in Pannonia; to tell 'em
of Julian's Death, and how that he was chosen Emperor. But the Batavi that were
at Sirmium, and were left there for a Guard to it, as soon as they heard the
news, they killed Lucillianus who brought 'em such ill tidings, without any
regard to that Relation which he had to the Emperor. But they let Procopius go
untouched, out of the respect they bore to Julian's Kindred; whilst Valentinian
made his escape and delivered himself from that Death, which they intended to
inflict upon him. But when Jovianus was going from Antioch toward
Constantinople, he was taken sick of a sudden at Dadastana in Bithynia, and
died after he had been Emperor only eight months; in which so short a time he
was not able to do any signal Service to the public. And when he was dead,
there was a Consultation proposed, concerning who should be his Successor,
which occasioned a great variety of Discourse and of several Persons, among the
Soldiers as well as Officers; till at length they all with one accord pitched
upon Salustius, Prefect of the Court. But he pretending he was too old and
therefore could not serve 'em in those their ill circumstances, they desired
his Son might be Emperor in his stead. But he told 'em, that his Son was young,
and upon that as well as other accounts unfit to undergo the weight of an
Imperial Diadem; so that they missed the choice of such a Man, who was the best
in that Age. Upon which reason they voted for Valentinian, who was born at
Cibalis, in Pannonia, and an excellent Soldier but no Scholar at all. However
they sent for him, being then at some distance; nor did the Commonwealth long
want an Head. And when he came to the Army at Nicea in Bithynia, he there took
upon him the Imperial Authority, and marched forward.

A New HISTORY. Written by Count ZOSIMVS, Sometime Advocate of the Treasury.
The Fourth Book.
HOW things were managed until Jovians death, after whom Valentinian was chosen
Emperor, you may find in the foregoing Book; [but we have not yet informed you,
that] whilst Valentinian was on his way toward Constantinople, he fell sick of
a Distemper, which to his native, choleric humor added much cruelty and even
madness it self; insomuch that he, though falsely, suspected the reason of his
Illness to proceed from some Charm or Poison that Julian's friends had out of
malice prepared. And upon that ground there were Accusations drawn up against
some great Men, which the Prefect of the Court, who as yet was Salustius, by
his discretion and prudence took off. But after his Distemper abated he left
Nicaea and came to Constantinople. Where when the Army and his other friends
advised him to choose himself a Partner in the Empire, that if there should be
occasion, he might have some body to assist him, and not let them suffer as
they did at Julian's death; he took their Counsel, and having considered of it,
chose, among all that he could think of, his Brother Valens, who, he thought,
would prove most faithful to him. Him, therefore he declared his Partner in the
Empire. And whilst they both lived at Constantinople, all those who were
Enemies to Julian's friends, continually gave out at Court, that such and such
Persons had a Design upon the Emperors, and made the brutish Rabble also roar
it out. Upon which the Emperors, who for other reasons hated all Julian's
Acquaintance, were raised to a greater degree of animosity, and therefore
invented such Charges against 'em, as had no show of reason in them.
Particularly, Valentinian was very severe upon Maximus the Philosopher, who had
formerly indicted him, in Julian's time, for profaning or neglecting holy
things upon the score of Christianity. But their care and concernment for
Affairs both Civil and Military at that time drew 'em off from these kind of
things.

Then did they apply themselves to making of Governors over the several
Nations, and consulted who should have the charge of the Palace. By which means
all who had been Governors of Countries, or in any other Office under Julian
were turned out: among them, Salustius, Prefect of the Court. Only Arintheus
and Victor continued in their Military Commands, which they had before, as
Captains, whilst others who had a desire for this or that preferment, got it by
mere chance. And this indeed was the only reasonable thing which they seemed
to do: for if any of the Officers were found guilty upon just Informations
against 'em, they suffered most certainly beyond all hopes of a pardon.

When things were thus settled, Valentinian thought fit, since he and his
Brother were Partners, to put the East Countries as far as Egypt, Bithynia, and
Thrace under his care, and take charge of Illyricum himself. From whence he
designed to go over into Italy, and to keep all the Cities there, together with
the Nations beyond the Alps, all Spain, Britain, and Africa in his own hands.
And when the Empire was thus divided Valentinian began to be more severe in his
Government, correcting the Errors of the several Magistrates, being very
rigorous in collecting the Taxes, and seeing that the Soldiers had their due
out of 'em. But because he resolved likewise to set forth certain Laws, he
began at home (as they say) and forbad the nocturnal Sacrifices: intending
thereby to restrain and hinder a great many ill actions. And yet when
Praetextatus, Proconsul of Greece, who was a person adorned with all Virtues,
told him that the Greeks could never live under such a Law, whereby they were
kept from performing those most Sacred Mysteries, that were the very bond of
humane Society, he suffered 'em to be performed according to Order, without any
regard to his own Law, and took care every thing should be done after the
ancient custom of the Country.

In the mean time the Barbarians beyond the Rhine, who as long as Julian lived,
still feared the Roman Name, and were content to be quiet in their own
Dominions, as soon as they heard of his Death, immediately marched out of their
Country and were prepared for a War against the Romans. Which when Valentinian
heard, he disposed of Forces both Horse and Foot with those also that wore
light Armor, as it was fit he should, and put convenient Garrisons in all the
several Towns upon the Rhine. But these things were thus ordered by Valentinian
because he had some skill in Military Affairs: whilst Valens was beset with
troubles on every side, who having lived an unactive life and come to the
Empire of a sudden could not sustein the weight of business. For not only the
Persians, who were proud of their condition which was much better since the
Truce made by them and Jovian, and made inroads upon the Country without
control, since Nisibis was subject to 'em, by disturbing the Eastern Towns
constrained the Emperor to go against 'em, and at that very time when he parted
from Constantinople did the Rebellion of Procopius break out. For him Julian
had trusted with some part of his Forces, as being akin to him, and given him
charge, that he and Sebastianus should go through Adiabene, and meet Julian who
went against the Enemy another way: and gave him leave to wear an Imperial Robe
for a reason that no body else knew of. But when it had pleased God to order
things another way, and that Jovian had succeeded Julian in the Imperial
Throne, Procopius ran immediately and delivered the Imperial Garment, that was
given to him, to Jovian, confessing why he received it, and entreating the
Emperor to absolve him from his Military Oath, and let him live at quiet, that
he might mind nothing else but Husbandry and his own private business. Which
having obtained he went to Cesarea, in Cappadocia, with his Wife and Children;
because he resolved to live in that place, where he had a good Estate. But
whilst he stayed there, Valentinian and Valens being chosen Emperors and having
formerly had a suspicion of him, they sent immediately to take him. Nor was
there any difficulty in that, for he surrendered himself up to 'em, and bad let
'em carry him whither they pleased, so they would but suffer him to speak with
his Wife and see his Children first. Which they consenting to, he prepared a
Feast for 'em, and when he saw they were Drunk, he and all his Family made
their escape toward the Euxine Sea: whence he took shipping and went over into
Cherronesus Tauriana. And having stayed there some time, he found the
Inhabitants to be a faithless sort of people, which made him fear, lest one
time or other they would deliver him up to those that sought for him; and
therefore seeing a Merchant Ship sail by, he put himself and Family on board of
it and in the Nightime arrived at Constantinople. Where lodging at an old
Acquaintant's House of his, and considering the State of the City since the
Emperor's departure, he attempted to make himself Emperor, and this was the
foundation of his Design.

There was a certain Eunuch, called Eugenius, not long before turned out of the
Court, who had no great love for the Emperors. Him therefore Procopius made his
friend, because he found him very Rich, and told him who he was, why he came
thither and how things ought to be managed. Whereupon, the Eunuch having
promised him to bear a part in all Attempts whatever, and to lend him Money, if
he wanted it; the first thing they undertook was, with Money to corrupt the
City-Guards, which consisted of two Legions. And then arming the Slaves and
mustering up with ease a vast multitude of Men, who were many of 'em
Volunteers, they sent 'em, in the Night, into the City, and made a general
disturbance; for that the people came every one out of their several Houses and
gazed upon Procopius as if he had been a King made of a sudden in a Play. But
the City being all in an uproar, and no Man in his right mind, or that could
tell what to do by reason of the surprise, Procopius thought he was yet
undiscovered by a great many, and that he might secure the Power to himself, if
the business were but so far unreveal'd. Then having taken Cesarius, whom the
Emperors had made Prefect of the City, and Nebridius, to whom they had
committed the Government of the Court after Salustius, he forced 'em to write
to the Subjects of the Empire whatever he pleased. But he also kept 'em
asunder, that they might not advise with one another. And when he had contrived
things thus, he went toward the Court in a splendid manner, where getting up
upon a Tribunal before the Gate, he filled all people with hopes and large
promises, and then marched into the Palace to take care for the remaining part
of his Affairs.

And because the new Emperors had divided the Army between 'em, Procopius
thought it requisite to send certain persons to the Soldiers, who were yet in
Disorder, and went by the Emperor's Command, from place to place as they
pleased, to bring over as many as they could to his Party. Nor did they fail
with ease to accomplish their Design, by giving Money to them and their
Officers: insomuch that they mustered up a considerable number, and made
themselves ready openly to set upon the Enemy. After which Procopius sent
Marcellus with an Army into Bithynia to take Serenianus and the Imperial Horse
that he had with him, in hopes to destroy 'em. But they flying to a Town called
Cyzicum, Marcellus took it, as being too strong for 'em both by Sea and Land;
and having caught Serenianus who was fled into Lydia, he put him to Death. With
which first lucky hit Procopius was so exalted that he raised more Men by
degrees, and was able in the Opinion of many people to fight the Emperors; for
both the Roman Legions, and the Barbarian Forces flocked to him. And then
besides the very honor of being akin to Julian, and having been his
Fellow-Soldier in all the Wars that he was ever engaged in, drew people to his
Party. Nor was that all, but he likewise sent certain Noblemen to the Prince of
Scythia which lies beyond Ister, who contributed ten thousand Men to fight in
his service. So also did the other Barbarous Nations send in their Quota, to
make themselves sharers in the Expedition. But yet Procopius considered that it
was not fit for him to engage with both the Emperors together, and therefore
thought it the best way to fight him first that was nearest, and then consult
farther, what was to be done.

And thus was Procopius employed: whilst the Emperor Valens, who heard of this
Rebellion at Galatia in Phrygia was frighted at the news and filled with
consternation. But Arbitio bad him have a good heart, and then he made those
Men that he had, ready for the War; and sent likewise to his Brother, to let
him know what Designs Procopius had in hand. But Valentinian did not think fit
to send Auxiliaries to him who was not able to defend that Empire which was
committed to him. So Valens was fain to prepare for a fight, and made Arbitio
General of his Army against Procopius. But when the Armies were just ready to
engage, Arbitio circumvented Procopius by a stratagem, and brought over a great
number of his Men, from whom he learned beforehand whatever Procopius designed
to do. And when the Emperor and Procopius came toward each other, the two
Armies met near Thyatira: where Procopius had like to have had the better on it,
and made him sole Lord of all, because Hormisdas (which was his Father's name
too) seemed in the fight to be too many for the Enemy. But Gomarius, another of
Procopius's Captains, imparting his intention to all Procopius's Soldiers that
loved the Emperor, cried out in the midst of the fight, Augustus, with a shout,
and gave the signal for all the rest to do the same; so that all Procopius's
Men went over to Valens.

And he as soon as he had gotten the Victory marched to Sardeis, and thence
into Phrygia, where in a Town called Nacolia he found Procopius; and there
again one Naplo, a Captain of Procopius, having ordered every thing for the
Emperors advantage, Valens had much the better of him; insomuch that he took
the Traitor, and, not long after him, Marcellus, whom he put both to Death. But
finding an Imperial Robe in Marcellus's possession that was given him by
Procopius, he was so angry at it, that he fell foul upon all and inquired after
not only those that were Actors in the Rebellion, but those also that were
Counselors in it, or so much as heard any thing of it, which they did not
presently discover. By which means he was very severe upon all sorts of Men,
without any justice; whilst all that either conspired or were but even kinsmen
or friends of the Conspirators, though otherwise altogether innocent, were
sacrificed to the Emperors fury.

Now this being the state of Affairs in that part of the Empire, which was
allotted to Valens, the Emperor Valentinian, who dwelt in the Countries beyond
the Alps, fell into very great and unexpected dangers. For all Germany
recollecting what they had suffered in those Days when Julian was a Caesar, as
soon as they heard of his Death, shook off all fear from their Souls, and
resuming their natural audacity they went one and all and invaded the Countries
that were subject to the Roman Empire. Where when the Emperor met 'em, they had
a smart Battle, in which the Barbarians won the Day and put the Roman Army to a
shameful flight. But Valentinian was resolved he would not run away to save his
life; and therefore bore the fortune of the fight with seeming satisfaction,
till he had found out who were the cause of their misfortune by beginning first
to fly. And having made strict enquiry so as at last to prove the Batavian
Legion guilty of it, he ordered all the Army to come together in all their
habiliments of War, as if they had been to hear some Speech that might have
been for their instruction in some matter of consequence. And when they came,
he made such an Oration to 'em, as brought perpetual shame upon them that began
to fly; and commanded that the Batavi should be stripped of their Arms and sold
for fugitive slaves to any public Colony or Plantation. Whereupon they all
fell flat upon the ground and begged of him not to inflict so shameful a
punishment upon his Soldiers, promising that hereafter they would show
themselves men and worthy of the Roman Name. To which he complied, and bid 'em
show by their actions, they meant what they said; whilst they arose from the
Earth, and arming themselves, as they ought to do, they renewed the fight, and
going without the Trench showed such alacrity and courage, that of an infinite
number of Barbarians there were but few went home again. And thus the War
against all Germany ended at that time.

But the Emperor Valens, having put many men to death after Procopius's death
and confiscated the goods of many more, was hindered from his expedition into
Persia by a party of Scythians, that live beyond the Ister, who infested the
Roman Territories. Against whom he sent out a competent number of men and
stopped their progress; nor only so, but forced 'em to surrender their Arms,
and sent 'em to inhabit in several Towns of his, that lie upon the Ister: with
Orders, that they should be kept in a Prison without Chains. Now these were the
Men that the Scythian Prince had sent Procopius as Auxiliaries to him, and
therefore when he desired of the Emperor that they might be dismissed, because
they were sent at the request of Ambassadors from him who had then the power in
his hands, the Emperor Valens would by no means hearken to it. For, he said,
they were neither sent to him nor taken as friends, but as Enemies: which was
the cause of the Scythian War. But when the Emperor perceived the Enemy had
some thoughts of invading the Roman Dominions, and that upon the same account
they were mustered up together with all speed, he drew his Army up along the
bank of Ister, and lying himself at Marcianople (which is the biggest City in
all Thrace) he took care both of his Armies being well exercised, and also that
they wanted no provisions. At which time also he made Auxonius Prefect of the
Court, Salustius having leave to lay down his Commission by reason of his Age,
after he had been twice in that same Office. Auxonius therefore, though such a
dangerous War was at hand, was not only just in collecting the Tributes, and
seeing that no Man was oppressed beyond what was his right and due to pay; but
he likewise got a great many Ships of burden, wherein he carried the Soldiers
provisions through the Euxine Sea as far as the mouth of the Ister, and thence
by Boats conveyed it to the several Towns upon the Riverside, so that the Army
might easily be supplied.

But after these things were thus transacted in the Wintertime, the Emperor in
the beginning of the Spring marched out of Marcianople, and going over into the
Enemies Country with those Soldiers, that were engarison'd about the Ister, he
attaqued the Barbarians. But they not daring to fight a pitched Battle,
absconded themselves in the Fenns, from whence they made secret sallies; and
therefore he ordered his Men to stand their ground, whilst he mustered up all
the Servants about the Camp, with all those that had the charge of the
Carriages, and promised to give that Man such a sum of Money who brought him
the head of a Barbarian. Whereupon they were all in hopes to get the Money; and
going into the Fenns and tge Woods killed all they met, and bringing the heads
of those that were slain received the Sum appointed. By which means there were
such a multitude destroyed, that the rest petitioned the Emperor for a Truce.
Nor did he reject their desire, but a Peace was made between them, which was no
dishonor to the Roman Name. For it was agreed that the Romans should enjoy
with all security whatever they formerly had, and the Barbarians were sorbid to
pass the River or come at all into the Roman Dominions.

Having made this Peace, he went to Constantinople, where seeing the Prefect of
the Court was dead, he gave Modestus the Place; and when he had so done, made
haste toward the War in Persia.

But whilst he was employed in his preparations for that, the Emperor
Valentinian, having put the German Affairs into a good posture, thought fit to
make provision for the future security of the Celtick Countries. To which end
he raised a vast multitude of young Men both of the Barbarians near the Rhine
and of the Husbandmen that lived in Countries subject to the Romans; all whom
he mustered among the Legionary Soldiers, and disciplined them so well, that
out of mere dread of that skill and experience in military Affairs, there was
not one of all those who live beyond the Rhine, who durst attempt the Cities
which were under the Romans, for nine years together; About which time one
Valentinian was banished for some misdemeanors into the Island of Britain,
where whilst he endeavored to make himself absolute, he lost his hopes and his
life together. And Valentinian the Emperor also fell sick of a Distemper, which
had like to have cost him his life: but yet he recovered, and then the
Courtiers came about him, desiring that he would declare who should be his
Successor, lest any thing should happen to befall him, and thereby the
Commonwealth be endamaged. To whom the Emperor assented, and declared his Son
Gratianus Emperor and his Partner in the Government, though he were young, and
not yet ripe of Age.

But the Affairs of the West being in this condition, the Emperor Valens
prepared to go for the East against the Persians, whither he was first bound.
And as he went gently onward, he assisted the Towns that sent Ambassadors to
him as much as was convenient: besides his doing many other good actions, and
easily granting their requests to all such as made just Demands. And when he
came to Antioch he ordered all matters relating to the War with great caution
and security; but having stayed the Winter-season in the Palace there, he went
in the Spring to Hierapolis; from whence he led his Army against the Persians,
and when Winter came again returned to Antioch. And thus was the War against
the Persians protracted. But whilst the Emperor was at Antioch, there happened
an unusual accident which was this. There was one Theodorus among the rest of
the Imperial Notaries, a Person well born and bred, but very young and easily
drawn into Vice by the glavering delusions of dissembling Knaves, as being in
the heat and vigor of his Age. Him therefore did a parcel of such Fellows set
upon, and persuaded him that they were excellent Scholars; particularly that,
by their skill in Divination, which they very well understood, they could
foretell things to come; and having enquired who should be Emperor after
Valens, they had set up a Tripos, which in a secret manner revealed to them
what was to come: and furthermore, that in that Tripos there appeared the
Letters th. e o and d [i. e. Theod.] which did as good as say in plain terms
that Theodorus should succeed Valens in the Empire.

With these fooleries he was so taken, that he was mighty desirous to be
continually conversant with Juglers and Conjurers, consulting what was to be
done; but was complained of to the Emperor, who made him suffer for it
according to his desert. After which there was also another accident. One
Fortunatianus, who was the Emperors Treasurer, had sentenced one of his
Soldiers to be whipped for Sorcery; who having been put to the Torture and
forced to accuse some others that were his Accomplices, the Trial was removed
before Modestus who was Prefect of the Court, because there were some persons
brought in, that were not subject to the former Judges jurisdiction. For
Justice and Judgment take place among all sorts of Men; and the Emperor, who
was extremely incensed, suspected all the most famous Philosophers, or any
other persons that were bred up to Learning, besides some Men of Quality in the
Court, who were accused as Conspirators against the Empire. And upon this score
all places were full of weeping and lamentation; for all the Prisons were
crammed with Men that did not deserve to be in them, and there were more Men
upon the Roads, than were left in the Cities. Nay, the very Guards that were
set to keep the Prisons where such poor Innocents lay, confessed themselves
unable to secure those that were under their charge, and were afraid lest they
should one time or other escape from 'em by mere force, they were so many. And
in this case the Informers went off without any danger, being only forced to
accuse others; whilst the convicted were sometimes put to death without lawful
proof, and some of 'em lost their Estates, insomuch that their Wives, Children,
and other Relations were reduced to extreme necessity. For the Design was by
these several wicked arts to raise a great sum of Money for the Treasury. Now
the first great Philosopher that was taken off, was Maximus; and after him
Hilarious of Phrygia, who had plainly interpreted some obscure Oracle, with
Simonides, Patricius the Lydian, and Andronicus of Caria, who were all men of
incomparable Learning, and condemned rather out of envy than by any just
proceeding. Whereby all things were in so great a confusion, that the Informers
and the Rabble along with 'em would go without control into any man's House,
rifle all they met, and deliver 'em to those that were appointed to kill 'em
all without hearing what they could say for themselves. And of these Rogues one
Festus was the Ringleader, whom the Emperor, knowing to be very ready at all
kind of cruelty, had sent Proconsul into Asia, that no learned Man might be
left alive, but his Design might succeed. For Festus having made what search he
could, killed all that he found without any trial of 'em, and forced the rest
to fly their Country.

Now the calamity which befell the Cities upon the account of Theodorus was
thus removed. Whilst Valentinian who thought he had pretty well managed the
German War, was very severe upon his Subjects, in exacting of Tributes, and
extorting from 'em much more than ever they used to pay. Though he pretended
that the Military expenses forced him to lay out Money from the public Stock.
And thus having caused every body to hate him, he was more bitter than before:
nor would he either inquire whether the Magistrates kept themselves from
bribery, but envied all that had the reputation of leading a blameless life.
And, to speak plainly, he was quite another man from what he appeared to be at
the beginning of his Reign. For which cause the Africans who could not endure
the Avarice of that Roman who was the Magister Militum, [Master of the Soldiery
or General] among the Moors, they gave the Purple Robe to Firmus and declared
him to be Emperor. Which being told, no doubt but it troubled Valentinian: who
immediately commanded certain Legions from the Garrisons in Pannonia and Mysia
to sail into Africa. And thereupon the Sarmatians with the Quadi, who were long
before offended with him that had the charge of those places (whose name was
Celestius) when the Soldiers were gone over into Africa, invaded the Pannonians
and the Mysians. For since Celestius had broken his Oath and not only
deceived, but killed their Prince by treachery, before they rose from Table,
the Barbarians very wisely took the opportunity of this Expedition and
plundered all the Country about the Ister, carrying all away that they found
out of the Cities, or Towns. By which means the Pannonians were exposed to the
Barbarian cruelty, whilst the Soldiers were very negligent in defending their
Towns, and did as much damage as the Barbarians themselves to all places within
the River. But Mysia suffered no injury, because Theodosius, who was the
Magister Militum, so valiantly withstood 'em and routed 'em when they came
against him. And from that Victory he not only gained great Honor, but
afterward came to be Emperor. But of that we shall speak in due time.

But Valentinian, not able to endure the news which he heard, marched out of
Celtica into Illyricum, with a Design to make War upon the Quadi and
Sarmatians; and made Merobaudes, who seemed to have more experience in Military
Affairs than any other, General of his whole Army. But seeing that the Winter
weather lasted a little longer than ordinary, the Quadi sent Ambassadors to him
with such instructions as were not modest or becoming: at which the Emperor was
so angry, that being almost mad the blood came down from his head, into his
mouth and stopped his breath, so that he died, after he had lived in Illyricum
nine months wanting some few days, and in the twelfth year of his Reign.

When he was dead a Thunderbolt fell upon Sirmium which burnt both the Palace
and the Marketplace, and seemed to such as are Critical Judges of those things
to be an ill Omen concerning public Affairs. There also happened Earthquakes
in some places; and Crete was shaken very much as likewise Peloponnesus and all
Greece, so that many places were ruined by it, yea almost all tumbled down,
except Athens and the Country of Attica, which they say were saved by this
means. Nestorius, who at that time was the chief Sacrist there, saw a Vision
that commanded him to pay public Honors to that Hero, Achilles: for it would
be a safeguard to the City. But he having communicated this to the Magistrates
of the City, they thought he was so old, as to dote, and regarded not what he
said, wherefore he considered of it within himself, and receiving instructions
from Divine Contemplations, he set up the Heroes Image which he made in a small
House under the Statue of Minerva which was placed in the Virgin Chamber. And
as often as he did sacrifice to the Goddess, he at the same time duly performed
what belonged to the Hero. And by this means having satisfied the desire of
the Vision, the Athenians were free from the Earthquake which fell upon every
body else excepting only the Country of Attica which partook of the Heroes
kindness. Now that this is true you may read in Syrianus the Philolosopher, who
has written an Hymn upon this Hero. And these things I thought fit to add as
not altogether impertinent to our present business.

But now that Valentinian was dead, and Merobaudes and Equitius, two Tribunes,
saw Valens and Gratian lived then at a great distance (for the one was in the
East, and the other left by his Father in the West of Gaul) they feared lest it
should so fall out, that the Barbarians beyond Ister might make some effort
whilst the Country was without a Governor, and therefore sent for
Valentinian's younger Son, whom he had by his Wife, that was Magnentius's
Widow, and not far off with the Child. Whom when they had clothed in Purple
they brought him into the Court, being scarce five years of Age. And when it
came to pass that Gratian and this young Valentinian divided the Empire between
'em, according to their discretion who were their Guardians or Protectors (for
they were not of age to manage their own Affairs) the Celtick Countries, all
Spain and the Island of Britain was given to Gratianus, and Valentinian was to
have all Italy, Illyricum, and Africa. Whilst in the mean time many
innundations of Wars oreflow'd the Emperor Valens from all parts. Of which the
first were, the Isauri (who are by some called Pisidae, by others Solymi, and
by others Cilices montani or Mountain Cilicians, of whom we will speak more
accurately when we come to the proper place for it) who plundered the Towns in
Lycia and Pamphylia, and though they could not get possession of the Walls and
Houses, yet they took away all that was in the Streets, or Fields. But the
Emperor who was yet at Antioch, sent a sufficient number of Men (as he thought)
against 'em, and then the Isauri fled with all their spoils into the craggy
Mountains, where the Soldiers were either so lazy as not to follow 'em, or
otherwise unable to remedy those misfortunes which the several Towns had
undergone.

But whilst these things were thus managed, a certain barbarous Nation, which
was never known till then, but appeared all of a sudden, attaqued the Scythians
beyond Ister. They are called Hunni, [and we know not] whether you may say,
they were Scythians, that lived under a Kingly Government, or those whom
Herodotus says lived near the Ister, and were a sort of flat-nosed, weak
people, or whether they came out of Asia inro Europe. For I have read a Story
that tells us, The Cimmerian Bosphorus was made firm ground by mud brought down
the Tanais and afforded them a Land-passage over out of Asia into Europe. But
however, there they were, with their Wives, Children, Horses and Carriages, and
invaded the Scythians that live upon the Ister: and though they neither could
nor understood how to fight on foot (for how should they? when they are not
able to set their feet firm upon the earth, but live continually, nay sleep on
Horseback) yet by their wheeling about upon their Horses, by their excursions,
and timely retreats, and by shooting as they rode, they made a great slaughter
among the Scythians. And this they did so continually, that the surviving
Scythians were forced to leave their Habitations to these Hunni, and passing
over the Ister to go and beseech the Emperor to receive 'em, upon their promise
to be his true and faithful Fellow Soldiers. Which petition of theirs seeing
the Officers of Garrison Towns near the Ister deliberated upon till the Emperors
pleasure was known, Valens permitted them to be received but without their
Arms. In order whereunto the Tribunes, and other Commanders went over to fetch
the Barbarians unarmed into the Roman Territories: but spent their time only
in looking after handsome Wenches, hunting out pretty Boys for beastly uses, or
making themselves masters of Slaves and Country hinds (for they minded nothing
that concerned the public good) so that a great many passed over with their
Arms, through mere negligence; who as soon as they were got into the Roman
Dominions, remembered neither their Petitions nor their Oaths, but filled all
Thrace, Pannonia and the whole Country as far as Macedonia and Thessaly, with
Barbarians that pillaged all before 'em.

When therefore they were in such extremity of danger, certain persons went to
the Emperor and told him what had happened. Whereupon having settled his Affairs
in Persia as well as he could, he made haste from Antioch and went for
Constantinople: from whence he marched into Thrace to fight those fugitive
Scythians. But as the Army and the Emperor himself were going forth, they saw a
strange sight, which was this. There was the body of a Man lying in the Rode,
stone-still, that looked as if it had been whipped from head to heel, only its
eyes were open, and stared upon all that came near it. Of whom when they had
demanded, What he was, and whence he came, or who had slashed him so, and
received no answer; they thought it some prodigious thing and showed him to the
Emperor as he passed by. Who though he asked it the same questions, yet it
remained speechless; nor could it be thought a living creature because it was
void of all motion, or quite dead, because the Eyes were seemingly well. At
last it vanished of a sudden. Which when the standersby beheld they could not
tell what to think; but those, that have skill in such things, said, it
foretold the future State of the Empire, That the Commonwealth should look as
if it were beaten and whipped, like those that are just expiring, till by the
ill-management of Magistrates and Ministers it were quite dead. And indeed if
we consider every thing, this prediction will appear to be true.

But the Emperor Valens seeing the Scythians plunder all Thrace, resolved to
send those men whom he had brought along with him out of the East, and knew to
be very good at fighting on Horse back, to make the first charge upon the
Scythian Horse. They therefore having received the Word from the Emperor went
in small numbers out of the Gates of Constantinople, and killing the straggling
Scythians with their Spears, brought many of their Heads each day into the
City. And because the nimbleness of their Horses, together with the force of
their Spears made the Scythians think it hard to overcome them, they intended
to circumvent the Saracens by a stratagem, which was thus: They planted
Ambuscades in several places of three Scythians to one Saracen: but failed of
their Design; for that the Saracens through the swiftness and agility of their
Horses could get away whenever they saw any considerable number of them
acoming. But if they came up to 'em softly, and hit 'em with their Spears, they
commonly made such a slaughter among the Scythians, that at last they chose
rather to pass the Ister, since they despaired of doing any good of it, and
surrender themselves to the Hunni, than be all knocked on the head by the
Saracens. When therefore they forsook all the places near Constantinople, and
were gone farther into the Country, the Emperor had room to draw his Army
forward. But whilst he stood considering how he should manage the War (when
such a multitude of Barbarians were at hand, and the ill conduct of his own
Officers gave him such trouble, that as he was afraid to casheer 'em in such
tempestuous circumstances; so also he was doubtful who he should put in their
places, since no one appeared that was fit for such employments) Sebastianus
left the West (though the Emperors there did not understand how things went by
reason of their nonage, but gave themselves wholly up to hearing of Calumnies
from the Eunuchs that attended in their Chambers) and came to Constantinople.
Which when Valens heard of, and was satisfied how skilful a person he was both
in military and civil Affairs, he made him General, and trusted him with the
management of the whole War. Whereupon Sebastianus considering the effeminacy
and sluggishness of the Tribunes as well as the Soldiers, how that they were
bred and taught only to run away, and to desire things that were base and more
fit for Women than Men to wish for. He begged that he might have but two
thousand Men of his own choosing. For he knew it was a difficult matter to
command a multitude of men that had been dissolutely governed, though it was
easy enough to teach a small number, and reclaim 'em from their effeminacy
into manhood: besides that it was more expedient to run the risque of a few
than of all. By which Arguments having persuaded the Emperor and obtained his
desire, He took not such who had been bred up in cowardice and used to run
away, but a party of men that had been lately taken into the Army, who were
lusty hale Fellows, and seemed to him who could judge of men, to be fit for any
service. He therefore presently made trial of each one among 'em, and what was
wanting he supplied by continual exercise, commending and rewarding all those
that were obedient, but seeming severe and inexorable to all that were
disobedient. And when he had by this means taught 'em all military Art, he took
possession of certain walled Towns, as having a great regard to the safety of
his Army. But from thence he attaqued the Barbarians by frequent Ambuscades as
they came out to forage: and sometime when they were laden with Spoils he
killed 'em, and made himself Master of what they had; and at other times
destroyed 'em whilst they were Drunk or washing in the River.

But when he had taken off a great part of the Barbarians by these methods, and
that the rest were so much afraid of him that they durst not come to forage,
he was extraordinarily envied. And that envy began an hatred of him, till at
length he was accused before the Emperor by those that had lost their Commands,
and therefore set the Court Eunuchs on to do him a diskindness. And by this
means the Emperor being perverted into an unreasonable suspicion of him,
Sebastianus sent the Emperor word, that he would have him stay where he was and
not march forward: For that it was no easy matter to come to a pitched Battle
with such a vast number of men; but it was better to protract the time by
circumventions and Ambuscades till they despaired for want of necessaries, and
either surrendered themselves, or departed out of the Roman Territories and put
themselves under the Hunns rather than be exposed to all that misery and
destruction which does attend a Famine. But whilst he advised the Emperor to
this, the adverse party persuaded him, to march forth with his whole Army: for
that the Barbarians were almost all destroyed, and the Emperor might gain a
Victory without any trouble. And this counsel of theirs though it were the
worse of the two so far prevailed, that (as ill fortune would have it) the
Emperor drew forth his whole Army without any order at all. Which when the
Barbarians boldly met they got the better of it by far and killed almost all of
'em, except some few, with whom the Emperor fled into an unwalled Village;
about which the Barbarians piled Wood and setting fire to it burnt all that ran
thither together with the Inhabitants, in such a manner that no one could ever
find the Emperor's body.

Now when Affairs were reduced to this low ebb, Victor who commanded the Roman
Horse, escaping the danger along with some of the Horse, went into Macedonia
and Thessaly, and from thence making an excursion into Mysia and Pannonia, he
told Gratian, who then lay thereabout, how things had fallen out, as also of
the loss both of the Emperor and the Army. Which Gratian heard with patience,
and was not much concerned for his Uncles Death (for there had been a grudg
between them two) but seeing himself unable to manage his Affairs, since Thrace
was over run by the Barbarians, as likewise Mysia and Pannonia, and that the
barbarous Nations upon the Rhine infested the Neighboring Towns without
control, he chose Theodosius to be his Partner in the Empire, who was born at
a Town called Cauca, in that part of Spain called Hispania Callaecia, and had
good skill as well as experience In Military Affairs. And having made him
Governor of Thrace and of the East Countries, He went himself into the West of
Gallia, to compose things there if it were possible.

Whilst therefore the new Emperor Theodosius remained at Thessalonica, there
was a great concourse of people from all parts that flocked thither both upon
private and public business, and having obtained of him as much as it was fit
for him to grant, went away again. But since a great multitude of the Scythians
that lived beyond the Ister (I mean the Gotthi, and the Taiphali, and the rest
of those Nations which formerly lived among 'em) had passed the River, and were
forced to infest the Roman Dominions, because the Hunni had gotten into their
Country, the Emperor Theodosius prepared for a War with all his Forces. But
seeing all Thrace was in the hands of the aforesaid Nations, and those that
guarded the Towns and Castles there durst not move out of their Walls, much
less engage in the open field, Modares, who was of the Royal Family of Scythia,
and had not long before come over to the Romans, who, for his fidelity to 'em,
had made him Magister Militum [ i. e. a General] having drawn the Soldiers to
the top of an Hill which was even and plain like a Meadow, of a great length,
with spacious fields at the bottom of it, he lay there unknown to the
Barbarians. And understanding by his Scouts that all the Enemies were in the
fields below, luxuriously wasting and destroying all the forage and provisions
that they found either in the Fields or in the unwalled Villages, so that they
lay there Drunk, he commanded his Soldiers so as not to be heard by the Enemy,
to go with their Swords and Bucklers only, without their heavy Armor or
joining of their Shields together, as they used, and set upon the Barbarians
whilst they were drowned in pleasure. Which they accordingly having done, in
one small part of a Day killed every one of 'em; among whom some were never
sensible who hurt 'em, others just felt their Wound and died, and the rest were
taken off by several sorts of Death. And afterward when they were all slain,
they fell to risling the Dead, from whence they proceeded to the Women and
Children and took four thousand Wagons and as many Captives as may probably
ride in so many Carriages, besides them that went on foot and only rode now and
then (as it is usual) by turns, to ease themselves.

Thus when the Army had made use of all that Fortune offered to it, the Affairs
of Thrace, which had been upon the very brink of ruin, were then at rest, since
the Barbarians there were destroyed beyond all hopes. But the Dominions of the
East had like to have utterly been ruined by this means: After the Hunns had
invaded the Nations beyond Ister (as I have told you) and that the Scythians
could not withstand their incursions, they begged of the Emperor Valens who was
then in being, that he would take 'em into Thrace, and they would do all the
Duties of Follow-Soldiers and good Subjects, in perfect obedience to all his
Commands. With which Promise of their Valens was so far persuaded as to admit
'em: and thinking it would be a sufficient caution for their fidelity if he
caused all their Children who were yet very young to be brought up in another
Country, he sent a great number of little Brats into the East, and made Julius
the Overseer both of their Education and keeping, because he thought him
sufficiently qualified with understanding for both those Offices. He therefore
distributed them into several Towns, lest the Barbarian Youth, being such a
vast number together, might have any opportunity to rebel or being out of their
own Country, to form a Conspiracy. Now the news of what had befaln their
Countrymen in Thrace was brought to them whilst they lived at the several
Towns and were grown to Man's estate. At which they were much troubled, and met
together, as many of 'em as lived in one City, who privately sent word to those
that inhabited in other places, that they had a mind to set upon the Roman
Towns in revenge for what their Parents and Countrymen had suffered. In the
mean time Julius hearing of the Barbarians intention, and doubting what to do,
though he at the same instant feared the expedite Attempts of the Barbarians
when they were once set on, he resolved not to let Theodosius know of the
Design, not only because he was then in Macedonia, but also because this
Charge was committed to him by Valens and not by Theodosius, who was then
Emperor, but yet hardly knew Julius: and therefore sent Letters privately to
the Senate of Constantinople, from whom having Authority to do what he thought
most conducing to the public good, he removed the danger that threatened the
several Towns in this manner. He sent for all the Military Officers and gave
'em an Oath of secrecy before he told 'em his Design. Which when they
understood and were instructed what to do, they spread a report among all the
Barbarians of each Town, that the Emperor had a mind to present 'em with large
gifts, and give 'em every one not only Money but Land too, to oblige 'em to
love himself and the Roman Nation. In order whereunto they bad 'em all meet at
their Metropolises or chief Cities upon a certain Day. With which news the
Barbarians were so pleased, that they remitted something of their fury and the
destruction which they intended to their several Cities: And upon the Day
appointed they all flocked to the places where they were ordered to meet. Where
when they arrived, the Soldiers who knew the signal, got up upon the tops of
Houses that were near the several Marketplaces (where the throng of 'em was)
and as the Barbarians came in did so pelt 'em with Stones and Darts that they
killed 'em every man and freed the Eastern Cities from all their fears.

And thus did the sagacity of their Officers put an end to those misfortunes
which happened both in the East and Thrace. Whilst at the same time the Emperor
Theodosius living in Thessalonica was very accessible to all that had a mind to
see him; but having begun his Reign in pleasure and idleness, he put the
Magistracy into disorder, and made the Military Officers more than they were
before. For whereas there had been formerly but one General or Master of the
Horse, and one other of the Foot, he distributed those Offices among above more
than five, and thereby put the public to greater charges for provisions. For
every one of those five or more had as much allowed him, as either of 'em had
when there was but two: besides that it was oppression upon the Soldiers to be
exposed to the avarice of so many Officers. For every one of 'em would get as
much out of the Soldiers allowance as one of two should. But this was not all:
for he increased the number of Captains, Lieutenants and Tribunes to such a
degree, that he left 'em twice as many as he found 'em, nor had the Soldiers
one farthing of their allowance out of the Treasury. All which was occasioned
by the Emperors negligence and excessive covetousness. Nay farther, it was He
that introduced such a vast expense at the Imperial Table, that to serve in
such a quantity of provisions and furnish a Table so richly, there were whole
Legions of Cooks, Butlers, and other attendants, whom if a man would reckon up
he must spend a great deal of time in taking down their names. For as to the
multitude of Eunuchs about the Court employed in the Emperors service, and how
most of 'em, especially such as were more beautiful than others called any
Magistrate or Officer to account whom they pleased, and how they had in effect
the sole Government of the Empire, disposing of the Emperor as they thought
fit, and changing his mind to whatsoever they desired. As to these things why
should I speak much, I say, when I am to show the particular causes of that
destruction which happened through such means. For as he would squander away
the public Stock without any consideration and bestow it upon fellows that had
no worth in 'em, till he was like enough to want Money; So he sold all Commands
of Provinces to any one that would buy 'em, without any regard either to the
reputation or conversation of the party, and thought him best qualified that
brought him most Gold or Silver. So that you might see Goldsmiths and Bankers
and others that are of the most sordid professions, with the Ensigns of
Magistracy about 'em, and selling the Provinces to those that had most Money.

And now since there was such a change in the State and so much for the worse,
the Soldiery was soon lessened, and came even to nothing at all: besides that
all the Money was gone out of the Towns, partly to pay excessive Taxes, and
partly to satisfy the covetousness of the Magistrates. For whosoever did not
endeavor to please and humor their insatiable desire, they suborned fellows
to accuse him, and did as good as say, they must get up what they paid for
their places. By which means those that lived in Towns led a very miserable
life through their own poverty and the iniquity of the Magistrates, and only
prayed to God to deliver 'em from such afflictions; for as yet they were
permitted to go in to the Temples and worship the Gods after their Country
fashion.

But the Emperor Theodosius seeing the Army very much diminished, permitted the
Barbarians beyond Ister, as many as would to come to him, and promised to make
all the Fugitives, Soldiers. Upon which terms many of 'em went to him and were
mustered among the Legions; conceiving within themselves when they were more of
'em together, they might easily attaque the Government and make themselves
Lords of all. But the Emperor having taken a view of the Fugitives who were a
great multitude, and more already than the other Soldiers that were there; and
considering also how it were possible to curb 'em if they had a mind to break
their promises of Obedience, he thought best to mingle some of 'em with those
Legions that were in Egypt, and take a Detachment from thence to supply their
places in his Army. Which when he had done, so that one party came and the
other went according to the Emperor's Order, the Egyptians indeed marched
through the several Towns very quietly and paid for what they had, but the
Barbarians behaved themselves very rudely, and disposed of all that was in the
several Markets as they pleased. But when they both met at Philadelphia, which
is a Town in Lydia the Egyptians who were far fewer than the Barbarians
observed their Officers Orders, whilst the Barbarians who exceeded them in
number, pretended to a greater privilege. And therefore when a certain
Tradesman in the Market place demanded his Money for Goods that he had sold to
a Barbarian, but the Barbarian drew his sword and cut him, whereupon the man
cried out, and there was another also hurt who came to assist him, the
Egyptians being sorry to see such an ill action, they modestly admonished the
Barbarians to refrain from such ununhandsom and unjust deeds; for that it did
not become men that resolved to live under the Roman Laws. But they were never
the better for their advice but drew upon them too, so long till the Egyptians
giving way to their passion fell upon 'em, killed above two hundred, and
wounding some of 'em compelled the rest to fly into Sinks where they died. But
when the Egyptians had done thus to the Barbarians at Philadelphia, and
persuaded them to be more modest, as being never like to want Enemies, they
held on their way: and the Barbarians marched toward Egypt whither they were
bound. Now their General was Hormisdas, a Persian, the Son of that Hormisdas,
who was with the Emperor Julian in the Persian War. But when the Egyptians came
into Macedonia and were joined with the Legions there, no Order was observed in
the Camp, nor any distinction between a Roman and a Barbarian, but all
conversed promiscuously together, neither was there so much as a Muster Roll
kept of the Soldiers names. Nay farther, it was permitted that the Fugitives
might go back into their own Country, though they were listed among the
Legions and send others in their stead, and when they pleased come again and be
Soldiers under the Romans.

When the Barbarians saw such disorder in the A^my (for the Fugitives-inform'd
'em of it, ^^^des the tree access which they had to it) they thought this a
fair opportunity to make an Attempt upon the Romans, who were so careless in
the conduct of their Affairs. And therefore having passed the River with ease,
and marched as far as Macedonia (for no body hindered 'em, being the Fugitives
could let 'em pass without molestation as far as they pleased) when they found
that the Emperor was coming to meet 'em with all his Forces, by a great fire
which they saw at Midnight and guessed to be near the Emperor and his Retinue
(which they also understood so to be from the Fugitives that came to 'em) they
ran by the light of that fire up to the Emperor's Tent. Where being joined by
the Fugitives, the Romans only (except some few fugitives that were on their
side) opposed 'em. Yet being so few against so many, they made indeed a shift
to give the Emperor time to escape, but themselves were all slain; not but that
they fought bravely and killed a great multitude of the Barbarians. Upon which
occasion if the Barbarians had followed their blow, and pursued those that fled
away with the Emperor, they had certainly vanquished 'em every man upon the
first attempt. But being satisfied with what they had won, and made themselves
Masters of Macedonia and Thessaly, which no body guarded, they left the Towns
to their own liberty, and did 'em no damage, out of hopes to have a Tribute
from 'em.

But the Emperor, when he heard they were marched home upon that account,
secured the Castles and walled Towns with Guards, and went himself to
Constantinople; having sent Letters to the Emperor Gratian to tell him what had
happened, and that it was necessary with all speed to send Relief in such
extremity of danger. And when he had dispatched away Couriers, Posts or
Letter-Carriers upon that Message, he took notice of what Macedonia and
Thessaly had suffered, but made such Collectors of Tribute, as were severe and
rigid in their exactions of it: so that a Man might have seen all that which
was left through the humanity of the Barbarians, gathered up for Tribute. For
they paid not only Money, but gave in their Women's Attire, and all their
Clothes, even to that (I was going to say) which covered their nakedness, to
satisfy Taxes. Insomuch that every Town and Country was full of lamentation
and tears; whilst they all called out upon the Barbarians and desired their
assistance.

And this was the State of Macedonia and Thessaly: whilst at the same time the
Emperor Theodosius made his entrance into Constantinople with splendor, as if
he had Triumphed for some great Victory; without any regard to the public
miseries, but making his luxuriant pleasures proportionable to the bigness of
the City. P. Diaconus says quite otherwise of him in his 12th Book. But (says
he) those things, wherewith Theodosius is aspersed, to wit, that he was a
Drunkard, and very ambitious to Triumph, he so much abhorred, that he waged
none, though he found Wars; and prohibited by a Law all lascivious actions, as
also Minstrels to be used at Feasts. But we must pardon Zosimus in this,
because with him it was the greatest Crime merely to be a Christian.
But the Emperor Gratian being mightily troubled at the news sent forth a
sufficient Army under the command of Baudo, accompanied by Arbogastes, who were
both of 'em Franks, but loved the Romans very well, were free from all bribery,
or covetousness and wise as well as stout Soldiers. Who when they came with the
Army into Macedonia and Thessaly, the Scythians that were there a plundering
all before 'em, as soon as they perceived the resolution and Design of these
two Men, immediately left the Country and ran back into Thrace, which they had
formerly pillaged. Where being in doubt what to do, they made use of such a
stratagem as before, and endeavored to cheat the Emperor Theodosius with the
same trick again. For they sent unto him Fugitives of the meanest rank, to
promise him all friendship and obedience; whom he believing entertained. And
therefore, least his former experience should have made him sensible of his own
advantage; they were followed by a great many more, whom he in like manner
received: till by the Emperor's folly the Fugitives had once more got the power
into their own hands. And that folly of his was daily increased by his
voluptuous way of living; for whatsoever contributes to the debauching of good
Manners received such additions in his Reign, that every one who affected to be
like the Emperor placed all humane happiness in such kind of things. For there
were Mimichs, and those cursed Caitiffs the Dancers, with every thing else that
conduces to obscenity or that lascivious and dissolute Music, which was in use
both in his time and after; insomuch that the Empire was utterly ruined by
those that imitated that fort of folly and madness. Nay more, they violated the
Temples of the Gods in all places, nor was it safe for any one to profess there
were any Gods, much less to look up to Heaven and adore what they saw there.

But whilst Theodosius was thus employed, the Emperor Gratian sent Vitalianus
to be General of the Illyrian Legions, who was a Man that could not any way
relieve 'em in that their languishing condition. And whilst this Vitalianus was
in Office there were two Regiments of Germans that lived beyond the Rhins, the
one of which was commanded by Fritigerne, and the other by Allothus and
Safraces, who lay so hard upon the Celtick Nations, that they forced the
Emperor Gratian to give 'em leave that if they would quit the Celtick Countries
they might cross the Ister and march into Pannonia and the upper Mysia: For his
Design and endeavor was to be freed from their continual inrodes. Whereupon
they passed the Ister with an intention to go through Pannonia into Epirus, and
crossing the River Achelous to attaque the Cities of Greece; but first thought
fit to get good store of provisions, and remove Athanaricus who was the chief
of all the Scythian royal Family, that no body might be left behind 'em to
hinder or obstruct their Enterprise. Accordingly they set upon him and easily
beat him out of the places where he lay: which made him betake himself with all
speed to Theodosius who was just then recovered from a Disease that had like to
have been the death of him. And Theodosius entertained very kindly both him and
all his Barbarians that were come along with him, going out a good way from
Constantinople to meet him. Nor was he less respectful to him afterward, but
when he died (which was within a little while) he interred him in a regal
Sepulcher; which was so sumptuous, that all the Barbarians stood amazed at the
excessive richness of it, and went again into their own Country, without
molesting the Romans any more, they so much admired the Emperors goodness and
magnificence. And as many of 'em as came along with the dead Prince,
continually guarded the bank of the River, lest any incursions should be made
upon the Romans.

At the same time Theodosius had more good fortune still. For he beat off the
Scyri and Carpodaces who were mixed with the Hunni, and so subdued 'em that he
forced 'em to cross the Ister and return into their own Country. From which
success of the Emperor his Soldiers reassumed their courage and seemed a little
to recover out of their former calamities, and the Husbandmen also had free
liberty to manure the Earth, as likewise the Cattle fed without fear. And thus
did Theodosius seem to make up their losses; whilst in the mean time Promotus,
who was General of the Foot in Thrace, but at this time made use of Boats as
well as Landforces, met with Aedotheus, who had raised a mighty Army not only
of the Nations that live upon the Ister, but such as live a great way off in
places unknown, and was then just coming with 'em over the River; where
Promotus (I say) met him and made such a slaughter among his men, that the very
River was filled with the dead bodies, and those that fell upon the Land could
scarce be numbered.

The Affairs of Thrace being in this condition, made Gratian's circumstances
very difficult: for he, taking the counsel of those Courtiers who use to
corrupt tho manners of Princes, received certain Fugitives called Alani, whom
he not only listed among his Army, but honored with large Presents, and
trusted with his greatest secrets, not valuing his own Soldiers at all. And
this begat in his Soldiers an hatred of him; which being enflamed, and
augmented by degrees, incited them toward innovation, but most of all that part
of 'em which was in the British Islands, as being the more resolute and surly
fellows. To which also Maximus, a Spaniard, who had been the Emperor
Theodosius's Fellow Soldier in Britain, gave 'em some farther encouragement.
For he took it very ill that Theodosius should be thought worthy of being made
Emperor, whilst he himself had no honorable Employment, and therefore incensed
the Soldiers with greater animosity against the Emperor. Upon which they were
easily persuaded and in a mutiny declared Maximus, Emperor. To whom having
presented the Purple Robe and Diadem, they went by Sea as far as the mouth of
the Rhine: Where seeing the German Army and all the rest that were in those
parts approved the choice very well, Gratian prepapared to fight him with a
considerable part of the Army which he yet had on his side. But when they came
to engage, they only skirmish'd for five days; till Gratian perceiving that,
first of all, the Moorish Horse forsook him and declared Maximus, Augustus; and
then that the rest revolted to Maximus by little and little, he bad adieu to
all good hopes, and taking along with him three hundred Horse, fled with them
to the Alps as fast as he could. And finding those parts unguarded, he went
toward Rhetia, Noricum, Pannonia and the upper Mysia. Which when Maximus
understood, he neglected not his opportunity, but sent Andragathius General of
the Horse, who was born near the Euxine Sea, and always seemed to be his
Friend, with the stoutest Horses that he had, to pursue him. And he accordingly
followed him with such speed, that he overtook him as he was just passing the
Bridge at Sigidunus and killed him: by which means he strengthened Maximus's
Dominion.

Now it is worth while upon this occasion to tell you a Story, not altogether
foreign from my present Narration. Among the Romans the Pontifices were the
persons who had the chief management of holy things: whom we may term
Gephyraei; if we translate the word Pontifices [which signifies Bridg-makers]
out of Latin into Greek; and the reason of that appellation was this. When men
as yet knew not how to worship by Statues, there were some Images of the Gods
first made in Thessaly: but because there were then no Temples (for the use of
them also was yet unknown) they set up those Pictures of the Gods upon a Bridge
that went cross the River Peneus, and called those that sacrificed to the Gods,
Gephyraei [Bridg Priests] from the place where the Images were first set up.
From whence the Romans, who take it from the Greeks, called those that were the
chief Priests, Pontifices, and made a Law that Kings, for their Honors sake,
should be reckoned among 'em. Of whom Numa Pompilius was the first that ever
enjoyed this Dignity; but after him all had it, not only that were called
Kings, but even Octavianus himself, and those who succeeded him in the Roman
Empire. For when any one came to be Emperor the Pontifices [chief Priests]
brought him the Priestly Habit, and presently he was styled [Pontifex Maximus]
or chief Priest. And indeed all other Emperors seemed very well pleased with
the Honor, and were willing to use the Appellation or Title, yea even
Constantine himself when he was Emperor [admitted of it] though he were
perverted from the right way in regard to holy matters, and embraced the
Christian Faith. So likewise after him did all the rest in order, to
Valentinian and Valens. But when the Pontifices [chief Priests] brought the
holy Robe to Gratian (as it was the custom to do) he rejected their offer; as
thinking it an unlawful Garb for a Christian to use. And when the Robe was
given back to the Priests that brought it, they say, the chief Person among 'em
said, If the Emperor will not be called Pontifex, we'll soon make one.

And thus did Gratian's Reign come to an end: whilst Maximus, who now opposed
himself to have sure footing in the Empire, sent an Embassy to the Emperor
Theodosius, not to beg pardon for what he had done against Gratian, but rather
to give a farther provocation. In which Negotiation, the Person sent was the
Imperial Chamberlain; yet no Eunuch (for Maximus would not have an Eunuch to
govern his Court) but a grave Person that had been his familiar Acquaintance
ever since he was a Child. Now the business which he went about, was, to ask
Theodosius if he would enter into a League, be friends, and make an Alliance
against all common Enemies that should oppose the Romans, and if he would not,
to declare against him open Hostility. Whereupon the Emperor Theodosius
admitted Maximus to be Emperor with him, and to partake both of his Statues and
his Imperial Title; though at the same time privately he levied War, and
endeavored to circumvent him by all manner of flattery and observance:
insomuch that he commanded Cynegius, Prefect of his Court, whom he sent into
Egypt, to prohibit all worship of the Gods there, and shut up their Temples,
that he should show the Alexandrians Maximus's Image, and set it up in some
public place, and declare to the people that he was to be his Partner in the
Empire. In which Affair Cynegius did as he was commanded; shutting up the
Temple-door throughout the East, all Egypt and Alexandria it self, and
prohibiting all their ancient sacrifices together with their customary Rites.
But now as to those things which from that time to this have befaln the Roman
Empire, a particular account from matter of fact will be a Demonstration.

About this time a cetain Nation of Scythians appeared from beyond the Ister,
who were never before known to any of the inhabitants thereabout; though the
Barbarians, of that Country called 'em, Prothingi. Who being a vast number of
'em, furnished with all convenient Arms, and very lusty men besides, they
easily overran the mid-land Barbarians, came down as far as the banks of
Ister, and desired leave to cross over the River. But Promotus, the General of
the Armies that lay there, drew his men out in lenght as far as he could along
the bank of the River and stopped the Barbarians passage. And whilst he was so
doing he found out also another way, which was this. He called together some of
his own Soldiers who understood their Language, and were such as he could trust
in things of that nature, and sent 'em to treat with these Barbarians about
betraying their own Party. But they that went, demanded a large Reward, to give
up the Roman General with the whole Army into the Barbarians hands. And when
the Barbarians told 'em they were not able to give so much, yet to create
belief of what they had said, they stood upon their first Proposals, and would
not abate one farthing of their price. At last being both sides agreed of the
Sum, they made secret compacts concerning the Treachery: in which it was
conserted, that part of the Money should be paid immediatey, and the rest when
the Victory was obtained. But when they had ordered how the Signal should be
given and the time when the Treason should be put in execution, they told the
whole story to the General; how that in the Nightime, the Barbarians were to
go about the work and cross the River to attaque the Roman Army.

The Barbarians therefore putting all their best men into a great many
Wherries, commanded them to go over first and set upon the Soldiers whilst they
were yet asleep. And next to them, they sent the midling sort, to assist the
first when they had begun the Attaque, as likewise, after them, the useless
multitude of all Ages, who would be sure to brag of a Victory when others had
gotten it. But Promotus being informed of all this beforehand by those whom he
sent to contrive this pretended Treachery, was prepared against the Barbarians
Designs, and set his Ships with their Stems one against another no more than
three deep, but ranged 'em as long as he could, even to twenty furlongs upon
the Riverside. By which means he not only kept the Enemy from coming over,
but sunk all the rest that he met coming over in the Wherries. But being a
dark, Moonless Night, the Barbarians knew nothing of what preparations the
Romans had made, and therefore going to work they went very silently on board
their Wherries, supposing that the Romans were altogether strangers to their
Designs. But when the Signal was given, those Men that devised the Treachery
having fore-warned the General of every particular intention, and made a
preparation proportionable to that of the Enemy; they sailed up to 'em in
great, strong Ships with stout Oars and sunk all they met, among whom there was
not one man that was saved by leaping over board, their Arms were so heavy. And
those Wherries, that escaped the Romans who sailed to and fro, if they fell
into the hands of those that lay along the shore, were pelted so fast with any
thing that came to hand, that they and the men in them were cast away at the
same time, nor could any pass that Wall of Roman Ships.

This caused a mighty slaughter among 'em, and such an one as was never seen in
any Sea fight before, insomuch that the River was filled with dead Bodies and
Arms which would naturally float upon the Water. And if any of 'em could swim
over, they light upon those that lay by the Rivers side, and by them were
destroyed. But when all the flower of the Barbarians were slain, the Soldiers
betook themselves to plundering, and not only carried away their Children and
Women, but made themselves Masters of all their provisions. And then the
General, Promotus, sent for the Emperor Theodosius who was not far off, to be a
witness of his brave Achievement. Who, when he saw the number of Captives, and
the quantity of spoils, set the Captives at liberty and by gifts that he
bestowed upon 'em, endeavored to entice 'em over to his own side, because he
knew their help would be of consequence to him in a War against Maximus.

Thus did Promotus continue in his Duty as the Defender and Governor of
Thrace, and put himself privately in readiness for a War. But it is worth while
to tell you another thing that fell out at the same time. There is a Town in
that part of Scythia, which lies in Thrace, called Tomi; where Gerontius, who
was a very strong Man and an excellent Soldier, commanded a Garrison. And before
this same Town there was planted a choice Company of Barbarians, who were not
only very hale, well-timber'd Men, but also mote courageous than any of the
rest. But these Men though they were presented by the Emperor with greater
allowance of Corn and other things, than any of the other Soldiers, yet they
did not intend to requite those honors that were done to 'em with good will,
but with contempt of the Governor and scorn of the Roman Soldiers. Which Design
of theirs when Gerontius perceived; how they intended to attaque the Town, and
put the Government into confusion, he advised with the wisest of his Soldiers
about a way to revenge himself upon those insolent, and unjust Barbarians. But
seeing them fearful and consequently flow to give their assent, as dreading the
very motion of the Barbarians, he himself took his Arms and a few of his Guards
along with him to fight the whole body of the Barbarians. And having opened the
Gates he marched out to meet 'em, whilst his Soldiers were yet either asleep
and fettered with fear as with a Chain, or got upon the Wall, to see what
passed. In the mean time the Barbarians laughed at Gerontius's madness, and
thinking him desirous of death, sent men against him who were extraordinary
strong. Whereupon Gerontius engaging with the first that charged up to him, and
presently catching hold of his Buckler fought very stoutly, till one of the
Guards that were about him, who saw them closed, cut off the Barbarians Arm,
and made him tumble from his Horse. And whilst the Barbarians stood amazed at
the courage and audacity of the Man, Gerontius attaqued some others of the
Enemy: insomuch, that when the Soldiers upon the Wall saw what their General
did, they remembered they were Romans, and sallying out killed most of the
Barbarians, who were astonished to see so sudden an eruption. Only some few
escaped into an Edifice which was highly honored by the Christians, and
esteemed as an Asylum or Sanctuary.

And now Gerontius having delivered Scythia from all impendent dangers and from
the Barbarians that attempted it, but were subdued by his extraordinary valor
and magnanimity, he expected some reward from the Emperor. But instead of that
Theodosius was very angry, that the Barbarians whom he had honored so much,
were cut off, though they had been a very plague to the public weal; and
therefore presently sent for Gerontius into custody, to give him an account for
what he had so bravely performed upon the score of the Romans. Upon which
occasion Gerontius accused the Barbarians of Rebellion against the Romans, with
a relation of what spoil and ravage they had committed among the Inhabitants of
that place: but the Emperor did not mind one word that he said, nor was he
moved from his former Opinion, but persisted in his thoughts, that he did not
remove them for the good of the public but for the lucre of what the Emperor
had given 'em, that so when he had got their goods into his hands, there might
be no body to accuse him. To which Gerontius replied, that he had sent them to
the public Treasury even after their Death (now the things that he had taken
from 'em were golden Necklaces which the Emperor gave 'em for Ornament) but
notwithstanding that, he had much ado to escape the dangers which beset him,
though he gave all he had among the Eunuchs, and paid a Sum proportionable to
his good will toward the Romans.

When things had thus run to ruin under the Reign of Theodosius, in whose time
no virtuous action was thought commendable, but all manner of luxury and
wantonness increased every day beyond all measure (as they use to say) those
that inhabited that great City of Antioch in Syria, not able to endure the
continual addition of new Taxes which the Collectors invented, rose up in Arms,
and shamefully pulling down the Statues both of the Emperor and Emperess, gave
out such words as were not unbefitting the actions that had passed, but were
moreover mixed with Drollery and that kind of Raillery which is usually among
them. But when the Emperor, who was displeased at what they had done,
threatened to punish them for that fault according to their demerit, the Senate
of the City, for fear of his anger, thought fit to send Ambassadors, to excuse
what the people had done. So they chose Libanius, the Sophister or Professor
(whose Writings that he left declare his praises) and Hilarious, a Man of a
nobly Family, and excellently well versed in all kind of Learning. Of which two
the Sophister made a Speech before the Emperor and Senate concerning the
Insurrection, in which he so far prevailed as to appease the Emperor's anger
which he had conceived against the Antiochians, and (which was more than he
expected) made the Emperon, who was now altogether reconciled to their City,
enjoin him to make a second Oration upon the same Subject. And Hilarious, who
was highly commended for his great Virtue, was by the Emperor made Governor of
all Palestine.

But whilst the Affairs of the East, of Thrace and Illyricum were in this
posture, Maximus, who thought things were not carried as he deserved, who was
only Governor of those Countries which were formerly under Gratian, contrived
how to depose the young Valentinian from the Empire, and that totally if he
could; but if he failed in the whole, to make sure of some part at least, as
much as he could get. And being overborn with this Resolution, he prepared to
pass the Alps and go into Italy. But seeing that he must of necessity travel
through a straight passage, and over craggy, pathless Mountains, with Marshes
and Fens beyond 'em, which admit of no Passengers but such as travel very
slowly, much lefs of such an Army, he deferred the enterprise till he had
better Counsel in it. But when Valentinian sent Ambassadors from Aquileia, to
desire a farther security of Peace, Maximus complied with his requests, and
pretended that he also was very well pleased with it. Valentinian therefore
sent Domninus upon that Negotiation, who though he was a Syrian born, yet he
was the Emperor's very good Acquaintance, and Friend. For as he was the next
Man to him in Power and Authority, so he seemed to excel all others in
fidelity and experience; and besides, what the Emperor had a mind to do without
any other bodies knowledge, he resolved to impart to this person only. When
therefore Domninus came to Maximus, and had told him the reasons of that
Embassy, he received him with all respect and kindness imaginable. For he
conferred such extraordinary honor upon him, and gave him such a load of
Presents, that Domninus thought Valentinian would never have such an other
friend. Nay so far did Maximus proceed to cheat Domninus, that he sent along
with him some part of the Army which he had, to help the Emperor against the
Barbarians; who oppressed the Pannonians that were under his Dominion.
Thereupon Domninus took his leave, and being well pleased not only with the
great quantity of Presents that he received, but the company of those Allies
who were sent along with him, he, like an unwise Man, made the way over the
Alps that led to his own home more pervious for Maximus. Which that he would do
being Maximus foresaw, and therefore had prepared all things in a readiness, he
followed him with all his Forces, and secretly sent out Guards before him, who
took all the care they could lest any one should pass by that way, and tell
Domninus's Retinue of Maximus's coming over into Italy. And indeed this Guard
upon the pass was very easy to be made; for it was impossible that any one
should go through the narrowest place upon the Alps but he must needs be seen.
When therefore he understood that Domninus and his Attendants had passed the
streights of the Alps, with all those invious Mountains, besides the Fenny
places beyond the Alps, that are so difficult for an Army to march through, and
did not fear meeting any Enemy in those cumbersom places, he immediately went
into Italy without any resistance, and marched to Aquileia.

At which Valentinian was so surprised, and in such a desperate condition, that
his Courtiers were afraid, lest Maximus should take him Prisoner and kill him;
for which reason he immediately took shipping and sailed to Thessalonica along
with his Mother Justina, who had been Wife (as I told you before) to
Magnentius, but, after his decease, was married to the Emperor Valentinian upon
the account of her extraordinary beauty. But she did not go alone without any
other Woman; for she carried her Daughter Galla along with her. And when they
had passed so many Seas and were arrived at Thessalonica, they sent an Embassy
to the Emperor Theodosius, to beg of him, that now at least he would revenge
the insolent injuries done to all Valentinian's Family. Which when he heard, he
was immediately astonished, and began a little to forget his extravagancy,
laying some restraint upon his wild-inclination to pleasures: and having
advised about it, 'twas thought fit that He with some of the Senate should go
to Thessalonica. And so accordingly they did; and there consulted again what
was to be done, till it was agreed as the unanimous consent of the Assembly,
that Maximus should be punished for his offenses. For they were of Opinion,
that such a Man ought not to live, who had not only killed Gratian, and
usurped his Empire, but having succeeded in that, had made some farther
progress, and deprived his Brother also of that Dominion which was left him.
But though Theodosius was very much displeased at these things, yet through his
natural effeminacy, and the negligent manage of his former life, he was loath to
undertake a War, and told 'em the inconveniences that arise from civil broils,
and how the Cowmonwealth must of necessity receive some fatal Wounds from both
sides. Wherefore he said, it was best first to send an Embassy; and, if Maximus
would deliver up the Empire to Valentinian and be quiet, that the Empire should
be divided amongst 'em all as it was before; but if he would suffer himself to
be overcome by covetousness, they would fight him without any more ado. Now
never a Man in the Senate durst speak a word against all this, because it seemed
advantageous to the public.

In the mean while Justina, who was a Person of good experience in things, and
knew how to conduct her Affairs to the best purpose, understanding that
Theodosius was very much inclined to Love, brought her Daughter Galla, who was
a very beautiful Lady, into his presence, and clasping the Emperor about the
knees, most humbly beseeched him that he would not suffer either Gratian's
Death (who gave him that Empire) to go unrevenged, nor let them lie neglected,
and destitute of all hopes. And as she spoke those words, she showed him the
Damsel, who was all in tears, bewailing her misfortunes. When Theodosius had
heard this supplication of hers, and withal observed the beauty of the young
Lady, he discovered by his eyes the Wound that she had made in his Heart; but
notwithstanding deferred that business till another time; and in the mean while
gave 'em some cause to hope the best. But being more and more each day enflamed
with a desire to the Damsel, he went to Justina, and requested of her that he
might have her Daughter, since Placilla his former Wife was Dead. To which
Demand of his she made answer, That she would not let him have her, unless he
would levy War against Maximus to revenge Gratian's Death, and restore
Valentinian to his Father's Throne. He therefore resolving to get her consent
by these means, made it his whole business to prepare for a War. And being
incited by a Woman, he not only obliged the Soldiers by increasing their
Allowances, but he likewise corrected his own remissness in other cases, since
necessity forced him to it, resolving to take care of some things that would
want looking after when he was gone. To which end, seeing Cynegius, the Prefect
of the Court, had happened to die by the way as he was coming back from Egypt,
he consulted who was fit to succeed him in that Office. And having taken
frequent views of many Men, at length he found out one for his turn, called
Tatianus, whom he sent for from Aquileia. For this Tatianus had born other
Offices under Valens and was a good Man in all respects; wherefore Theodosius
declared him Prefect of the Court all over the Country, and sending him the
Ensigns of Magistracy made his Son Proclus Praetor or Governor of the City.
And truly in this he did very well, in committing the greatest Offices to such
good Men, who knew how to dispose of things very skilfully for the good of the
Subjects when the Emperor was gone. He likewise took a care for the Army and
made Promotus General of the Horse and Timasius of the Foot.

But just when all things were ready fot his Journey, he heard, the Barbarians,
who were mixed among the Roman Legions, had been solicited by Maximus with
promises of great Rewards if they would betray the Army. But they perceiving
that the Design was discovered, fled into the Fens and Bogs of Macedonia, where
they hid themselves in the Woods. But being pursued, and searched for with all
diligence, they were most of them slain. So that the Emperor being freed from
this fright, marched with all resolution and his whole Army against Maximus;
having first put Justina, with her Son and Daughter on Shipboard, and
committed 'em to the care of those, who would see 'em safe at Rome. For he
believed that the Romans would receive 'em very gladly, because they were
disaffected to Maximus. But he with his Army designed to march through the
upper Pannonia, and over the Apennine Mountains to Aquileia, that he might
surprise the Enemy before they were prepared.

But whilst Theodosius was on his way, it happened that Maximus having heard
that Valentinian's Mother with her Children, was like to cross the Ionian Bay,
got together a convenient number of swift Chase-ships and gave 'em to
Andragathius, whom he sent to hunt 'em out. But Andragathius, though he sailed
to and fro to all places, yet missed of his aim (for they were passed the
Ionian Straight before) and therefore getting together a competent Navy, he
sailed to all the Coasts thereabout, because he thought Theodosius would
attaque 'em in a Sea Fight.

But whilst Andragathius was thus employed, Theodosius having passed through
Pannonia and the Streights of the Apennine Mountains, set upon Maximus's Army
before they expected, or were provided for him. And when some part of his Army,
who ran as fast as they could, had got to the Walls of Aquileia and forced
their passage through the Gates (for the Guards or Sentinels were too few to
resist 'em) Maximus was pulled down from his Imperial Throne, whilst he was
beginning to distribute Money among his Soldiers, and being stripped of his
Imperial Robes was brought to Theodosius: who having recounted some few of his
Crimes against the Public by way of Reproach, delivered him to the common
Hangman or Executioner, to suffer due punishment.

Now this was the end of Maximus and his usurped Dominion; who when he had
craftily conquered Valentinian, dreamed he should easily subdue the whole Roman
Empire. But then the Emperor Theodosius having heard that when Maximus came
over the Alps he left his Son Victor there, whom he had honored with the Title
of Caesar, he presently sent his General, called Arbogastes, who deprived the
Youth not only of his Dignity but his life too. Which when it was told to
Andragathius, who was then a cruising in the Ionian Bay, it made him so
sensible of ten thousand dangers which were like to befall him that he never
stayed to expect the Enemies coming, but was the Executioner of his own
punishment; for he threw himself into the Sea, as choosing rather to trust the
Waves than Men that were his greatest Enemies.

Then did Theodosius deliver to Valentinian as much of the Empire as ever his
Father had; which was indeed but what a Man ought to do to those that have
deserved well of him. And afterward having mingled all the choice of Maximus's
Soldiers among his own, he sent Valentinian away into Italy, Celtica, and other
parts to order such things as concerned his share in the Empire. His Mother
also went along with him, to supply, as much as in a Woman lay, what prudence
he through want of age might lack.

But going himself back to Thessalonica, he found no small confusion in the
Affairs of Macedonia. For all the Barbarians who had hid themselves in the Fens
and the Woods lying near the Lakes, and had escaped the former incursion of the
Romans, having got an opportunity when Theodosius was engaged in the Civil War,
plundered all Macedonia and Thessaly without any opposition. But when they
heard of the late Victory and that the Emperor was coming back again, they
once more hid themselves in the Fens, and from thence stealing out privately at
break of Day they carried off all that came in their way, and then they
repaired to their usual places. Insomuch that the Emperor thought at last, that
these, whoever they were, that sallied out thus to pillage the Country, were
rather Devils than Men. Wherefore being very doubtful in his mind he told no
body his Design; but taking along with him five Horsemen, whom he ordered, each
of 'em to lead three or four Horses (that so if any Horse tired, the Rider
might have another to get upon, and the Horses by that means be able to sustein
the fatigue of that enterprise which he intended) he gave no ground for
suspicion that he was the Emperor, but went about the Country like any
ordinary person: and if he or his Retinue at any time wanted meat, he begged of
the Country people. At last he came to a small Inn, where an old Woman lived,
and desired that she would let him into her House and give him some Drink: both
which she did; and by that time she had entertained him very kindly with Wine
and other things that she then by chance had in the House, it was almost Night,
and so he desired her to let him lie there; to which the old Woman likewise
consented; and the Emperor lay in a certain Room, where he saw a Man that said
never a word, but looked as if he had not a mind to be known. At which the
Emperor wondered, and calling the old Woman to him, demanded of her who he was
and whence he came? To which she replied, that she could not tell him either
that, or why he came thither: but this she said she knew, that since the
Emperor Theodosius and his Army returned home, he had been her Guest and paid
her every Day for his Diet, but had gone out every Day from Morning till Night
and walked where he pleased, till Night, and then he used to come back again,
as from some hard labor, and after he had eaten something, lay down in that
posture which he now saw him in. When the Emperor had heard what the Woman
said, he thought it convenient to make a farther enquiry into the business; and
taking hold of the Fellow bad him tell, who he was. And being he would not
answer so much as one word, he whipped him out of design to make him confess.
But the Fellow not yielding to that torment, he commanded his Horsemen to prick
him with their Swords, and told him withal, that he was the Emperor,
Theodosius. Whereupon, when the Man said he was the Spy for those Barbarians
who were hid in the Fens, and gave 'em notice where he was, as also what Men or
places it was convenient for 'em to attaque, the Emperor immediately out off
his Head.

And after that going to his Army which lay encamped nor far off, he brought
his Soldiers to the place where he knew the Barbarians lived, and falling upon
'em killed every one of what age soever, draging some out of the Fens where
they were hid, and murdering others in the Water; so that there was a great
slaughter of the Barbarians. Now the General, Timasius, who admired at the
Emperors Valor, desired of him that he would let the Soldiers who were by
this time hungry and not able to toil any longer in the Fens, have time to
refresh themselves; to which the Emperor consenting, the Trumpet sounded a
Retreat, which made the Soldiers leave their work and persecuting of the
Barbarians. But when they had eaten and drank very plentifully, they were so
overcome with Wine and weariness, that they fell fast asleep. Which when the
Barbarians that were yet left perceived, they took up Arms, and falling upon
the Soldiers, who were already subdued by sleep and drunkenness, they punch'd
'em with Spears and Swords and every mortal Instrument, so long, till the
Emperor himself had like to have been killed with all his Army, if some of
those who had not yet Dined had not ran to the Emperors Tent, and told him
what had happened. At which the Emperor being much troubled together with
those that he had with him, resolved to avoid the approaching danger by a
timely flight. But Promotus meeting 'em as they fled away (for the Emperor had
sent for him) desired the Emperor to consult the safety both of himself and
those that were about him; for that he would take care of the Barbarians and
punish them for their obstinacy according to their deserts. Nor had he sooner
said so, but he attaqued the Barbarians: and finding that they were still upon
the sleeping Soldiers, made up to 'em with all speed, and killed so many of
'em, that few or none at all escaped safe into the Fens.

Now these were the most remarkable accidents, that befell the Emperor
Theodosius after his return from killing Maximus. But when he came back to
Constantinople, he was very proud of his Victory over Maximus; though he was so
much concerned for what the Barbarians in the Fens had done both to himself and
all his Army, that he resolved to bid adieu to all Wars and fighting. Wherefore
committing the care of those things to Promotus, he himself began to recollect
his former way of living, and in rich Banquets, exquisite Pleasures, Theatrical
Shows, and Horse-Races created to himself a great deal of delight. Which makes
me wonder at this Man's inclination to both sides. For tho he were by nature
slothful, and given to all idleness, as well as other Vices, which I have told
you of before, yet whenever he had no sad accident, or formidable Object to
molest him, he gave the loose to his Nature; but when he was in any stress,
whereby the state of Affairs was like to be shaken, he laid aside his
sluggishness, and bidding farewell to pleasures prepared himself for manly,
hardy and troublesome enterprises. And notwithstanding that he was such a Man by
what experience tells us, he would, when free from care, make himself a Slave
to his natural Vices of ease and luxury.

Now of those that were Magistrates under him, Rufinus was counted the
chiefest, who was by Nation a Celtick, and Master of the Court Guards: for the
Emperor trusted him with all manner of things, and had little esteem for any
one else; which vexed Timasius and Promotus, who after so many dangers that
they had undergone for the public good, were placed only in the second rank
of Favorites. And this made Rufinus so proud and high-minded, that in a
public Assembly he cast forth very bold words against Promotus: Which Promotus
being not able to endure gave him a swinging blow in the Face and wounded him.
Whereupon Rufinus went immediately to the Emperor, and, showing him his Face,
put him into such a fury, that he said, If they had not lad aside their envy to
Rufinus, they should ere long see him Emperor. Which when Rufinus heard, who
was upon other accounts also an Enemy to many more, through his excessive
ambition to be above all, he persuaded the Emperor to command Promotus out of
the Court to some place where he might live and exercise the Soldiers. And
having obtained his desire, he set an Ambuscade of Barbarians to wait for him
as he was going into Thrace: who as they were commanded, attaqued him on a
sudden and killed him. Him, who was a Man above the love of Riches, and had
behaved himself sincerely both to the Commonwealth and the Emperors; but had
the just reward of his folly, for serving those who disposed of the public
Affairs with so much sloth and impiety.

When this Action was noised abroad, and got into every bodies mouth, though
every modest, sober Man was troubled at such enormities, yet at the same time
Rufinus, as if he had done some glorious Deed, was made Consul. And then
Tatianus, with his Son Proculus (who had offended Rufinus upon no other score,
than that, being Prefects, the one of the Court, and the other of the City,
they had discharged their Offices without any bribery and as much as possibly
they could, according to their Duty) were called into question without any
reason. And to essect what was designed against them, Tatianus being first put
out of his Place, was brought to his Trial, whilst Rufinus was made Prefect of
the Imperial Court. Now though in appearance there were others commissionated
as Judges in this Trial besides Rufinus, yet he alone had Authority to pass the
Sentence. But when Proculus had discovered the Design, he made his escape: upon
which Rufinus, who thought him an industrious Man, and feared lest he might
study some new way to give him disturbance, came to his Father Tatianus, and by
deceitful Oaths made him believe whatever he said; nay, he persuaded the
Emperor to give both the Father and the Son all hopes imaginable, till by this
means he had cheated Tatianus out of a well grounded suspicion into vain dreams
of safety and made him by Letters recall his Son. But as soon as Proculus came,
he was laid hold on and put in Prison; and Tatianus being sent to live in his
own Country, they had several Hearings of Proculus's Cause, till at last the
Judges, according to agreement between them and Rufinus, commanded him to be
carried into the Suburbs, called Sycae, and there put to death. Which when the
Emperor heard of, he seat, forsooth, to recall the Sword from his Throat; but
the Messenger went so slowly, by the Order of Rufinus, that Proculus's head was
cut off before he came to the place.

Now whilst these things were in action, the news was brought that the Emperor
Valentinian was dead, and this was the manner of his death: Arbogastes, a
Frank, who was made Lieutenant to Baudo by the Emperor Gratian, had, upon
Baudo's decease, in confidence of his own industry, made himself General,
without the Emperor's leave. And being thought fit for the place by all the
Soldiers under him, upon the account both of his Valor and knowledge in
Military Affairs, as also his contempt of Riches, he grew into great Power; and
was so very high, that he would speak his mind freely to the Emperor, and what
he thought not well done, or as it ought to be, he would find fault with. Which
Valentinian took so ill that he opposed him several times, and would have done
him a diskindness but could not bring it about: for Arbogastes was fortified
with the love of all the Soldiers. At length Valentinian who could no longer
endure to be under his correction, seeing Arbogastes coming toward him as he
sat in his Imperial Throne, looked sternly upon him and gave him an Instrument
whereby he casheered him from his Command; which when Arbogastes had read, he
replied, Thou (said he) neither gave me my Command, nor can thou take it
from me; and having so said, tore the Instrument in pieces, threw it down and
went away. Now from that time they did not keep their suspicions to themselves,
but their ill will to each other was publicly known: and Valentinian sent
frequent Letters to the Emperor Theodosius, to acquaint him with the arrogant
saucy behavior of Arbogastes toward the Majesty of an Emperor, and desired
him withal to send him very speedily some assistance, or he swore, he would
suddenly come and visit him. In the mean time Arbogastes, being in debate what
course to take, came at last to this resolution. There was in the Court a
certain Person, called Eugenius, who was so excellent a Scholar, that he
professed Rhetoric and kept a School. This Person Richomeris had commended to
Arbogastes as a kind, civil Man, to his own knowledge, and desired him to make
him his familiar, being one that would not be useless to him if any thing
should happen where the assistance of a real Friend were needful. By which
means, when Richomeris was gone to the Emperor Theodosius, the daily
conversation of these two made Eugenius Arbogastes's very great Friend, nor had
he any secret but he trusted him with it. At this juncture therefore remembering
Eugenius, who by his extraordinary Learning and gravity of Conversation, seemed
very fit to manage an Empire, he communicated to him his intentions. But seeing
him not well pleased with what he proposed to him, he proceeded to induce him
by all the Arts he could, and begged of him not to reject what Fortune had so
favorably offered. And when he had persuaded him, he thought it best in the
first place to remove Valentinian, and so to deliver up the sole Power to
Eugenius. To which end he went to Vienna, a Town in Gaul where the Emperor
was, and as he was playing at certain Sports near the Wall of the Town with
some of the Soldiers, thinking nothing of it, he fell upon him, gave him a
mortal wound and killed him. Which bold action of his the Soldiers said never a
word to, not only because he was so great a Person, and such a Warlike Hero,
but because they loved him too for his contempt of Riches. Wherefore as soon as
he had done the deed he declared Eugenius Emperor, and put 'em all in good
hopes that he would prove a good Governor, because he was so extraordinarily
qualified.

When these things were related to the Emperor Theodosius, his Wise Galla put
the whole Court into disorder by lamenting for the death of her Brother. And
the Emperor also was full of grief and care, having not only lost his Partner
in the Government, who was a young Man and so nearly related to him, but
likewise fallen into the hands of Men that were both disaffected to him, and
besides that, invincible; for Arbogasles was bold and valiant, as Eugenius was
learned and virtuous. But though he said thus to himself and often revolved it
in his mind, yet he resolved (as it were) at once to throw the Dice for all he
had, and therefore made all manner of preparation for a War. And in pursuance
of his Design, he intended to make Rictomeris Commander of the Horse, having
had experience of his courage in many Wars, and to make other Officers for the
Legions. But Rictomeris dying of a Disease whilst he was consulting about these
Affairs, he was fain to make choice of other Men. But whilst the Emperor was
considering of it, there was news brought of an Embassy from Eugenius, to know
of the Emperor Theodosius, whether he would admit Eugenius to Reign, or
declare his Election void. Now the Person sent upon that Embassy was one
Rufinus, an Athenian, who neither brought any Letters from Arbogastes, nor made
any other mention of him. But whilst the Emperor delayed the time to consult
what he should do, or what Answer to make to the Ambassadors, it happened that
another thing also intervened, which was this: When Theodosius first came to be
Emperor, he received some Barbarians into his friendship and Alliance, whom he
obliged both with hopes and large Presents; nor was he wanting by all
civilities to endear the Officers of each Nation, but admitted 'em even to his
Table with him. But there arose a debate among 'em in which they maintained two
different Opinions. For some of 'em said, it was better break their Oaths, that
they had taken, when they made themselves subject to the Romans; whilst others,
on the contrary, said, they ought by no means to do any thing against their own
agreement. Now he that was for trampling upon his Promise, and persuaded all
his Countrymen to do the same, was one Priulfus; as on the other side,
Fraustius maintained that they ought to stand by what they had sworn. But it
was a long time before any one knew, that there was such a Controversy among
'em; till on a time when they were at the Emperor's Table, and had drank more
than ordinary, they broke out into a quarrel with each other, and declared
their Opinions; so that the Emperor, when he knew the mind of every particular
Man, put an end to the Entertainment. But as they went from the Court, they
grew into such an heat, that Fraustius, not able to endure it any longer, drew
out his Sword and killed Priulfus. And seeing his Soldiers would have set upon
Fraustius, the Emperor's Guards stood between and would not suffer the mutiny
to proceed any farther: though when the Emperor heard of it, he did not much
regard what they had done, but let the quarrelsom fools kill one another as
they would. In the mean time having deceived the Ambassadors with Presents and
fair words that seemed to have a great deal of moderation in them, he sent 'em
home; and, as soon as they were gone, went on with his Warlike preparations.
But thinking that his chief business was, the choice of Captains, as indeed it
is, he made Timasius Commander of the Roman Army; and next to him, Stilico (who
married Serena the Daughter of Theodosius the Emperor's Brother) putting his
Allies the Barbarians under the conduct of Gains and Saul, with whom also
Bacurius was in the same Commission; who was of Armenian extract, but a Man
free from all ill inclinations, besides his skill in military Affairs.

When he had thus made choice of his grand Officers, and was making what haste
he could toward his marching out, it happened that his Wife Galla died in
Childbed, and was no sooner eased of her burden but she was deprived of her
life also. Upon which occasion when the Emperor had mourned for her a whole
Day (according to Homers rule) he went away with his Army to the War; but left
his Son Arcadius behind him, who was some time before made Emperor. But
because he was young his Father thought fit to cure, as it were, the defects of
his nonage, by leaving Rufinus with him, who was not only Prefect of the
Court, and did what he pleased, but even as much as the power of Majesty
enabled the Emperor himself to do. And having done thus, he took his younger
Son Honorius along with him, son passed the intermediate Countries, and having
beyond all hopes got over the Alps, he arrived where the Enemy lay, insomuch
that Eugenius was amazed to see him there whom he so little expected. Now since
he was there and consequently must fight, He thought it best to put his
Barbarian Forces, in the Forelorn-Hope, and exposed them first, and therefore
commanded Gains with the Nations under his Command to make the first attaque,
and that the other Captains should follow him as many as commanded Barbarian
Soldiers, whether Horse, Horse Bowmen, or Foot. Then did Eugenius also draw out
his Men, and when the two Armies were engaged, there was such an Eclipse of the
Sun at the very time of the Fight, that above half the while it looked more
like Night than Day. And therefore seeing they fought a kind of a nocturnal
Battle, they made such a mighty slaughter, that the same Day the greater part
of Theodosius's Allies were slain, and their Commander Bacurius also, who
fought very stoutly in the head of 'em; whilst the remaining part of 'em
escaped very narrowly with the rest. When therefore Night came on and the
Armies had rallied their Forces, Eugenius was so proud of his Victory that he
distributed Money among those that had behaved themselves best in the Battle,
and gave 'em time to sup: as if, after such a Defeat there were like to be no
fighting. But whilst they wore at Meat, the Emperor Theodosius, who saw it was
almost break of Day, fell upon the Enemies with all his Forces, whilst they
were yet lying down upon the ground, and killed 'em before they could tell who
hurt 'em. And then going on even to Eugenius's Tent, where he set upon those
that were about him, killing many of 'em, he also took some of 'em that were
running away for fear; among whom Eugenius was one: whom when they had gotten
into their hands, they cut off his Head and carried it upon a long Spear about
all the Camp, to show those who were yet his Friends, how they ought, as
Romans, to be reconciled to the Emperor, especially now, since the Usurper was
removed. Whereupon almost all those that were left after the Victory ran over
to the Emperor, and shouting called him Augustus, beseeching him likewise to
pardon 'em for what they had been guilty of: to which the Emperor very easily
assented. But Arbogastes who had no mind to try the Emperor's good nature fled
up into the most craggy Mountains; where when he perceived that they went about
in all places to search for him, he stabbed himself, as choosing rather to die
a voluntary death than to be taken by the Enemy.

When things had thus succeeded to the Emperor Theodosius, he went to Rome,
where he declared his Son Honorius Emperor, made Stilico General of all the
Forces there, and left him as Tutor to his Son. But before he went away he
called the Senate together, (who stuck close to their ancient Country Rites and
Customs, nor could be persuaded to join with them, that seemed any way to
incline toward a contempt of the Gods) and in an Oration exhorted 'em to
relinquish their former Error (as he called it) and embrace the Christian
faith, which promises remission of all sins and impieties. But seeing never a
Man of 'em would be persuaded to it, nor recede from their ancient Ceremonies
which had been delivered down to 'em ever since their City was built, and
prefer an irrational assent before 'em (for they said, they had lived almost
one thousand two hundred years in the observation of 'em, in all which time
their City was never conquered, and therefore if they should change them for
others, they could not tell what might come of it) Theodosius told 'em, that
the Treasury was too much drained by the expenses that were occasioned in holy
Rites and Sacrifices, and that he would therefore abolish them, because he
neither thought what they did there commendable, nor could the Soldiers
necessities spare so much Money. To which though the Senate replied, that
Sactifices were not rightly performed unless the Charges were from the public
Stock, yet for this reason the Law for performance of holy Rites and Sacrifices
was repealed and is out of date, besides other things that lay neglected which
they received from their Forefathers; insomuch that the Roman Empire being
wasted by degrees is become the habitation of Barbarians, or rather having
quite lost all its Inhabitants is reduced to such a form, that a Man cannot
tell where the Cities formerly stood. Now that things were brought into such a
sad condition will appear by a particular account of them. But the Emperor
Theodosius having delivered up Italy, Spain, the Celti, and all Libya to
Honorius his Son, died of a Distemper in his return to Constantinople: but his
Body was embalmed and buried in the Imperial Sepulchers at that City.

A New HISTORY Written by Count ZOSIMVS, Sometime Advocate of the Treasury. The
Fifth Book.
NOW when the whole Empire was in the hands of Arcadius and Honorius, they
seemed indeed by their Style and Title to be invested with Power, though in
reality the universal administration of Affairs was managed, in the East, by
Rufinus, and in the West, by Stilico. And by them were all Causes determined,
even as they pleased; for he that bribed lustily, or by any other means of
friendship or Relation could make the Judge his Advocate was sure to carry the
day. From whence it came to pass, that all those great Estates, which made the
Possessors of 'em so generally accounted happy Men, devolved unto these two;
since some by reconciling gifts sought to avoid false accusations, and others
parted with all they had to get an Office, or any other way to purchase the
ruin of such and such Cities. Whilst therefore all sort of iniquity reigned in
the several Cities, the Money flowed from every quarter into the Houses of
Rufinus and Stilico: as, on the contrary, Poverty still preyed upon the
habitations of them who had been formermerly Rich. Nor did the Emperors know of
any thing that was done, but thought all that Rufinus and Stilico commanded,
was done as it were by virtue of some unwritten Law. But after that they had
gathered upon an infinite mass of Wealth, Rufinus began to dream of getting to
be Emperor by a design which he had of making his own Daughter, who was now
marriagable, the Emperor's Wife: for that he thought would be a good ground for
his pretensions to the Government. In order whereunto he privately mentioned
the thing through some of those that waited upon the Emperor, supposing
himself that no body saw what he aimed at, though the report of it was spread
all over the Town. For all Men guessed at his intentions by his pride and
arrogance, which swelled and increased every day so much, that he was generally
hated more and more. Yet he notwithstanding, as though he had a mind
industriously to disguise small faults with greater enormities, was so bold as
to do another thing, which was this:

Florentius, who had been Prefect of the Court in the Countries beyond the
Alps, when the great Julian was Caefar, had a Son called Lucianus, who had made
use of Rufinus as his Patron, and given him the best part of his Estate. For
which Rufinus upon all occasions professed a great deal of kindness to the
young Gentleman, and was always a commending him to the Emperor Arcadius: who
made him Count [or Earl] of the East; which is a Dignity that impowers every
one on whom it is conferred, to govern all Prefects of Provinces through the
East, and to correct whatever is done amiss. Lucianus therefore showing all
that virtue which becomes a Governor toward those that are under him, was
famous for his Justice, temperance, and all other endowments that can adorn a
good Magistrate; having neither respect to persons, or any other thoughts but
what the Law suggested to him. And this was the reason that when Eucherius the
Emperor's Uncle desired him to do a thing which was not fitting for him to
comply with, he gave him a repulse, and thereby vexed him to such a degree that
he traduced him to the Emperor. Whereupon seeing the Emperor said, Rufinus
was the cause of it, who had bestowed so much power upon such a Person, Rufinus
took an occasion (as if forsooth he had mightily resented the blame which the
Emperor laid upon him) and without telling any body what his design was, went
with a very small Retinne to Antioch: where having entered the City at midnight
he laid hold upon Lucianus and without any accusation at all, brought him to
his Trial. After which he commanded him to be drubb'd in the Neck with leaden
balls till he fainted; and then caused him to be carried in a Litter, all
covered over, to make people think that he was not yet dead, and should receive
some real act of humanity. But the City was so very much disgusted at the
unusual manner of his proceeding, that he was fain to sweeten the people by
building an Imperial Portico, than which there is no finer structure in the
whole City. And when he had so done he returned to Constantinople, where he
solicited his Affairs in order to an affinity between him and the Emperor, to
whom he endeavored now more than ever to give his Daughter in marriage. But
Fortune ordered the matter another way, Rufinus failed of his expectation by
this means. Promotus had two Sons, who whilst Theodosius was yet alive, were
brought up along with his Children. Now the one of these Persons had a Damsel
in his House who was extraordinary beautiful; whom Eutrepius one of the Eunuchs
that waited upon the Emperor, advised him to make his Wife, not without great
commendations of her beauty. And seeing that the Emperor took what he said
with some kind of relish, he showed him the Damsels Picture; whereby he
enflamed Arcadius with a passion so much greater for the Lady that at last he
persuaded him into a resolution to marry her: whilst Rufinus, in the mean time,
knew nothing of the matter, but thought his own Daughter would very shortly be
Emperess, and that he himself should ere long be a Partner in the Empire. But
the Eunuch as soon as he saw tha he had made up the match which he himsel'f
designed, commanded the people to dance about and carry Garlands in their
hands, as they used to do upon their Emperor's Wedding-days; and having gotten
an Imperial Robe with other Attire fit for an Empress out of the Palace, which
he gave to the Emperor's Servants to carry, he went through the City with the
people before him. And whereas they all supposed that those things were to be
presented to Rufinus's Daughter, and ran along with those that carried 'em, yet
when they were come to Promotus's House, they went in there with the nuptial
Presents, and delivering them to the Damsel, that lived there with Promotus's
Son, they showed who was like to be the Emperor's Wife. By which means Rufinus
being frustrated of all his hopes, when he saw another Woman Emperess, made it
his business to find out a way how to remove Eutropius.

And thus did things stand in that part of oath Empire which was under the
Government of Arcadius; whilst Stilico, who was Governor of the Western
Empire, gave his Daughter, that he had by Serena, in marriage to the Emperor
Honerius. Now this Serena was the Daughter of Honorius, who was Brother to
Theodosius, the Father of the two Emperors. by which Relation to the Emperor
Stilico having strengthened his Authority, he had likewise almost all the Roman
Army under his Command. For Theodosius dying in Italy after he had taken off
Eugenius, this Stilico was general of the whole Army, out of which he selected
all the strongest and most Warlike Soldiers, whom he kept with him, sending all
the weaker part and the very refuse into the East. Which when he had done,
being very angry with Rufinus, who had a mind to be invested with a Power in
the East, that might balance his in the West, he resolved to go to Arcadius,
desiring to have the disposal of all his Affairs too according to his own will
and pleasure. For he said, That when Theodosius was upon his Death bed, he gave
him charge to take a special care of all the Affairs belonging to both the
Emperors. Which when Rufinus understood, he endeavored by all the art he
could to hinder Stilico's expedition into the East; as likewise to disperse and
weaken the Military power of Arcadius. And indeed whilst he was a contriving
all this, he found Men for his turn more wicked than he desired, by whose
assistance he was the cause of great calamities to the Romans: As how, I Will
tell you.

Musonius, a Grecian, who was an incomparable Scholar, had three Sons, whose
names were Musonius, Antiochus, and Axiochus: of whom Musonius and Axiochus
endeavored to out do their Fathers Virtues both in their Learning and
integrity. But Antiochus was pleased with all the contrary courses, being an
instrument of wickedness only. Wherefore Rufinus finding him fit for his
purpose, made him Pro-Consul of Greece, because he had a mind that the
Barbarians when they came in should have no great trouble in laying of it
waste; and committed the Garrison at Thermopylae to the care of Gerontius, who
would be serviceable in all his Designs against the Commonwealth. And when
Rufinus had devised these wicked projects, seeing Alarichus grew seditious and
disobedient to the Laws (for he took it very ill, that he was not made Captain
of some other Military Forces, besides those Barbarians which Theodosius gave
him, when he helped to remove the Tyrant Eugenius) he gave him private notice,
that he would have him bring forth his Barbarians, and all other assistance of
what Nation soever they were for that he might easily make himself Master of
all that Country. Whereupon Alarichus marched out of Thrace into Macedonia and
Thessaly, destroying all things by the way. But when he came near to
Thermopylae, he sent a private Message to Antiochus the Pro Consul, and
Gerontius the Governor of the Garrison at Thermopylae, to inform 'em of his
approach. Which news Gerontius no sooner heard, but he and his Guards marched
off, and left a free passage for the Barbarians into Greece. Where when they
were arrived, they immediately fell to plunder the Country, and sack all the
Towns, killing all the Men both young and old, and carrying away all the Women
and Children (together with all the Money) in whole ldroves. In which
expedition all Baeotia, and whatsoever Greek Countries the Barbarians passed
through after their entrance at Thermopylae, were so depopulated, that the
ruins are to be seen even to this day, excepting only Thebes, which was saved
partly by its own strength and partly by the haste which Alarichus was in to go
and take Athens, and therefore would not stay to besiege this City. Wherefore
the Thebans having, thus escaped him, he went to Athens, supposing he should
easily take that City, which by reason of its largeness could not well be
defended; nor being contiguous to the Pyraeeus, could it long hold out for want
of necessaries before it would surrender.

Thus did Alarichus hope: but the Antiquity of the City, even amidst all these
impious designs, was able to call forth the very Divine Providence to its aid,
and thereby preserve it. Concerning which it is worth ones while to give you an
account of the cause whereby the City was saved, as being supernatural,
godlike, and apt to excite all those that hear it to Devotion: [and thus it
happened.] When Alarichus came with all his Forces to the City, He saw Minerva,
their Tutelar Goddess walking about the Wall in that very shape that you may
see her among the Statues of the Deities, [which is] armed, and ready to
attaque all those that oppose her: and before the Walls [he saw] Achilles
standing in such an Heroic posture, as Homer showed him to the Trojans when he
fought against them so furiously to revenge the death of Patroclus. Which Sight
Alarichus being not able to endure, desisted from all attempts upon the City,
and sent out Heralds to offer terms of peace: which they receiving, and having
mutually given their Oaths to each other, Alarichus entered Athens with a small
number of Men. Where being entertained with all kind of civility, he washed
himself, and was treated by the best of the City; after which also he received
certain Presents and went away, leaving the City and all Attica unhurt,
untouched. Now the City of Athens was the only place which was saved in the
Earthquake that happened under the Reign of Valens, and shook all Greece, as I
told you in the precedent Book; and escaped also at this time, though it was in
such extremity of danger.

Alarichus therefore having left all Attica unwasted, for fear of the
Apparitions which he saw, passed on to Megaris; which he took upon the first
attempt, and so went toward Peloponnesus, having no body in his way that would
resist him. And when Gerontius had given him leave to pass over the Isthmus,
all the Towns beyond that were capable of being taken without the trouble of a
fight, because they were unwalled, and confided only in the security which
they received from the Isthmus. For which reason Corinth was first stormed and
immediately taken, with the small Towns adjacent: and after that, Argos, with
all the places between that and Lacedaemon. Nay even Sparta it self came in for
a share in the common captivity of all Greece, as being no longer fenced either
with Arms, or Warlike Men (though the covetousness of the Romans) but exposed
to Magistrates who were treacherous, and would readily serve their Governor's
voluptuous inclination in all things that conduced to public ruin, and
destruction.

Rufinus, when he heard of the calamities which had befallen Greece, was still
more desirous to be Emperor. For now that the Commonwealth was in an uproar,
he thought there would be nothing in the way to hinder such an enterprise. But
Stilico, having put a considerable number of Soldiers on board a convenient
number of Ships, made haste to assist the Achaians in their Affliction. And
being arrived at Peloponnesus, he forced the Barbarians to fly into Pholoe,
where he had easily cut 'em all off for want of provisions, had he not given
himself to luxury, mimickry, and lewd Women; and permitted his Soldiers not
only to plunder what the Barbarians left, but thereby also to give the Enemy
time to depart out of Peloponnesus, and marching with all their Spoils into
Epirus to pillage all the Towns in that Country. Which when Stilico heard that
they had done, he sailed away into Italy without doing any execution, save
only, that he brought upon the Grecians much greater and more grievous
calamities by means of the Soldiers that he took thither along with him.

And when he came into Italy, he immediately resolved to contrive Rufinus's
death, and that in this manner. He told the Emperor Honorius that it was
convenient for him to sent some Auxiliary Legions to his Brother Arcadius, to
defend the miserable Nations under his Dominion, And being by the Emperor
ordered to do as he thought fitting, he gave command what Men should be sent in
that Affair; making Gains their General, to whom he told what his Design was
upon Rufinus, When therefore the Soldiers were come near to Constantinople,
Gains went before and told the Emperor Arcadius of their approach, and how
they came with a desire to assist him in his necessity. Whereupon the Emperor
being pleased at their coming, Gains advised him to go and meet 'em as they
were just entering the City: for he said, it was a customary honor which was
usually bestowed upon the Soldiers in such a case. Insomuch that the Emperor
was persuaded to it, and going out to meet 'em before the City they all paid
their obeisance to him, which he on the other side as graciously received; till
at last, when Gains gave the Signal, they all sell upon Rufinus, and getting
him among 'em so slashed him with their Swords that one cut off his right hand,
another his left, a third divided his head from his sholders and went his way
singing Triumphant Songs. Nay they reproached him so much even after he was
dead, as to carry his hand all about the City, and ask all they met to give
something to an insatiable Miser.

And thus Rufinus, who was the cause of many intolerable calamities to private
persons, as well as author of public mischief, suffered the just punishment
due to his wicked Deeds. Whilst in the mean time Eutropius, who was an
Instrument in all Stilico's Designs against Rufinus, was Overseer and Ruler of
all things that were done in the Court. Who though he made Rufinus's Estate for
the most part his own, yet he permitted others also to take as much of it as it
was fit for them to have. But Rufinus's Wife with her Daughter ran into a
Church belonging to the Christians, for fear of perishing with her Husband;
till Eutropius promised 'em that they should sail unmolested to Jerusalem,
which was once a receptacle and habitation for Jews, but since the Reign of
Constantine has been adorned with Structures built by the Christians. And here
did they two spend the rest of their days. Whilst in the mean time Eutropius
having a mind to remove all persons who were of any account, that no Man else
might be so great with the Emperor as himself, he laid a Plot against
Timasius, who had been a General ever since the Reign of Valens and in many a
Battle, without any reason of it: and the false Accusation was this:

One Bargus, a Native of Laodicea in Syria, who sold Sauceages, being caught in
some misdemeanors there fled from Laodicea to Sardeis: where seeing he appeared
in his own colors, he was famous for his Roguery. Timasius therefore, coming
to Sardeis, and seeing this Fellow, who was a witty Villain and cunning enough
to flatter any body into a kindness for him, he made him his familiar, and in a
short time gave him the Command of a Company. Nor only so, but took him also
along with him to Constantinople: where though the Magistrates did not approve
of his so doing, (for Bargus had been formerly banished Constantinople upon the
account of some Villainies which he had committed) yet Eutropius [was well
enough pleased that] he had found a Man fit for him to make use of in his false
Accusation against Timasius, and therefore set him up for the Informer, with a
Libel in his Hand, to impeach Timasius of Treason for aiming and desiring to be
Emperor. Now in this case the Emperor sat as President of the Court; but
Eutropius stood by him, who was the Imperial Chamberlain, and had full
Authority to pass the Sentence. But seeing all the people were displeased, that
a Sauceage-monger should accuse a Person who had been so great, and honorable,
the Emperor went out of the Court, and left the whole matter to Saturninus and
Procopius. Of whom the former was very old and had born several Offices of
great importance, though not without flattery, and being used even in judicial
Cases to humor them who were the Emperor's chief Creatures. But Procopius, on
the other hand, who was Father-in-law to the Emperor Valens, was a morose,
stubborn Man, and in some things seemed to speak the truth boldly: insomuch
that upon this occasion being brought in for a Judge in the case of Timasius, he
objected to Saturninus, That Bargus was not a fit person to accuse Timasius, or
that a person who had born so many great Offices and a Man of so much honor
should be destroyed upon the false accusation of such a pitiful, base Fellow,
or (which was the greatest absurdity of all) that a Benefactor should suffer by
him that he had been kind to. But Procopius got nothing by taking this freedom
to speak; since Saturninus's Opinion prevailed and was commended.

Timasius therefore was sentenced to live in Oasis, and sent thither with the
common Guard upon him. Now this Oasis was a sad barren place, from whence no
Man could ever return that was once carried into it. For the way thither being
sandy, desert, and uninhabited, makes people who go to Oasis that they cannot
tell which way they travel, or where the Road is; because the Wind fills the
tracts of peoples feet with sand, nor is there any Tree or House to direct 'em.
Yet there was a common report that Timasius was rescued by his Son Syagrius,
who having escaped from those that were sent to search for him, made use of
certain Robbers to rescue his Father. But whether that be true, or whether they
spread such a rumor abroad to gratific Eutropius, no body certainly knows;
save only thus much, that neither Timasius nor Syagrius have ever been seen
from that time to this. In the mean time Bargus, who had freed Eutropius from
all suspicion, or fear of Timasius, was made Colonel of a Legion, which brought
him in a good sum of Money, though he was so foolish to hope for more still by
way of Present. For he did not consider, that Eutropius, who had found him to
be such a Rascal to his Benefactor Timasius, expected him to be no less toward
him also. When therefore Bargus was gone from home about the Affairs relating
to his Office, Eutropius persuaded his Wife, who was fallen out with him about
something or other, to present an Information to the Emperor, with many
Accusations in it, to impeach Bargus of the greatest Crimes imaginable. Which
when Eutropius heard [read over before the Emperour] he immediately brought
Bargus to his Trial, and upon conviction, delivered him over to be punished
according as he deserved. Whereupon all Men both admired and praised the Eye of
Adrastia [ i. e. the All seeing Justice of God] which no wicked Man can escape
[as the word Adrastia signifies.]

But whilst Eutropius was, as it were, drunk with Riches and seemed in his own
conceit to be elevated even above the Clouds, he had his Spies in almost all
Countries to make enquiry how things were carried, and what every particular
Man's condition was; nor was there any thing at all but brought him in some
profit, or other. Wherefore his envy and his covetousness together set him
against Abundantius also; who was born in that part of Scythia which lies in
Thrace, but had been a Soldier even since the Reign of Gratian, received great
Honors under Theodosius, and was at that time chosen General and Consful But
Eutropius having a mind to deprive him at once both of his Estate and Honor,
the Emperor commanded at least by Writing that it should be so; and
Abundantius being presently banished the Court, was ordered to live at Sidon in
Phaenicia all the rest of his days. By which means though Eutropius had no body
at Constantinople that durst so much as look at him; yet he remembered that
Stilico was Lord of all things in the West, and therefore contrived how to
prevent his coming to Constantinople. To which purpose he persuaded the
Emperor, to call a Senate, and by a public Decree declare Stilico an Enemy to
the Empire. Which being done, he immediately made Gildo (who was Governor of
all that part of Africa that belongs to Carthage) his Friend, and by his
assistance dividing that Country from the Dominions of Honorius he added it to
the Empire of Arcadius. Whereat when Stilico was mightily troubled, and could
not tell what in the World to do, there happened an extraordinary accident. For
Gildo had a Brother, called Masceldelus, against whom through the barbarous
fury of his disposition he had laid a design, and thereby forced him to sail
into Italy to Stilico, to complain of his Brother's severity. Which he no
sooner had done, but Stilico gave him a good competent number of Men and Ships
and sent him to fight Gildo. And when he came to the place where he heard his
Brother lay, he set upon him with his whole Forces before he was ready for the
Battle; and after a sharp Engagement, defeated him to such a degree, that Gildo
hanged himself; as choosing rather to do so, than come into the hands of his
Enemics. Now by means of this Victory Gildo's Brother restored Africa to
Honorius and sailed back into Italy: where though Stilico envied him for his
great Achievement, yet he pretended a kindness for him, of which he at least
gave him good hopes. But as he was afterward going one day into some place in
the Suburbs, and was got upon the Bridge that is over the River there, where
among others Masceldelus also attended upon him, the Guards, in obedience to
the Signal which Stilico gave 'em, thrust Masc^^delus into the River, whilst
the former laughed, and the later was choked by the violence of the stream.

Now from this time forward the enmity between Eutropius and Stilico was very
manifest, and in every bodies mouth. But though they were disaffected to each
other, yet in this agreed, to insult with all security over the miseries of the
Subject; whilst the one [that is, Stilico] had married his Daughter Mary to the
Emperor Honorius, and the other ruled Arcadius, as if he had been a Sheep, [or
any other the like tame Creature.] For whether any of the Subjects had a finer
Seat than ordinary, to be sure one of them was Master of it, or whether there
were any Silver or Gold stirring, it all slow'd from the former possessors of
it, into their Coffers: for there were great numbers of Sycophants [ i. e.
false Accusers] in all places, who were ordered to give notice of such things.

But seeing the Emperor on both sides in this condition, all those of the
Senatorian Order were sorry that things were in such bad circumstances,
especially Gains, who had neither Honor enough for a Commander of his age,
nor would be satisfied with all the gifts that were or could be bestowed upon
him, his barbarous Avarice was so insatiable. But that which stung him more
than all the rest, was that all the Money flowed into Eutropius's House. For
these reasons being very much enraged he made Tribigildus partner in his
Design: who was a Man very daring and ready to undertake any hazardous Exploit;
but he commanded Barbarians (not Romans) who were posted in Phrygia, where he
had the care of 'em committed to him by the Emperor. Now this same Tribigildus
pretending he would go into Phrygia to take a view of the Barbarians who were
under his command, went out from Consiantinople upon that account. And having
taken those Barbarians whom he commanded along with him, he attaqued all places
or persons that he met with by the way, nor did he contain himself from the
murder of Men, Women, and Children, but destroyed all before him, and in a
little time got together such a multitude of Slaves and other abject Fellows,
that he put all Asia into extreme danger. For not only all Lydia was full of
Tumults, seeing all the Inhabitants (in a manner) were fled to the Sea coasts,
from whence they and their Families sailed all into the Islands or elsewhere;
but even all Asia that lay upon the Sea expected to see such approaching danger
as they had never yet beheld Nor when these things were told the Emperor did he
take any pity on the common calamity (for indeed he was not capable of
understanding what was fit to be done, being so extremely foolish as he was)
but gave Eutropius the whole administration of the Empire. Which when he had
obtained, he chose Gains and Leo to be his Generals, with a design to send the
one of 'em into Asia to attaque the Barbarians, or other promiscuous people
that had taken possession of it; but to send Gains through Thrace, and the
Streights of the Hellespont, to meet the Enemy if he saw that they were
troublesome in those places.

But Leo, who was appointed to assist in the emergencies of Asia, was a Man of
no military conduct at all, nor endued with any other qualification, that might
deserve to have raised him to his present fortune, save only that he was
Eutropius's familiar Friend. But however he upon that only reason was
employed; and Gains was sent into Thrace, to obstruct Tribigildus and his men
from passing over the Hellespont, and to fight 'em by Sea if occasion were. Now
when these Commanders were thus instructed, they led away their Forces to their
several Posts: whilst Gains remembering the compact betwixt him and
Tribigildus, and that the time was at hand wherein he was to put the design in
execution, commanded Tribigildus to draw his Army toward the Hellespont. And [I
believe [had he concealed what he intended against the Commonwealth, and gone
quietly out of Constantinople with his Barbarians, his whole design had taken
effect; nor was there any thing to hinder but that all Asia might have been
seized by him and even the whole East at the same time destroyed. But seeing
Fortune at that time was pleased to preserve those Cities to the Roman
Government, this Gains was overborn by his hot furious nature as a Barbarian,
and went from Constantinople, with almost all his Warlike Power. And when he
came almost to Heraclea, he advertised Tribigildus what to do. But he resolved
not to go toward Hellespont by any means, for fear of lighting upon the Forces
that were posted thereabout; and therefore when he had destroyed all Phrygia,
he set upon Pisidia; where meeting with no obstacle he pillaged all the Country
and went away.

Which news though Gains heard, he was not any way concerned for the ravage
which had been committed, because he remembered the agreement betwixt him and
Tribigildus. But Leo in the mean time stayed in the parts adjacent to the
Hellespont, and not only durst not fight Tribigildus, but said likewise, He was
afraid, lest Tribigildus should send out some part of his Army another way and
waste all the Country near the Hellespont before they were aware of him. By
which means it so happened, that Tribigildus took all the Towns without any let
or hinderance, and killed all the Inhabitants together with the Soldiers; nor
was there ever a Barbarian that fought for the Romans. For they mingled
themselves in the several conflicts among those of their own Nation, and
opposed the Roman Subjects.

In the mean while Gains, though he seemed to be sorry for the misfortunes of
the Romans, yet he pretended to admire the Stratagems and Prowess of
Tribigildus, declaring him to be invincible upon the account of his prudence,
and that he overcame them more by his conduct than his strength. And therefore
when he was got over into Asia, he made no attempt upon any one, but slighted
and neglected the ruin of the Towns and Countries. Nor did he do any more than
just follow the Enemy, and behave himself somewhat like a bare Spectator of the
action, expecting when Tribigildus would go into the East, and sending forces
to him privately to assist him in his enterprises, having not yet discovered
his Opinion as to the present state of Affairs. Now if Tribigildus had gone
into Phrygia and so, not into Pisidia, but strait into Lydia, he could have met
with no obstacle, but, when he had made himself Master of that, might have
destroyed Ionia too. And from thence passing by Sea into the Isles where he
might have got what shipping he had pleased, it had been easy for him to have
over run all the East, and pillaged every Country betwixt that and Egypt,
seeing there was no Army able to cope with him. But he not thinking of these
things, and resolving to march into Pamphilia which borders upon Pisidia, litt
into cumbersom ways, where his Horse could by no means pass. But seeing that no
Army withstood them, one Valentine, of Selga (which is a little Town in
Pamphilia, standing upon an Hill) who was a pretty good Scholar, and not
altogether unskilful in military Affairs, gathered together a company of Slaves
and Country fellows, who had been used continually to fight against the Robbers
thereabouts, and posted them upon the Hills above those places through which
Tribigildus was to march; in such a manner that they could see every one who
passed that way, but no body could see them, though the Enemy marched by in the
daytime. Tribigildus therefore with his Barbarians, taking the plainer way
into the lower parts of Pamphylia, and coming in the Nightime into the Fields
under Selga, the Barbarians were severely pelted with Slings that threw stones
down upon 'em as much as a Man can grasp and bigger: For from that higher
ground it was ea^y to cast stones a little bigger than ordinary. Now therefore
seeing there was no way to escape (for on the one side of the way there was a
deep Lake and Fens, and on the other a steep, narrow pass, that would scarce
admit two Men a breast (which ascent because it is roundish and winding, the
Natives call, The Snail, from the similitude it bears to that Animal) where one
Florentius was planted with Men enough to hinder all such as should attempt to
come that way) the Barbarians being pent up in these places, and continually
pelted with abundance of huge stones, were most of them knocked on the head.
For, being they were so streighten'd for room, the stones that fell from above
could not miss of killing one or other of 'em. And therefore not knowing what
in the earth to do, most of 'em threw themselves and their Horses into the
Lake, and to avoid Death by the stones, perished in the Fens: whilst
Tribigildus with three hundred Men got up upon the Snail, where he corrupted
Florentius and the Guards that were with him for a vast Sum of Money to let
them pass: and when he by this means had escaped, he suffered all the rest to
be utterly destroyed. But though Tribigildus thought that he hereby had freed
himself from all the danger which Valentine brought upon him, yet he fell
headlong presently into far greater perils than the former. For almost all the
Inhabitants of the several Towns, arming themselves with what came next to
hand, enclosed him and the three hundred Men who escaped along with him between
the Rivers Melanes and Eurymedon, of which the one runs above Sida, and the
other through Aspendus. Wherefore being thus straightened and not knowing what
to do, he sent to Gains. But Gains though he were sorry for what had
happened, yet having not yet revealed his mind as to the Rebellion, he sent
Leo, the next Commander to himself, to assist the Pamphylians, and to join with
Valentine against Tribigildus, so as not to suffer him and his Men to cross the
Rivers. Whereupon Leo, though he were a Man naturally of a low spirit, and
devoted all his lifetime to pleasure, yet he obeyed his Orders. And this made
Gains afraid, lest Tribigildus, being beset on every side, and not having
strength enough to fight the Enemy, might be totally destroyed. Wherefore he
sent other Troops of Barbarians that he had with him, into the Roman Camp, not
only by degrees to waste it, but to make way for Tribigildus's escape. So the
Barbarians whom Gains gave to Leo, as Auxiliaries, fell upon all the Romans
which they met with, spoiled the Country, and killed the Soldiers; nor did they
cease to attaque all places, till they had cut off Leo with all his Army, and
made almost the whole Country like a Desert: so that by this means Gaines's
design took effect. For Tribigildus being escaped out of Pamphylia, laid
greater afflictions than the former upon the Cities of Phrygia. From whence
Gains took occasion to extol his Achievements very highly to the Emperor,
and put the Senate together with the whole Court into such a fear of him, that
he threatened and told 'em, he would come to the very Hellespont, and go near
to turn all things topsy-turvy if the Emperor would not vouchsafe to take some
care in satisfying his requests.

But Gains did this out of policy, at once to conceal his inclinations from
the Emperor, and by those respects which were shown to Tribigildus to get an
occasion of putting his own project in execution. For it did not vex him so
much that he himself was slighted, as that Eutropius was advanced to the
highest pitch of Power, so as to be reckoned among the Consuls, called by their
Style for a great while together, and honored with the dignity of a Patrician.
For these were the things that most moved Gains to Sedition: and therefore
when he was ready for it, he first thought fit to contrive Eutropius's death.
To which end whilst he was yet in Phrygia, he sent to the Emperor, and told
him that he despaired of any good success, since Tribigildus was so subtle a
Warrior, and besides that, that it was impossible to sustein his fury or
deliver Asia from the present extremities, unless the Emperor would be pleased
to comply with his request, which was this: That Eutropius who was the greatest
cause of all the mischief that had happened, might be delivered into his hands,
to be disposed on as he thought fit.

Which when the Emperor Arcadius heard, he presently sent for Eutropius,
degraded him from his Honors, and dismissed him. Whereupon he immediately ran
into a Church of the Christians which by him was made a Sanctuary or Place of
Refuge. But because Gains was so urgent, and said that Tribigildus would never
be quiet till Eutropius was removed, they took him by force (even against the
Law for making Churches Sanctuaries,) and sent him into Cyprus, with a strict
Guard upon him. But Gains being still very instant and urging the Emperor
Arcadius on still to take him off, the Emperor's Attendants made an
equivocating evasion upon the Oath which was Sworn to Eutropius when he was
dragged out of the Church, and caused him to be sent for back out of Cyprus;
and then, as if they had only sworn not to kill him as long as he was at
Constantinople, they sent him to Charcedon and there murdered him. Thus did
Fortune deal very strangely with Eutropius on both hands, in raising him first
to such an height as no Eunuch before had attained to, and then exposing him
to death through the hatred which they who were Enemies to the Commonwealth
professed against him.

But Gains though he were now apparently inclined to innovation, yet thought
himself undiscovered: and therefore being absolute Master of Tribigildus's
Soul, for that he was much above him in Power and Authority, he personated him
and made a Peace with the Emperor; and after having mutually both taken and
given their Oaths, he returned again through Phrygia and Lydia. And that way
Tribigildus followed him, marching through the upper Lydia in such a manner
that he never set sight upon Sardeis, which is the Metropolis of Lydia. But
when they were joined into one body at Thyatira, Tribigildus repented that he
had left Sardeis unsack'd, since it was so easy a matter to take a City, as
that was, quite destitute of all defense. Wherefore he resolved to return
thither along with Gains and storm that City. And their design had certainly
taken effect, if a great deal of Rain had not fallen which made a Flood upon
the Land, and raised the Rivers so high that they were unpassable; whereby
their journey was stopped. Whereupon they divided the Country between 'em, and
led their Forces, Gains toward Bythinia, and the other toward the Hellespont,
permitting the Barbarians that followed 'em to plunder all before 'em. And by
that time the one came to Chalcedon, the other had gotten possession of all the
places near to Lampsacus; so that Constantinople and even the whole Roman
Empire was in extreme danger. And then did Gains desire the Emperor would
come to him, being resolved to parley with no body but him himself in Person.
To which the Emperor submitted and they met in a place near Chalcedon, where
there is a Church dedicated to the holy Martyr Euphemia, who is honored for
her devotion to Christ. And there it was agreed, that Gains and Tribigildus
should come over out of Asia into Europe, and that the most eminent Men in all
the Commonwealth should be delivered into their hands to be put to death. Of
which number were Aurelianus, who was that year Consul, and Saturninus, who had
been a Consul, and John, whom the Emperor trusted with all his secrets, and
who, many people said, was the Father of Arcadius's Son.

And this request did the Emperor grant though it was so tyrannical. But when
Gains had gotten these Men in his clutches, he laid his Sword no more than
just upon the skin of their Bodies, and was content to let them suffer
banishment only. After which he crossed over into Thrace, whither he commanded
Tribigildus to follow him, leaving Asia, that was now beginning to breath
again, and like to be delivered from all those dangers which beset it. But
whilst he lived at Constantinople, he dispersed his Soldiers into several
quarters; insomuch, that he berest the City even of the very Court-Guards;
giving the Barbarians certain private Signals, with a charge, that when they
saw the Soldiers were gone out of the City, they should immediately invade it,
being now destitute of all defense, and deliver up the sole Power to him alone.

Having given these Orders to the Barbarians under his Command, he went out of
the City, pretending that the fatigue of War had made him sick, and that he
therefore wanted some refreshment, which he should never have, if he did not
live some time without care. Wherefore he left the Barbarians in the City, who
were a great many more in number than the Court-Guards, and retired to a Villa
or Country House, some forty furlongs from the City: whence he expected an
opportunity of invading it, as soon as the Barbarians there should have made
their attempt. And as Gains was filled with these hopes; so had he not been
carried away with the heat of a Barbarian, and anticipated the proper season
for it, the Barbarians must of necessity have made themselves Masters of the
City. But he not staying for the Signal drew his Soldiers to the Wall, and
thereby made the Sentinels who were affrighted at the sight, give an Alarm. And
thereupon immediately there was a general tumult, with lamentation of the
Women, and such promiscuous cries, as if the City had been already taken; till
at length they ran all together and fell upon the Barbarians that were in the
City. And when they had killed 'em with Swords, Stones, and other Weapons
whatever came to their hands, they ran up upon the Wall, and with the
assistance of the Guards so pelted Gaines's Men, that they beat 'em off from
coming into the City with every thing that fell in their way.

But when the City had thus escaped their danger, the Barbarians being enclosed
by those within, and more than seven thousand got into a Church belonging to
the Christians, that stands near the Palace, making that their Sanctuary to
preserve 'em; the Emperor commanded 'em to be slain even in that place, nor
would he let it be a sufficient refuge for 'em, whereby to avoid the just
penalty which was due to their bold actions. But though the Emperor commanded
it so to be, yet no Man durst lay hands upon them, to pull 'em out of the
Sanctuaries, for fear lest they should attempt to defend themselves. They
therefore thought it best to take off the roof of the Church over the Altar (as
they call it) and that those who were appointed for the purpose, should throw
down firebrarnds upon on 'em so long till they had burnt 'em every man to
death. And by this means were the Barbarians destroyed; which to some that were
very zealous for Christianity seemed a most abominable crime to be committed in
the midst of such a great City.

Now therefore when Gains was disappointed in this his great Attempt, he
openly made preparation for a War against the Commonwealth. But setting first
upon the Countries in Thrace, he found their Cities well fenced with Walls, and
guarded by the Magistrates and Inhabitants. For they having been used to Wars
and taught by former incursions how to take care of themselves, were ready to
fight with all their souls: wherefore Gains, seeing nothing left without their
Walls but Grass (for they had gathered up all kind of Fruits, Cattle and other
provisions) he resolved to leave Thrace and make haste into Cherronesus, with
an intention to return through the Streights of the Hellespont into Asia. But
whilst he was deliberating upon these matters, the Emperor and Senate with one
accord chose Fraiutus General for the War against Gains; who though he were a
Barbarian born, yet he was a Grecian in all other respects, and that not only
in his manner of living, but in his Mind and Religion. And therefore to him
(who had been a famous Leader in many Wars and freed all the East from Cilicia
to Phenice and Palestine, from the plague of Robbers) did they commit the
conduct of their Army. Which when he had received, he opposed Gains, not
suffering the Barbarians to pass over the Hellespont into Asia. But whilst that
Gains was a preparing for their fight, Fraiutus could not endure his Men
should be idle, and therefore kept 'em to continual exercise; by which he made
'em so fit for service, that, instead of their former sloth and laziness, they
were discontented that Gains delayed the War so long.

Thus was Fraiutus employed in Asia, viewing not only his own Camp both Night
and Day, but observing also the motions of the Enemy: Besides which, he
likewise took care of the shipping. For he had a Fleet enough to maintain a Sea
fight, of Ships called [Liburnae] from a Town in Italy [called Libarnia] where
that sort of Ships were-first built. And these Ships seemed to have been as
swiftsailers as those with fifty Oars, though they were much inferior to them
of three Oars to each bank, and have not been built of a long time. Yet
Polybius the Historian seems to tell us the proportions of Six Oared Ships,
which the Romans and the Carthaginians seem to have used in their fights
against one another. But in the mean time Gains having forced his way through
the Long-Wall into Cherronesus, had ranged his Men all along that rising shore
in Thrace, that reaches from over against Parium as far as Lampsacus, Abydus,
and those places that make that straight Sea. Whilst, on the other hand, the
Roman General sailed all about Asia, both Night and Day to pry into the Enemies
designs. But Gains, for want of necessary provisions, being troubled that the
time was so protracted, cut down a quantity of Timber Trees out of a Wood in
Cherronesus, which he fastened together very accurately, and making them fit to
receive both Men and Horses, set his Men and their Horses upon them and so let
'em swim with the Stream, or Tide. For they could not be either managed with
Oars, or any otherwise admit of the Pilot's Skill, being made so in haste
without any Art at all, by the rude contrivance of Barbarians. But he himself
staid upon the shore, in hopes that he should quickly get the Victory, for that
the Romans could not be any way strong enough to grapple with his Men in this
engagement. Nor was the wise Roman General unaware of that truth; and therefore
giving a guess what was to be done, commanded his Ships to put a little off
from the Land: and seeing the Tumultuary Vessels of the Barbarians carried down
with the stream wheresoever it drove them, he first attaqued one that came in
the foremost range of Timber, and having a Ship with a brazen Stem, was much
too strong for it; for he not only bore hard upon it with his Ship, but so
pelted the Men that were upon it with Darts that he sunk both that and them
together. Which when the rest of his Ships Crews saw, and imitated, they killed
some with Darts, whilst some fell off the Timbers and were drowned, nor could
any one of 'em hardly escape death. At which great Overthrow Gains being much
concerned, and knowing not what to do, since he had lost so many of his
Fellow Soldiers, he removed a little out of Cherronesus into that part of
Thrace that lies beyond it. But Fraiutus at that time did not think fit to
follow Gains in his flight, but mustered up his Men in the same place, and was
content with the Victory that Fortune had bestowed upon him. And when almost
all People accused Fraiutus for not pursuing Gains, but sparing him, because
Gains and those that fled away with him, were Fraiutus's Countrymen, yet he,
who was conscious of no such thing, returned to the Emperor, very proud of his
Victory, which he freely and boldly imputed to the favor of the Gods whom he
worshipped. For he was not ashamed, even in the Emperor's presence, to profess,
that he worshipped and honored the Gods after the ^^^ent way of his (...) not
follow the vul^^^^ (...) case. So the Emperor received him very kindly and made
him Consul. But Gain. in the mean while, having lost most part of his Army, as
I told you, ran away with the rest to the River Ister: where seeing Thrace laid
waste by the former inroads into it, he plundered every thing that came to his
hand. but fearing, lest another Roman Army should follow him and attaque his
Barbarians, who were but few, and besides that, suspecting those Romans who
went along with him, he killed 'em every Man, before they knew any thing of his
intention, and afterward with his Barbarians crossed the Ister with a design to
go into his own Country and there spend the rest of his days.

But whilst Gains was doing this, one Vldes, who at that time was Prince of
the Hunns, believing it unsafe for him to suffer a Barbarian with an Army of
his own at his heels, to have any habitation beyond the Ister; and at the same
time supposing that he should gratify the Emperor if he expelled him out of
the Country, provided to fight him, and having mustered up a considerable
number of Men put 'em into Battalia against the Enemy. So likewise Gains on
the other side, seeing he could neither return to the Romans, nor otherwise
escape the shock that Vldes had threatened, armed those Men whom he had with
him, and met the Hunns. And after several Engagements between the two Armies,
in some of which Gaines's party bore up very stoutly, at last, after many of
his Men were slain, even Gains himself also was killed, though he fought with
great courage and bravery.

And now the War being ended by the death of Gains, that Vldes, the Prince of
the Hunns sent his Head to Arcadius the Emperor, and was rewarded for sodoing:
Whereupon he made a League with the Romans. But Affairs being carried without
any conduct, because the Emperor had no Prudence at all, the Estate of Thrace
was again disturbed. For there were a company of Fugitive Slaves, and others
that had run away from their ranks, pretending themselves to be Hunns, pillaged
all the Fields and took whatever they found without doors; till such time as
Fraiutus went against 'em and killing all he litt upon, put the Inhabitants out
of fear. -- Here is a Chasme, which it is in vain for any one to think of
filling up, unless he gives himself the liberty of only guessing at it. The
sense therefore, such as may be deduced from the precedent passages, is this.
Gains formerly required that Aurelianus, Saturninus, and Johannes should be
delivered into his hands, that he might punish 'em as he pleased; and
therefore, it is probable, he committed 'em to Custody till he should think fit
to inflict some punishment upon them. But when Fraiutus pursued the remaining
part of Gaines's Army, who was now killed, the Keepers gave their Prisoners
free leave to escape, for fear lest they should fare but very hardly if they
fell into Fraiutus's hands. Hence does Sylburgius conjecture that [(...)] i. e.
in Latin Characters [liam] is the latter end of the word [(...)] [Thessaliam]
or (...)] Paraliam] which signifies, near the Seacoast; into which Country
Fraiutus designed to go over, to catch the Traitors and punish 'em according to
their demerits, and then you must suppose that the next words relate to them
when it is said -- fearing lest they should be but roughly dealt withal. But
meeting with him they landed in Epirus, where consulting how to save
themselves, (for they were in great danger upon the account of their
extraordinary Offense) they gave their Prisoners an opportunity to escape:
though others say, they gave Money to be dismissed. But howsoever they got away,
they came back to Constantinople beyond all expectation, where they appeared
before the Emperor, the Senate and all other People.

Now from this time was the hatred which the Emperess had conceived against
John (who was a Christian Bishop) very much increased; for though she had been
displeased at him formerly, for being somewhat sharp upon her in his public
Homilies before the People, yet at this juncture, when he and the other two
were come home again, she broke out into an open abhorrence of him. Wherefore
to satisfy her passion, she did both what she pleased, and what she could to
make the Bishops in all places consent to John's removal; of whom the first and
chiefest was Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, who was the first that
opposed the ancient holy Rites and Ceremonies. And though indeed there was a
Debate proposed to be held about it, yet John seeing that things did not
proceed with such equity as they ought to have done, went out of Constantinople
of his own accord. At which the People being disturbed (for he was excellent
good at obliging the brutish common People) the City was in a Tumult, and the
Christian Church was filled with them, that they call Monks. Now these are a
sort of Men that abstain from lawful marriage, and furnish populous Colleges,
in several Cities and Villages, with unmarried Men, who are not fit for War,
nor any other service in the Commonwealth: save only, that by going on in
their way, from that time to this, they have gotten a great deal of Land into
their possession, and under pretense of charity to the Poor, have made (I had
almost said) all other Men, Beggars. And these Men having gotten into the
Churches, hindered the People from coming to their usual Devotion. At which the
People and the Soldiers too were so vexed, that they desired to correct, and
lop off (as it were) the luxuriant boldness of the Monks. And having the Signal
given 'em for the same purpose, they marched out boldly and without any trial
or examination put 'em all to the Sword, till they filled the Church with dead
bodies, and pursuing those that ran away wounded every Man that they met in
black Clothes. Among whom many died by mistake, who either were in mourning, or
upon any other occasion were in such a habit.

But by this time John being returned attempted the same things over again, and
stirred up the like troubles in the City: where the number of Sycophants being
now greater than ever they had been, and always attending upon the
Court-Eunuchs, if any rich Man died, they brought an account of his Estate, as
if he had had no Children or Relations. Whereupon the Emperor's Letters were
issued out, to command that John Do should have Richard Roes Estate. Nay, Men's
Inheritances were disposed of to any that begged 'em, though the Children of the
Party stood by lamenting and calling upon their Parents. In fine, there was
nothing but filled the Cities and Towns with sorrow, and did the Inhabitants an
unreasonable deal of injury. For the Emperor being a mere Fool, his Wife, who
was arrogant above all the rest of Woman kind, and devoted both to the
insatiable avarice of Eunuchs and the Women who were about her, and ruled her
most, made every body weary of their life; insomuch that to modest People
nothing was more eligible than Death.

And as if these things were not sufficient, there was misfortune that fell
upon Constantinople much greater than can be expressed, in this manner. John,
as I told you, coming home again after his banishment, and instigating the
People against the Emperess in his usual Homilies or Sermons, and seeing
himself expelled both from the Sea Episcopal as also from the City, took
shipping and left the Town. But those that were of his Party, endeavoring to
procure that no Man should be Bishop after, resolved to destroy the City by
Fire. And to that end having privately set fire to a Church in the Nightime,
and got them out of the City at break of Day (whereby they prevented the
discovery of who they were) as soon as it was broad day they showed all the
People in what extremity of danger the City was. For not only that Church was
burned to the ground, but the contiguous Houses also were consumed, especially
those upon whom the violence of the Wind drove the fire. But besides them, the
fire caught in the Senate House, which stood before the Palace, and was a most
beautiful, magnificent Structure. For it was adorned with the Statues of famous
Artists, that looked very gloriously, and with such colors in Marble, as are
not now to be found in any Mines. Nay, they say, that those Images, which were
formerly consecrated in Helicon to the Muses, and in the time of Constantine
were sufferers by that universal Sacriledg, being set up and dedicated in this
place were burned at the same time, to signify that disaffection which all Men
should one day bear to the Muses.

But because there was a kind of Miracle wrought at that time, I think it worth
the relating. This Temple of the Senate, for the sake of which I tell you this
Story, had the Statues of Jupiter and Minerva before the doors of it, standing
upon two stone Pedestals, as they do to this day. Now they say, that of Jupiter
is Jupiter Dodonaeus, and the other, of Minerva, the same which was formerly
consecrated in Lindus. When therefore the fire had consumed all the Temple, the
Lead upon the roof also being melted ran down upon the Statues, as likewise all
the stones that could not resist the force of the fire fell upon them, till at
last when the beauty of the building was all turned into one heap of rubblish,
it was the common Opinion that these two Statues also were reduced to ashes.
But when the place was cleansed and ready to be rebuilt, upon it showed the
Statues of those two Deities only, which had escaped the universal ruin.
Which Accident gave all those who were above the ordinary rank of Men some
better hopes of the City, as if these Deities resolved to take continual care
of it.

But let these things go as God will have 'em; [whilst I return thither from
whence I digress'd.] Now all People being sorry for this calamity of the City,
though they found no reason for it but blind Chance (as the saying is) the
Emperor's Attendants were intent upon the rebuilding of the ruinated Houses.
But at the same time it was reported at Court, that a great number of
Isaurians, who live above Pamphylia and Cilicia continually in the craggy
inaccessible Mountains of Taurus, being divided into several Bands of Robbers,
invaded the adjacent Champaign Country. And though they were not strong enough
to attack the walled Towns, yet they overran all the unwalled Villages and
plundered all before 'em. For the former ravage which was committed there by
Tribigildus and his Barbarians, made their present incursions the more easy.
But when this news was brought, Arbazacius was sent out as General, to assist
the oppressed Pamphylians. Who having got a good competent Army along with him,
and pursued the Robbers up into the Mountains, he took most of their Villages,
and killed abundance of Men. And indeed he might easily have perfectly subdued
'em, and put the Towns in absolute security, had he not remitted great part of
his vigor by giving himself up to luxury and filthy pleasures, or through his
covetousness preferred Riches before the public good. For which his
treacherous behavior being summoned to appear before the Emperor, he expected
to be tried, but by giving part of that which he took from the Isaurians to the
Emperess, he not only escaped the Law, but spent the rest of his Money in such
pleasures as that City afforded.

Thus did the Isaurians content themselves with private Robberies, and were not
yet broken out into an open invasion upon the neighboring Nations. But in the
mean time Alarichus, being departed (as I told you before) out of Peloponnesus,
and all that Country which the River Achelous passes through, he made an Halt
in Epirus, where the Molossians, the Thesprotians, and other People live, as
far as Epidamnus and the Taulantians Country, to wait till Stilico had brought
about what they had agreed upon, which was this: Stilico seeing that Arcadius's
Ministers of State were disaffected to him, intended, by the assistance of
Alarichus, to add all the Illyrian Countries to the Empire of Honorius. And
having made a compact with Alarichus to that purpose, he expected shortly to
put his design in execution. But whilst Alarichus waited his Commands, one
Rhodogaisus having mustered up four hundred thousand of the Celtick and the
German People that live beyond the Ister, and the Rhine, made preparations to
pass over into Italy. Which News when it was first told put all People into a
consternation; and yet though the several Towns were fallen into despair, and
even Rome it self very apprehensive of its extreme danger, Stilico took all the
Forces with him which were at Ticinum in Liguria (which were some thirty
Companies) with all the Auxiliaries that he could get of the Alani and the
Hunni, and without staying for the Enemies coming, crossed the Ister with his
whole Army. By which means setting upon the Barbarians before they were aware,
he utterly destroyed their whole Forces, insomuch that none of 'em escaped
except some few that he added to the Roman Auxiliaries. Now Stilico being, as
you may guess, very proud of this Victory, he returned with his Army and had
Garlands given him by almost all People, as having so strangely delivered Italy
from the dangers that she so much feared or expected. But at Ravenna (which is
the Metropolis of Flaminia [Romagnia] an ancient City, and a Colony of the
Thessalians, called Rhene, because the Water runs round it [as the word Rhene
imports] and not as Olympiodorus of Thebes says, that it was so called from
Remus, Brother to Romulus, who was the builder of it; for he must leave that to
Quadratus, who has mentioned this very matter in his History of the Emperor
Marcus) at this same Ravenna, I say, Stilico being intent upon his preparations
to attaque the Illyrian Cities, and by the help of Alarichus not only to draw
'em off from Arcadius, but to join 'em to the Empire of Honorius, there
happened two impediments to fall at once in his way: which were, a report that
Alarichus was dead, and Letters of the Emperor Honorius from Rome, that gave
him account how Constantine was turned Rebel and come out of the Island of
Britain into the Countries beyond the Alps where he carried himself in their
Cities like an Emperor. But the discourse concerning Alarichus's death seemed
to be doubtful, before certain Persons came and assured him how it really was.
But what was said of Constantine's setting up for the Empire was believed by
all Men. By which means Stilico being hindered from his intended expedition
against the Illyrians came to Rome, to consult with others concerning the
present State of Affairs.

But after Autumn, when Winter was come on ( Bassus and Philippus being chosen
Consuls) the Emperor Honorius, who had long lost his Wife Maria, desired to
have her Sister Thermantia. But Stilico seemed not to approve of that Proposal,
though Serena promoted it, as having a mind it should be a Match, upon this
score: When Mary was to be married to Honorius, her Mother seeing the Damsel
too young for an Husband, and yet being unwilling to defer the Marriage, though
she thought that, to let a Man lie with such a tender Creature, was to offer
violence to Nature, she got a certain Woman who knew how to manage such
Affairs, and, by her means contrived it so, that Maria should live with the
Emperor, and be his Bedfellow, but that he neither should nor could do Family
duty to her. But, in the mean time the Damsel died a pure Virgin, and so
Serena, who, you may well imagine, was desirous to be Grandmother to a young
Emperor or Emperess, for fear of having her great Power lessened, did what she
could to marry her other Daughter to Honorius. Which being brought to pass, the
Girl not long after died, in the same manner as the former did. And about the
same time Stilico was informed, that Alarichus having left Epirus, and got
through those Streights that obstruct the passage from Pannonia to Venice, had
pitched his Camp at a Town called Emo, which lies between the upper Pannonia
and Noricum. Now it is worth while to remark, what is observable concerning
this same Town, and how it came first to be built. They say, that the
Argonautes being pursued by Aeetas, arrived at the mouth of the Ister where it
disembogues it self into the Pontus, and thought it the best way for 'em to go
up this River against the stream with the help of Oars, and a convenient gale
of Wind together till they came nearer to the Sea. And when they had so done,
and were arrived at this Place, they left a memorial of their coming to it,
which was the building of this Town, and afterward putting their Ship, the
Argo, upon Machines or Engines for the purpose, they drew it four hundred
furlongs off, even to the Sea side and so arrived at the Thessalian shore, as
Pisander the Poet says, who has comprehended almost the whole Story in a Poem,
called The Heroic marriages of the Gods. But Alarichus having marched out of
Emo, and, crossing the River Aquilis, got over the Apennine Mountains, came
into Noricum. Now the Apennine Mountains lie just upon the borders of Pannonia,
and make the way to Noricum very narrow; and therefore though the Pass be kept
by a small Guard, a great number must labor hard to get through it. But
notwithstanding the difficulty, Alarichus marched through into Noricum and from
thence an Embassy to Stilico, to desire a supply of Money not only upon the
account of his stay in Epirus, which he said was made by the persuasions of
Stilico, but also to defray his Journey into Noricum and Italy. But Stilico,
though he received the Embassy, left the Ambassadors at Ravenna and went
himself to Rome, with a design to consult the Emperor and the Senate in the
Affair. But when the Senate met at the Imperial Palace, and proposed to debate
whether they should proclaim a War or no, they were most of 'em for fighting.
Only Stilico and some few others, who complied with him out of pure fear, were
of a contrary Opinion, and voted for a Peace with Alarichus. Now therefore when
those that were for a War, desired to know of Stilico, why he was more for
Peace than War; nay, to the dishonor of the Roman Name and glory, would meanly
purchase it with Money. He replied; Alarichus has stayed thus long in Epirus,
that he may join with me in a War against the Emperor of the West, and drawing
the Illyrians from under that Dominion, make them additional Subjects to
Honorius. And this had been done before that time [he said] if the Emperor
Honorius's Letters had not come in the mean while and stopped his Journey into
the East, in expectation whereof Alarichus had spent so much time in that
Country. And as Stilico said these words, he produced an Epistle from the
Emperor, and said, Serena was the cause of all, as being minded to preserve an
inviolable friendship between the two Emperors.

Since therefore they all thought Stilico spoke nothing but reason, the Senate
was pleased to order that Alarichus should have three thousand pounds upon the
account of a Peace, though most of 'em gave their Votes more out of fear to
Stilico than their own judgment or inclination. For that was the reason that
Lampadius, a Person of great Birth and Quality, having uttered this Latin
Sentence [Non est ista Pax, sed Pactio Servitutis] which in English is thus
[This is not the bond of Peace but of Slavery] was fain, as soon as the Senate
was dismissed, to fly into a neighboring Church belonging to the Christians,
for fear of suffering for the freedom, that he took in so saying.

When therefore Stilico had made the Peace with Alarichus after this manner, he
prepared himself very earnestly for his Journey, to put his designs in
execution. But the Emperor said that he would go also from Rome to Ravenna, to
view and congratulate the Army, especially since such and so great an Enemy was
come into Italy: though he did not say so of his own inclination but was
persuaded to it by Serena. For she had a mind to have him live in a securer
City, so that if Alarichus should break the Peace and invade Rome, he might not
take the Emperor too: but she was the more zealous to preserve him, since her
own safety depended upon his. But Stilico, being much against the Emperors
going to Ravenna, contrived many Obstacles to hinder it. To which seeing the
Emperor for all that would not give way, but was still intent upon his
Journey, one Sarus, a Barbarian, and Captain of a Company of Barbarians at
Ravenna, made a mutiny before the City at the instigation of Stilico: not that
he really designed to put things into a confusion, but to frighten the Emperor
out of his intention of coming to Ravenna. But seeing the Emperor persisted in
his resolution, Justinianus, an excellent Lawyer at Rome, whom Stilico made his
Assistant and Counselor, through the sagacity of his judgment, seemed to give
a shrewd guess at what the Design was upon which the Emperor took that
Journey; and that the Soldiers who were in Ticinum, and disaffected to Stilico
(when the Emperor came thither) would reduce him into very dangerous
circumstances. Wherefore he continually advised him to persuade the Emperor
out of his present intentions. But when he saw the Emperor would not hearken
to Stilico's Counsel, he went away from him, lest he through his familiarity
with Stilico should have suffered under the same misfortune.

But before this time there had been a report at Rome. that the Emperor
Arcadius was dead, which was confirmed after the Emperor Honorius went for
Ravenna: and therefore seeing Stilico was at Ravenna, whilst the Emperor was
at a City in Aemilia, called Bononia, some seventy Miles (as they call 'em [in
Latin, Septuaginta Millarium spatio] he sent for Stilico to chastize the
Soldiers who mutiny'd by the way among themselves. Whereupon when Stilico had
gathered the mutinous Soldiers together, and told 'em that the Emperor had not
only commanded him to correct 'em for it, but to make a Decumation or Tithing,
among 'em, and punish all the most guilty with death [by picking out every
tenth Man] he put 'em into such a fright, that they all burst out into tears,
and desiring him to take pity on them, made him promise them the Emperor's
Pardon. And when the Emperor had performed what he had promised they applied
themselves to public business. For Stilico was desirous to go into the East,
or manage Affairs for Theodosius (Son to Arcadius) who was very young and
wanted a Governor. And Honorius himself also was a thinking to go the same
Journey, with a design to secure that young Emperor's Dominions. But Stilico,
being disgusted upon that account, and showing him by computation what a vast
Sum of Money it would cost him to defray such an expedition, deterred the
Emperor from that enterprise. But he told him likewise that Constantine's
Rebellion would not permit him to go so far off as not to take care of Italy
and Rome it self, since that Usurper Constantine had overran all Gallia and
lived then at Orleance. Nay more, that, though what he had said was enough to
deserve the Emperor's care and Presence, Alarichus also was acoming with such
a vast Army of Barbarians; who as he was a Barbarian and a faithless Fellow, so
when he found Italy destitute of all assistance, would certainly invade it.
Wherefore he thought it the best Counsel, and most conducing to public good,
for Alarichus to undertake the Expedition against that Rebel Constantine, along
with part of his Barbarians, some Roman Legions and their Officers, who should
be sharers with him in the War; and then, for Stilico himself to go into the
East, if the Emperor commanded it, and would give him instructions what to do
there.

The Emperor, who thought that Stilico said nothing but what was right, gave
him Letters both to the Emperor of the East and to Alarichus, and so departed
from Bononia. But Stilico stayed there, and went neither into the East, nor did
any thing else that was designed. Nay he did not so much as send over any of
those Soldiers, that were in Ticinum, to Ravenna, or any other place, lest they
should meet the Emperor by the way and set him upon doing something to his
prejudice.

But Stilico being in these circumstances, though he were conscious of no ill
intention either against the Emperor or Soldiers, one When Stilico did what he
could to put the Court into Confusion, as Sozomen says, b. 9. c. 4. Olympius,
discovering his design, acquainted Honorius, that Stilico endeavored to get
the Empire into his own hands, and make his Son Eucherius his Partner in it,
who was no doubt a Gentile and an Enemy to the Christians. And therefore we may
the less admire why he is painted in such colors by Z^simus, with whom it is
equivolent to all other Crimes, merely to be a Christian.
Olympius, who was born near the Euxine Sea, and a great Officer in the Court
Guards, concealing a great deal of wickedness in his heart under the disguise
of Christian Religion, and being used to have frequent Discourses with the
Emperor upon the account of his pretended modesty and good carriage, said many
a stabbing word (to speak Poetically) against Stilico, and that he desired to
go into the East for no other reason but to get an opportunity of removing
young Theodosius, and putting the Empire into the hands of his own Son,
Eucherius. And these things he told the Emperor as they traveled along,
having a good occasion then to do it. But when the Emperor was at Ticinum,
Olympius, using to visit the sick Soldiers (which was the very Masterpiece of
all his hypocritical virtue) he dispersed such incantations [or false
insinuating Stories] among them too. But when the Emperor had been four days at
Ticinum, all the Soldiers being called together into the Court, the Emperor
appeared before 'em, and encouraged 'em to a War against the Rebel,
Constantine. And seeing no body was moved at any thing concerning Stilico,
Olympius was observed to nod toward the Soldiers, as if he would have put them
in mind of what he had said to 'em in private. At which they were almost mad,
and killed Limenius, who was Prefect of the Court in the Nations beyond the
Alps, and with him one Chariobaudes, who was General of the Legions in those
parts. For these two had by chance escaped the Tyrants hands and were come to
the Emperor at Ticinum. But besides these two there were slain, Vincentius and
Salvius, the one General of the Horse, and the other Commander of the Domestic
Forces. But seeing the Tumult increased, the Emperor retired into the Palace,
and some of the Magistates escaped, and then the Soldiers dispersing themselves
about the City, killed as many of the Magistrates as they could, pulling them
out of the Houses into which they had fled: and plundered all the Town:
Insomuch that when the Disease was past all cure, the Emperor put on a short
Coat, without either his long Robe or his Diadem; and coming forth into the
midst of the City, had very much ado to restrain and curb the fury of the
People. For those Magistrates also, who were taken even after their flight,
were cut off; as Naemorius, Master of the Court-bands, and Petronius, the
Treasurer and Stewart of the Emperor's private Patrimony; besides Salvius,
whose Office it was to declare what the Emperor thought fit to do [upon any
occasion] and was called Quaestor ever since the time of Constantine. Nor could
this Man escape Death, though he embraced and hugged the Emperor's feet. But
the Tumult continuing till late at Night, and the Emperor fearing lest any
thing should be committed against his own Person also, (for which reason he
withdrew) they happening to find Loaginianus. who was Prefect of the Court in
Italy, killed him. Now all these Magistrates were slain by the mad Soldiers:
but there perished of promiscuous people also so great a number as cannot
easily be computed.

When this news came to Stilico, who was then at Bononia, a City of Aemilia (as
I told you) it troubled him extremely. And therefore calling together all the
Commanders of his Confederate Barbarians who were with him, he proposed a
Consultation concerning what was most fit to be done. And there it was agreed
by common consent, that if the Emperor were slain (which was yet doubtful) all
the Confederate Barbarians at one time should join together and fall upon the
Roman Soldiers, and by that means make all others more modest and civil. But if
the Emperor appeared to be safe, though the Magistrates were taken off, that
then the Authors of the Tumult should be brought to condign punishment. And
this was the result of that Consultation into which Stilico entered with his
Barbarians. But when they knew that there was no indignity offered to the
Emperor's Person, Stilico resolved to proceed no farther in punishing or
correcting of the Soldiers, but to return to Ravenna. For he considered both
the number of the Soldiers, and saw likewise that the Emperor was not
steadfastly his Friend; not did he think it either honest or safe to set
Barbarians upon the Roman Army.

Now therefore Stilico being very anxious about these things, the Barbarians
that were about him were very desirous to make their former resolutions valid,
and therefore endeavored to persuade him from those things that he afterward
thought fit to be done. But being not able to persuade him, all the rest
determined to stay in some place or other till they were better informed what
the Emperor's Opinion was of Stilico; only Sarus, who excelled all the other
Confederates in strength and dignity, together with those Barbarians that were
under him, having killed all the Hunns that were Stilico's Lifeguard (whilst
they were asleep) and taken all his Carriages that followed him, went into his
Tent, in which he stayed to expect what would be the issue [of such actions.]
Whereupon Stilico seeing his Barbarians fell out among one another, went away
to Ravenna, and engaged the Cities, in which there were any Women or Children
belonging to the Barbarians, to receive never a Soul of the Barbarians, if they
came to 'em [for shelter.] But in the mean time Olympius being now grown Master
of the King's Will, sent the Imperial Letters to the Soldiers at Ravenna, to
command 'em presently to apprehend Stilico and keep him in Prison without
Fetters. Which when Stilico heard of, he got into a Church of the Christians
which was near, whilst it was yet Night; and his Barbarians, as also his other
familiars, who, with his Servants were all armed, seeing that, expected what
would follow. And when it was Day, the Soldiers going into the Church and
swearing before the Bishop, that they were commanded by the Emperor not to
kill him, but only to keep him in custody. But when he was got out of the
Church and in the Soldiers custody, there were other Letters delivered by him
that brought the former, wherein the penalty of Death was inflicted upon
Stilico for his offenses against the Commonwealth; insomuch that whilst
Eucherius his Son fled away at this juncture toward Rome, Stilico was led to
execution. But when the Barbarians about him, with his Servants and other
Friends or Relations (of whom there were a vast number) were prepared and
resolved to rescue him from the blow, Stilico deterred 'em from the enterprise
with all fearful menaces imaginable, and in a manner submitted his Neck to the
Sword, being the most modest and justest Person of almost all those that were
Men of great Authority, in his time. For though he married Theodosius the elder
Brother's Daughter [or Theodosius the elder's Niece by his Brother's side] and
was entrusted with both the Empires of his two Sons, yea, had been a Commander
twenty three years, yet he never appeared to make military Officers for Money,
or to convert the Soldiers allowance to his own use. And being the Father of
one Son only he proposed a dignity, or preferment to him, which was to be
Tribune of the Notaries (as they call that Officer) and limited him that he
should never desire or seek after any other Power or Authority. Now therefore
that studious Men or Astrologers may not be ignorant when he died, it was under
the Consulship of Bassus and Philippus, in which also the Emperor Arcadius
submitted to Fate, upon the 22d of August.

When Stilico was dead, all the Affairs of the Court were managed by Olympius,
according to his own will and pleasure; and Olympius too had the Office of
Magister, i. e. Master of the Court, whilst the Emperor distributed the rest
to those whom Olympius thought fit to recommend. But in the mean while not
only all his Friends, but even all others that had any kindness for Stilico
were sought out; and of that number Deuterius who was Captain of the Guard of
the Imperial Bedchamber was called in question, as also Petrus, Tribune of the
Company of Notaries: and when they had been put to the public Torture, to make
'em consess something concerning Stilico, yet, they having nothing to say
either against him or themselves either, Olympius failed of his desire, but
caused them to be drubb'd to Death with Cudgels. And though many others that
were suspected to be Stilico's Friends and conscious of his Designs, were
called to question and put to the Torture, to make em confess whether they knew
of his Ambition to be Emperor, yet seeing never a man of 'em would say any such
thing, the curious enquirers into such matters desisted from their enterprise,
But in the mean time Honorius the Emperor commanded his Wife Thermantia to be
taken from the Imperial Throne and restored to her Mother, who for all that was
not at all suspicacious: and ordered Eucherius, Stilico's Son, to be searched
for and put to death. Whom when they had found in a Church at Rome, into which
he had fled, they let him alone out of respect to the place. Whilst at the same
time and in the same City of Rome one Heliocrates, who was the Treasurer,
produced the Emperor's Letter, commanding that all who had born any Office in
the time of Stilico, should be confiscated, and thereby was totally employed in
gathering Money into the Treasury. But as if these things were not enough to
satisfy that evil Genius that captivated mankind in Chains of Wickedness and
confounded all things by a neglect of holy Rites, there was an addition made to
all their former misfortunes, which was thus:

The Soldiers that were in the City, when they heard of Stilico's death, ^ell
upon all the Women and Children, that were in the City, belonging to the
Barbarians: and having, as it were by a Signal, destroyed 'em every Soul, they
plundered 'em of all they had. Which when the Relations of those that were
slain came to hear, they met together from all quarters; and being mightily
incensed at the Remans for such an impious breach of their words which they had
passed in the presence of the Gods, they all resolved to join themselves to
Alarichus, and be his assistants in the War against Rome. Whereupon having
mustered up something more than thirty thousand Men, they Rendezvouz'd where
they pleased. But Alarichus was not sufficiently excited even by these Men to
undertake a War, but still preferred Peace, remembering the League which he made
with Stilico. He therefore sent Ambassadors and desired to purchase a Peace,
though with a small sum of Money, as likewise to have Aetius and Jason, the
former, Son to Jovius, and the latter, to Gaudentius, for Hostages: and
therewithal told 'em, that he would send them two under the like circumstances
out of his Nobility, and having made peace upon such terms would lead his Army
out of Noricum into Pannonia. But Alarichus demanding Peace upon these
conditions, the Emperor refused him his Request, although he must have of
necessity done one thing or other of two that were before him, if he would have
disposed of his Affairs the right way. For he must either have deferred the
War, and procured a Peace for some small sum, or if he would rather fight, he
ought to have mustered up all the Legions that he could, and posted them in the
Enemies way to obstruct the Barbarians from coming any further on. Besides
which, he should have chosen a fit Man to lead 'em and made Sarus General of
the War, who in his own person was sufficient to strike a terror into the
Enemies, upon the account both of his courage and his experience in Warlike
Affairs, and had also a number of Barbarians under him enough to make a good
defense. But he, on the contrary, neither embracing the offers of Peace, not
making Sarus his Friend, nor mustering up the Roman Army, but placing all his
hopes in the desires and wishes of Olympius, was the cause of so many
calamities to the Commonwealth. For he made such Men Commanders as were
contemptible in the esteem of the Enemy; to wit, Turpilio, whom he made General
of the Horse, Varanes of the Foot, Vigilantius of the Domestics, and so of all
other things accordingly. Upon which account all Men despaired and seemed to
have the utter ruin of Italy even then before their Eyes.

Now seeing these things were thus ordered, Alarichus began his expedition
against Rome, and laughed at the preparations made by Honorius. And because he
would not go about such a weighty business with only equal but rather far
greater Forces than his Enemy, he sent for his Wifes Brother, called Ataulphus,
out of the upper Pannonia, to be his Partner in the Action, as having a very
considerable number of Gotths and Hunns to bring along with him. Yet
nevertheless he did not stay for his Brother-in law's coming, but marching
forward in haste, passed by Aquileia and all the other Cities in order that lie
beyond the River Po, I mean Concordia, Altinum, and Cremona. And when he had
crossed the River, being as it were at some Festival, and having no Enemy to
stop him, he came into a certain Castle of Bononia, which they call Oecubaria.
From whence passing by all Aemilia, and leaving Ravenna behind him he ^arne to
Ariminum, a great City of Fla^^nia. But moving by that also with ^^eed, as he
did by all the rest that were in that Province, he came into Picenum, which is
a Nation lying in the extremity of the Ionian Bay. And from thence marching
toward Rome, he sacked all the Castles and Towns that were in his way;
insomuch that if Arsacius and Tarentius, the two Eunuchs, had not made haste
and so prevented the coming of the Barbarians into those parts as to bring
Eucherius, Stilico's Son, before that time to Rome, to die according to the
Emperor's Order, and executed what the Emperor commanded, the Youth had
certainly fallen into the hands of Alarichus and been saved. But the Eunuchs
having fulfilled what was enjoined 'em upon that score, and delivered
Thermantia, Honorius's Wife, to her Mother, they took shipping and went over to
the Emperor in Gallia Celtica, where he then lived, because they could not go
unto him the same way they came. Now upon this account the Emperor thinking he
should do good service to the Commonwealth, if he rewarded these two Eunuchs
for their great exploits in restoring Thermantia to her Mother, and killing
Eucherius, he made Tarentius Imperial Chamberlain, and gave Arsacius the next
Place under him. Then having taken often Bathanarius, who was Master of the
Soldiers [ Militum Magister, General] in the greater Libya, and Husband to
Stilico's Sister, he gave that Command to Heraclianus who was the Man that
killed Stilico, and received his Honor as the reward of that Action.

But when Alarichus was near Rome, besieging those within, the Senate suspected
Serena for bringing the Barbarians against their City. And therefore both the
whole Senate and Placidia, who was the Emperor's own Sister by the Mothers
side thought fit that she should die for it, as being the cause of all the
present mischief. For Alarichus, said they, when Serena is removed, will draw
off from the City, because there will be no body left from whom he can hope to
have the City betrayed into his hands. But this suspicion was really salse; for
Serena never thought of any such thing. However she suffered justly for her
impieties toward the Gods, as I am now agoing to tell you. When Theodosius the
Elder, having defeated the Rebel Eugenius, came to Rome, and created in all
people a Contempt or neglect of divine Worship, denying to defray the charge of
holy things out of the public Stock, the Priests of both Sexes were turned out
and banished, and the Temples bereft of all their Sacrifices. Whereupon Serena,
scoffing at 'em, would needs see the Temple dedicated to the Mother of the
Gods. In which when she saw certain [ Bracelets and] attire about the neck of
Rheas Statue, suitable to the divine Worship which was paid to her, She took it
off of the Statue and put it about her own Neck. And when a certain old Maid,
that was the only person left of all the Vestal Virgins, upbraided her with
such a wicked Action even to her Teeth, she not only gave her very ill
Language, but commanded her Attendants to carry or drive her away. But
notwithstanding, the old Woman, as she was going from the place, prayed that
whatsoever was due to such impiety, might fall upon Serena, her Husband and
Children. But Serena took no notice of what she said, and went out of the
Temple well pleased with the Attire that she had gotten; though afterward there
often appeared to her something not only fantastic, in a Dream, but real,
when she was awake, which did foretell her Death. But others too, besides her,
saw the like things: and so far did that just Vengeance, which uses to punish
the wicked, discharge its duty, that though Serena knew what would happen, she
took no care of her self, but submitted that Neck about which she had put the
Goddesses Attire, even to What Death Serena died I cannot learn from those
Authors that I have by me. But I should wonder, if Zosimus did not refer such
accidents to these to a contempt of the Gods, for there is no fitter defense
for false worship than what is derived from Tables. But it is indeed credible
that Serena hanged her self, though upon far different occasions, as, the
frustration of her ambitious hopes, and the unexpected diverce of her Daughter,
who being now sent home again, Serena had no hopes left of being an Emperess,
nor any reason to cherish her exalted thoughts. He likewise in the same Comma
or paragraph tells you such an other Story of Stilico, though we may easily
demonstrate the cause of his Death. For he had raised the Alemans, Suevians,
Vandals, and Burgundians to extort the Empire from his Son-in-law to his Son.
For he is noted with this Character in Paul. Diac. l. 13. He gave the blood of
all mankind to purchase a Purple Garment for one Boy.
an Halter. It is likewise said, that Stilico, for another impiety not much
unlike this of Serena, did not escape the secret hand of Vengeance. For he also
is said to have commanded the Doors of the Capitol at Rome, that were covered
with a great quantity of of Gold, to be uncased; and that those who were
employed in that Affair, found upon some part of the Doors, this Inscription,
[These things] are kept for a wretched Prince. And so it proved, even as the
Inscription foretold, for he died most wretchedly and most miserably too.

Yet notwithstanding Serenas death did not remove Alarichus from the Siege, but
he blocked up the Gates all round, and having possessed himself of the River
Tiber, obstructed the supply of necessaries from the Port to the City. Which
when the Romans saw, they resolved yet still to persevere, because they
expected almost every day to have Auxiliaries sent 'em from Ravenna. But when
they found no body came, and that they were disappointed of their hopes, they
thought good to retrench the measure of the allowance of Corn [or other
provisions] and to order that there should not be dressed [or prepared for
eating] above one half of what was formerly for each day; and afterward, when
their scarcity increased upon them, a third part only. And seeing there was no
remedy for their Relief, but that all their Belly timber [Succours of the
Belly, (...)] was spent, a Plague, as was probable it would, succeeded their
famine, and all places were full of dead bodies. And because the dead could not
be buried without the City (for the Enemies kept all the Passes or Avenues) the
City was their Sepulcher. So that it was like to be dispeopled upon another
account, and, though there had been no want of Victuals, yet the very stench
arising from the dead bodies was enough to infect and corrupt their bodies. But
Laeta, Wife to Gratian, who had been sometime Emperor, and her Mother
Pissamena supplied a great many with necessary food for some time. For, since
the Treasury allowed them the Provisions of an Imperial Table, through the
generosity of Theodosius who gave 'em that privilege, a great many received the
kindness of those two Women, and from their House got that which fortified 'em
against a Famine. But the malady was come to that extremity, as that they were
in danger to eat one another, they tried all ways which are abominable in the
eyes of mankind, and then resolved to send an Embassy to the Enemy, and
acquaint them, that they were ready to accept of any reasonable conditions of
Peace, and at the same time more ready for War, since the Roman People had
taken up Arms, and through their continual exercise in Military Affairs were
grown very much inclinable to fight. Now Basilius being chosen their
Ambassador, who was a Spaniard, and Governor of a Province, Johnannes went out
along with him (who was the chief of the Imperial Notaries, called Tribunes)
because he was acquainted with Alarichus, and [might be] a means to reconcile
them. For the Romans did not certainly know, whether Alarichus himself were
come thither or no, or whether it were he that besieged Rome. For they were
cheated with a former Report that it was another Person who had been Stilico's
Friend, and brought him to the City.

When therefore the Ambassadors came to him, they were ashamed of that
ignorance in which the Romans had been so long kept, but delivered the Senates
Message. Which when Alarichus heard, and that the people having been used to
Arms were ready for a War; The thickest grass, says he, is more easily cut than
the thinnest: and having so said, he laughed at the Ambassadors most
excessively. But when they came to talk of Peace, he used such expressions as
were beyond all barbarous Arrogance, or insolence. For he said, He would not
relinquish the Siege upon any other Condition, than that he should have all the
Gold and Silver in the City, together with all the Household goods in it,
besides the Barbarian Slaves. Whereupon when one of the Ambassadors said, If
you take all these things, what will you leave for the Citizens? He replied,
Their Souls. So when the Ambassadors had received this Answer, they desired
time to communicate it to the Citizens and advise with them what was to be
done. Which leave having obtained, they related all the Discourse that had
passed in that Embassy. Whereupon the Romans being persuaded that it was really
Alarichus who fought against 'em, and despairing of all things that conduce to
humane strength, they called to mind that help which the City had formerly
found in insurrections; and that they, by transgressing their ancient
Ceremonies were left destitute of it.

But whilst they were considering of these things, Pompeianus the Prefect of
the City, litt by chance upon some Men, that came out of Tuscany to Rome, and
said, That a certain Town, called Neveia, had freed it self from imminent
dangers, inasmuch as it had beaten off the Barbarians, who beset it, by Thunder
and Lightning which was caused through their Devotion to the Gods in the
ancient manner of Worship. And therefore when he had discoursed with these Men,
he did what he well could do out of the Books belonging to the Chief Priests or
Pontifies. But when he remembered what Opinion was then prevalent, he resolved
to go about his business with more security, and proposed the whole matter to
the Bishop of the City, whose Name was Innocentius. And he truly preferring the
safety of the City before his own Opinion, permitted 'em privately to do
whatever they knew how to do. But they pretending that what they could do would
do no good unless the public and usual Sacrifices were performed, the Senate
went up into the Capitol, and there, as also in the several Markets of the
City, did all that was to be performed; but no body daring to communicate in
their Religious, ancient Worship, they dismissed those Men who came out of
Thuscany, and applied themselves to reconcile the Barbarian as well as they
could. To which end they again sent Ambassadors; and after they had made long
Speeches on both sides, they agreed that the City should give five thousand
pound of Gold, and thirty thousand of Silver, with four thousand Silk Coats,
three thousand Fleeces or Fells of a Scarlet die, and three thousand pounds of
Pepper. But because the City had no public Stock, there was a necessity for
those Senators who had Estates, to undertake the collection of it by way of
Assessment. Now Palladius being empowered to rate every one according to his
Estate, but not able to make up the whole sum out of all, either upon the
account that some concealed part of their goods, or because the City was
otherwise impoverished through the continual covetousness and exactions of the
Emperors Magistrates; that wicked Demon or Genius, who at that time presided
over mankind, and stirred up the Persons employed in this Affair to the highest
pitch of all wickedness. For they resolved to supply what was wanting, out of
the Attire that was about the Statues [of the Gods]: which was in effect no
other, than to render those Images (that had been set up, and dedicated to holy
Rites and Ceremonies, and were adorned with decent Attire, for that they had
kept the City in perpetual happiness) when that ceremonious Worship should be
in any degree diminished) inanimate and inefficacious. And because all things
must then needs conspire to ruin the City, they not only robbed the Statues of
their Ornaments, but also melted some of 'em down that were made of Gold and
Silver: among which was that of Fortitude, or Valor, which the Romans call,
Virtus. Which being destroyed, all the Roman Valor and Courage that remained,
was quite extinguished; according to that which Men who were conversant about
holy Rites and ancient Ceremonies from that time foretold.

Now the Money being raised in this manner, they thought fit to send an Embassy
to the Emperor, to confer with him about the ensuing Peace [and to inform him)
that Alarichus did not require Money only, but certain Noblemens Sons likewise
for Hostages: upon which Condition also he would not only make a Peace, but
enter into an Alliance with the Emperor and assist the Romans against all
those who had a mind to oppose 'em. Whereupon the Emperor resolving to
conclude the Peace, the Money was paid to the Barbarians. Which being done,
Alarichus gave the Citizens the Freedom of a Market for three days together,
and leave to go securely out at certain Gates of the City, as also to bring up
their Corn from the Port. By which means when the Citizens had taken breath
again, by selling all the remaining part of their goods, or exchanging one
thing for another, to buy them necessaries, the Barbarians departed from Rome,
and pitched their Camp in certain places about Tuscany. And then almost all the
Slaves that were in Rome, flying daily out of the City enrolled themselves
among the Barbarians, to the number of forty thousand. But some of the
Barbarians who were straggling up and down attaqued the Romans as they were
going down to the Port, and bringing up their provisions. Which when Alarichus
understood, he used his utmost endeavor to hinder such proceedings, as being
done without his knowledge or consent. And now they seemed to have some small
respit from their misfortunes. Whilst the Emperor Honorius at Ravenna was just
entering upon the Consulship, having had that Honor eight times, and the
Emperor Theodosius, in the East, three times. At which juncture the Rebel
Constantine sent Eunuchs to Honorius, to beg his pardon for having received the
Empire. For he did not take it of his own choice, but by compulsion from the
Soldiers. Which Petition of his when the Emperor heard, and saw it was not
easy for him, since Alarichus and his Barbarians were so near, to prepare for
other Wars; besides the care that he took of his Kinsmen who were in the Rebels
custody (as, Verenianus and Didymius, by name) he not only granted their
Request; but sent him also an Imperial Robe. But indeed his care for his
Kinsmen was all in vain and frustrate, they being killed before this Embassy.
When therefore he had so done, he sent the Eunuchs home.

But the Peace with Alarichus being not yet confirmed, because the Emperor had
neither given him the Hostages, nor fulfilled all his desires, there were
Ambassadors sent from the Senate to Ravenna, [whose names were] Cecilianus,
Attalus, and Maximianus. Who though they lamented the sad misfortunes that had
befallen Rome, and tragically described the multitude of them that perished
there; yet they gained nothing by it, by reason that Olympius confounded all
Affairs and put a stop to those things that seemed to go in their due course.
Upon which account the Emperor dismissing the Ambassadors without their
Errand for which they came, he turned out Theodorus from being Prefect of the
City and gave the place to Cecicilianus, commanding that Attalus should be
Treasurer. But seeing Olympius made it his whole business to search in all
places for those that were reported to know any thing of Stilico's Affairs,
there were several Persons called in question upon that false Accusation, as
Marcellianus and Salonius, two Brothers, belonging to the Regiment of the
Imperial Notaries. And these two did Olympius deliver to the Prefect of the
Court; by whose Order though their bodies were beaten or drubb'd with all sorts
of severities in that kind, yet they discovered no tittle of what Olympius
would fain have known.

Now the Affairs of Rome being in no better a condition than before, the
Emperor thought fit to send for five Regiments of Soldiers out of Dalmatia
from their own Quarters there, to guard the City of Rome. Which Regimenrs were
made up of six thousand Men, who for carriage and strength were the chief of
all the Roman Army: and their General's Name was Valens, a Person ready to
attempt the greatest and most hazardous enterprise. He therefore would not seem
so much a Coward as to go that way which the Enemy did not guard; so that
Alarichus expecting till he came by and falling upon him with his whole Army,
subdued all those that were with him, excepting only an hundred that with much
ado escaped, together with their Commander. For he arrived safe at Rome, along
with Attalus, who was sent by the Senate to the Emperor. But seeing more
mischiefs were still added to the present ones, this Attalus when he came to
Rome, turned Heliocrates out of his Office, which the Emperor had given him by
the persuasions of Olympius. For Heliocrates was employed to search into the
Estates of them that were banished upon the account of their Acquaintance or
Relation to Stilico, and return 'em into the Treasury. But he being a moderate,
good-natured Man, looked upon it as an impiety to insult upon the unfortunate;
and therefore did not make any strict enquiry into things, but on the contrary
sent many of the Parties notice by a private Messenger to hide what they could,
insomuch that being reckoned a vile Fellow upon this score, he was brought to
Ravenna, to suffer for his humanity toward those Men that were under such
misfortunes. And he had certainly died for it, through the cruelty that then
obtein'd, if he had not got into a Church belonging to the Christians. But
Maximillianus who fell into the hands of the Enemy, was sold to his Father
Marinianus for thirty thousand pieces of Gold. For since the Emperor deferred
the Peace, and did not fulfill or perform what was agreed upon, the Romans
could not any longer pass freely out of the City. Wherefore the Senate sent
Ambassadors a second time to the Emperor about the Peace, along with whom the
Bishop of Rome also went. There were also some Barbarians in their Retinue,
sent by Alarichus, to protect 'em from their Enemies who infested the several
Roads.

But when these Ambassadors were come to the Emperor, Ataulphus, whom
Alarichus sent for (as I told you before) was come over the Alps, that lie as
you go from Pannonia to Venice. Which when the Emperor heard, and that he had
no great Army with him, he ordered all his Soldiers both Horse and Foot, as
many as were in the several Cities, to go with their own Officers and meet him.
But to Olympius, who was Captain of the Court-guards he gave the Hunns that
were in Ravenna, to the number of three hundred. Who when they saw those that
came -- [Here is a Chasm or Balk,] which may be supplied with these words [were
arrived] at a City after the word [came] and then it runs thus, Who wen they
saw those that came, were arrived at a City called Pisa, they made an attaque
and engaging with 'em, killed eleven hundred Gotths, and returned safe to
Ravenna with the loss of only seventeen Men.

But the Eunuchs about the Court made such informations to the Emperor against
Olympius, as the cause of all the ill accidents that had befallen the
Commonwealth, that they procured his removal out of his present Office.
Whereupon he, fearing lest he might suffer some greater misfortune, fled away
into Dalmatia; whilst in the mean time the Emperor sent Attalus, Prefect of
the City, to Rome, and being very solicitous that nothing belonging to the
Treasury should be concealed, he sent Demetrius also to assist Attalus, and
make a diligent enquiry into the public Stock. And when he had made many
innovations as to the Magistracy and other matters also; turning out those that
were formerly in great Authority and conferring their Offices upon others, he
appointed Generidus likewise to be Commander of all the Forces in Dalmatia, who
was already Captain General of all the rest that were posted or engarrison'd in
the upper Pannonia, Noricum and Rhaetia, even as far as the Alps. Now this
Generidus though he were of a Barbarian extract, was, in his disposition
inclined to all sorts of Virtues and the freest from covetousness of any Man
living. But whilst he adhered to ancient Rites and could not endure to
relinquish the old way of worshipping the Gods, there was a Law promulgated,
that prohibited all who were not Christians from wearing a Girdle in the Court.
Which Law being established, Generidus who was a Military Officer at that time
in Rome, laid down his Girdle and kept at home in his own House. And when the
Emperor required him as being enrolled among the Officers, to come to Court in
his due course; He replied, There was a Law that forbad him the use of a
Girdle, or that any one at all should be reckoned among the Officers who did
not reverence the Christian Religion. To which when the Emperor answered, That
the Law [he cited] did indeed oblige all others, excepting him alone, who had
undertaken such dangerous enterprises upon the score of the Commonwealth; He
made him this return, That he could not suffer himself to accept of such an
Honor that seemed to affront all the rest who upon the account of that Law had
been put out of Commission. Nor did he execute his Office, till the Emperor
being forced both by necessity and shame together, had utterly abolished the
Law; and gave all people leave to enjoy their own Opinions in all Places or
Offices whether they were Military or Civil.

Now Generidus, having begun with this piece of Gallantry, employed and
instructed the Soldiers with continual labors and exercises; distributing Corn
among 'em, and suffering no body to take any thing of it away from them, as
they were formerly used to do; besides that he himself out of his public
Allowance, gave those that took most pains convenient encouragement. Since
therefore he appeared so great, he was not only a Terror to the adjacent
Barbarians, but a security also to all those Nations which he had under his
care. But when the Soldiers mutinied at Ravenna, they took possession of the
Port there, crying out in a rude manner, and demanding that the Emperor would
come before 'em. But he, for fear of the insurrection, being got into some
private place, one Jovius came out among 'em, who was the Prefect of the Court
and honored with the Dignity of a Patrician; and making as if he knew not the
reason why they mutinied (although himself was said to be the cause of it,
together with Illebichus, who was Captain of the Domestic Horse) He asked them
what ground they had to be so violent? But as soon as he heard the Soldiers
say, that by all means they must have Turpillio, and Vigilantius the two
Generals with Terentius the Imperial Chamberlain and Arsacius, next to him in
Dignity, delivered to 'em; the Emperor fearing lest the Soldiers should
revolt, condemned the two Generals to perpetual Exile: and they thereupon being
put on board a Ship were killed by those that should have carried 'em [to the
place of Banishment.] For so indeed Jovius had commanded them to do; as fearing
lest if they ever came back again, and discovered the intrigue that was laid
against 'em, they might excite the Emperor to punish him for it. But Terentius
was sent into the East, whilst Arsacius was ordered to live at Millain. And
when the Emperor had made Eusebius Chamberlain in the room of Terentius, given
Valens, Turpillio's Command, and chosen Ellebichus Prefect instead of
Vigilatius, he seemed in some measure to assuage the fury of the Soldiers.

But Jovius, who was Prosect of the Court, having transferred all the Power of
managing the Emperor into his own hands, resolved to send Ambassadors to
Alarichus, to desire him to come even to Ravenna, and [to tell him] that there
they would conclude the Peace. Whereupon Alarichus being persuaded by the
Letters that he received both from the Emperor and Jovius too, and being come
as far as Ariminum, thirty miles from Ravenna, Jovius made haste thither also,
as having been Alarichus's Friend and familiar Acquaintance in Epirus, to treat
concerning the League. Now Alarichus made these following Demands: That he
would have so much Gold every year, and such a quantity of Corn; as likewise
that he and the Barbarians that were with him might inhabit both the Venetias,
Noricum and Dalmatia. Which Demands of his when Jovius had written out in the
presence of Alarichus, he sent 'em to the Emperor, with others Letters which
he privately conveyed to him, to advise him that he would make Alarichus
General of both his Armies; for that he might thereby induce him to remit
something of the severity in his Conditions, and make a Peace upon pretty
tolerable and moderate terms. But when the Emperor received that Epistle, he
condemned Jovius for his forward rashness, and sent him a Letter, wherein he
told him, It was fit that he indeed, as being Prefect of the Court, and
understanding the strength of the public Revenues, should assign the quantity
of Corn and Gold, but that he would never confer any Dignity or Command either
upon Alarichus or any of his Family.

Which Epistle as soon as Jovius received, he opened and read it, not only to
himself but in Alarichus's hearing: who though he bore all other things very
patiently, yet when he saw the Generalship denied not only to himself, but to
all his Family also, he was so enraged, that immediately he commanded his
Barbarians to march for Rome with all speed, to revenge the Affront, offered
both to him and all his Family. But Jovius being put to a stand when he saw the
Emperor's unexpected Letter, went back to Ravenna. And being desirous to
acquit himself of all blame, he bound Honorius under several Oaths, never to
make Peace with Alarichus, but to wage War against him continually: as he
himself likewise swore, by touching the Emperor's Head, and made all others,
that were in any Office, do the same.

Affairs being thus conserted, the Emperor, who was to make War against
Alarichus, called ten thousand Hunns to his assistance. And being willing to
have Provision ready for 'em against they came, he commanded the Dalmatians to
bring in Corn, and Sheep and Oxen; sending his Scouts also to enquire, how
Alarichus intended to march to Rome, and mustering up his Forces from all
quarters. But Alarichus in the mean time repented of his intended Voyage to
Rome, and sent the Bishops of each City, not only by way of Ambassadors, but
also to advise the Emperor, not to suffer such a City as that, which had
commanded a great part of the World for above thousand years, to be delivered
up and destroyed by the Barbarian, not such magnificent Structures to be
demolished by Hostile flames, but that he would rather make a Peace upon some
reasonable Conditions. For the Barbarian [he would have 'em tell the Emperour]
neither wanted preferment, nor would he desire those Provinces now, which
formerly he had a mind to dwell in, only the two Norici, that lie upon the
extreme parts of Ister, harassed with continual incursions, and bring in but a
small Revenue to the Treasury. Besides which he would have only so much Corn
every year, as the Emperor should think fit, and would remit the Gold: so that
there should be a Friendship and Alliance betwixt him and the Romans against
every one that took up Arms, or rise in opposition to the Empire. Which when
Alarichus had modestly and soberly proposed, (whilst all People admired his
moderation) Jovius and those that were the Emperor's greatest Ministers, said
his Demands could not be possibly granted, since all Men that were in any
Commission had sworn not to make Peace with Alarichus. For if their Oath had
been given to God, they might indeed have probably broke it, and left it to the
Deities Goodness to pardon 'em, for their impiety, but since they had sworn by
the Emperor's Head, it was by no means lawful for 'em to offend against so
great a Vow: So cautious were they that then had the management of public
Affairs, as being berest of Gods Care and Protection.

A New HISTORY Written by Count ZOSIMVS, Sometime Advocate of the Treasury. The
Sixth Book.
ALARICHVS therefore being thus affronted for these his reasonable Demands,
made haste toward Rome with all his Army, designing to lay close Siege to that
City. But at the same time there came one J^vius. a Man of great Learning and
Virtue, from Constantine, who had usurped the Government of Gallia Celtica, to
Honerius by way of an Ambassador, desiring that the former Peace, which they
had agreed upon, might be confirmed, and begging pardon for the killing of
Verenianus and Didymius, who were kinsmen to the Emperor Honorius. For he made
an Apology and said, that they were not taken off by Constantine's good will.
But seeing Honorius much troubled, he said it was convenient for him, since he
was so embarass'd with the Affairs of Italy, to make some small concessions:
and that if he would suffer him to go back to Constantine, and tell him what
circumstances Italy was then in, that he himself would shortly return thither
with all the Forces in Celtica, Spain, and Britain, to relieve both Italy and
Rome. Upon which Conditions Jovius was permitted to depart.

But since I have not given you a just Account concerning the state of Celtica,
it is fit I should tell you particularly how things were carried there formerly.
When Arcadius was Emperor ( Honorius being the seventh time, and Theodosius
the second time Consuls) the Soldiers in Britain made an insurrection, and
promoted Marcus to the Imperial Throne, paying all obedience to him as their
chief Lord in those parts. But some time after when they had killed him, for
not complying with their humors, they set up Gratian, whom they presented with
a Purple Robe and Diadem, and attended upon like an Emperor. But being
disgusted at him likewise, they in four months after deposed and murdered him,
delivering the Empire up into the hands of Constantine. Who, having made
Justinianus and Nevigastes Commanders of the Celtick Soldiery, left Britain and
went over; but coming to Bononia (which is the nearest City to the Seaside,
lying in the lower Germany) and having stayed there some days, he made all the
Armies betwixt that and the Alps, which part Gallia and Italy, his Friends, so
that he now seemed secure of the Empire. But at the same time Stilico sent
Sarus, as General, with an Army against Constantine; who meeting the General
Justinianus with all the Forces which he had, slew him and most of his
Soldiers: and, having made himself Master of great Spoils, went to besiege
Valentia, where he understood that Constantine had taken up his Quarters, as
being a City well guarded and secure for him to reside at. Whilst Nevigastes
the surviving Commander making some overtures of Peace to Sarus, he received
him as his Friend; but Sarus, though he mutually both gave and took an Oath to
the contrary, immediately killed him, without any regard to what he had sworn.

But when Constantine had made Edobinchus, a Frank by extract, but born in
Britain, and Gerontius, a Britain, his Commanders [in the room of Justinian and
Nevigastes] Sarus, who was afraid of these two upon the account of their
Military experience and Courage, raised the Siege from before Valentia when he
had lay'n there seven days. But Constantine's Officers attaqued him so briskly
with their greatest vigor that he had much ado to escape alive, and was fain
to give all his Spoils to the Bacaudae, to let him pass into Italy. Bacaudae,
vel Robbers, ^t memini.
Now therefore when Sarus was thus got safe into Italy, Constantine, who had
mustered up all his Forces, resolved to set a sufficient guard upon the Alps,
in three places, which obstruct the passage out of Celtica into Italy and so
onward, commonly called the Cottian, the Paenine, and the Maritime Alps. And
the reason why he took such care was this:

Some years before, when Arcadius was in his sixth Consulate and Probus was his
Colleague, the Vandals mixing with the Alanes and Suevians came over these
places, and plundered the Countries beyond the Alps. Where when they had made a
great slaughter, they became so formidable even to the Armies in Britain also,
that they forced 'em (for fear lest they might proceed as far as their Country)
to choose several Usurpers, as Marcus, Gratianus, and after them Constantinus:
Against whom there was a sharp engagement; but the Romans overcame, and killed
most part of the Barbarians: and yet, because they did not pursue those that
ran away (or otherwise they might certainly have killed 'em every Man) they
gave 'em time to recruit, and by mustering up a great number of Barbarians, to
put themselves once more into a fighting posture. Now upon this account did
Constantine set Guards upon these places, that those People might not have so
free a passage into Gallia. He likewise secured the Rhine, which had been
neglected since the Emperor Julian's time. And having thus ordered Affairs
throughout all Gallia, he put his eldest Son Constans into the Habit of a
Caesar and sent him into Spain. For he had a mind to be absolute Lord of all
the Countries there, not only out of a desire to enlarge his own Dominions,
but to retrench the Power of Honorius's Kinsmen. For he was afraid, lest when
they had gathered together an Army of the Soldiers that were in those parts,
they might, one time or other, cross over the Pyrenian Mountains and set upon
him, whilst Honorius, [probably] might send an Army out of Italy and by
environing of him on every side, depose him from his [usurped] Throne. So
Constans went over into Spain, having Terentius for his General, and
Apollinarius Prefect of his Court. And when he had appointed all the Officers
about his Court both Military and Civil; He sent his Army under their Conduct
against those who were akin to the Emperor Theodosius and disturbed all Spain
at that time. Who when they had made the first Onset against Constans with
their Lusitanian [or Portugueze] Soldiers and found themselves overpowered,
they mustered up a vast company of Slaves and Country Fellows, by whose
assistance they had like to have reduced him into most dangerous circumstances;
but even in this case too they failed of their expectation, whilst they and
their Wives were taken Prisoners by Constans. Which accident being told to
their Brothers, Theodosius and Lagodius, the one of 'em ran into Italy, and the
other escaped safe into the East. Now when Constans had done these exploits in
Spain, he returned to his Father Constantine, carrying Verenianus and Didymius
along with him, but leaving his General, Gerontius, there, with the Gallick
Soldiers, to guard the Pass from Celtica into Spain: although the Spanish
Soldiers did desire that they might be trusted with that Affair, as they had
been formerly, and that the safety of their Country might not be committed to
the care of Strangers. So Verenianus and Didymius being brought to Constantine,
were immediately put to Death.

But after that, Constans was a second time sent into Spain, and had Justus for
his General. At which Gerontius being disgusted, and having obliged the
Soldiers in those parts, he incited the Barbarians that were in Gallia Celtica
to rise in opposition against Constantine. Whom seeing Constantine was not able
to withstand, for that the greater part of his Army was in Spain, the
Barbarians beyond the Rhine did so licentiously over run all places, and
reduced not only the Britains but some of the Celtick Nations also to such
necessity, that they revolted from the Empire, and lived no longer under the
Roman Laws but as they pleased themselves. The Britains therefore took up Arms
and ventured upon any dangerous enterprise upon the account of their own
safety, till they had freed their Cities from the Barbarians that besieged 'em.
In like manner did all the Armorichan Country [ Brittaigne in France] with the
other Provinces in Gallia, who, in imitation of Britain, delivered themselves
the same way; by turning out the Roman Magistrates or Officers, and setting up
a Government, such as they pleased, of their own.

This Revolt or Defection therefore of Britain and the Celtick Nations,
happened when Constantine usurped the Empire, by whose neglect of Government
the Barbarians were emboldened to commit such Ravage. But in the mean time
Alarichus in Italy, seeing he could not gain a Peace upon the Conditions that
he proposed, nor had received any Hostages, invaded Rome once more, and
threatened to storm it, if the Citizens would not take his part and go along
with him against the Emperor Honorius. To which proposal they so long deferred
their Answer, that he besieged the City; and marching to the Port, though he
was some days before he could take it, yet at last he made himself Master of
it. And finding that all the City Stores lay there, he threatened to distribute
them among his own Men, unless the Romans would forthwith consent to his
Proposals. Wherefore the whole Senate met, and having consulted what they
should do, complied with all that Alarichus commanded of 'em. For there was no
avoiding Death, since no relief of Provisions was brought in from the Port to
the City. Accordingly they received Alarichus's Embassy, invited him to their
City, and, as they were commanded, set Attalus, Prefect of the City, upon an
Imperial Throne, with a Purple Robe and Crown: who presently declared Lampadius
Prefect of the Court, and Marcianus, of the City, but gave the Generalships to
Alarichus and Valens (who formerly commanded the Dalmatian Legions)
distributing the other Offices to others in order. Then with an Imperial Guard
about him he went toward the Court, though many ill Omens attended him by the
way. The next day going into the Senate he made a Speech, full of Arrogance;
wherein he told 'em with great Ostentation that he would subdue the whole World
to the Romans, and do things greater than that too. For which perhaps the Gods
were angry and designed soon after to remove him.

But the Romans therefore were overjoyed, having not only gotten other
Magistrates that knew how to manage things very well, but Tertullus also, at
whose promotion to the Consulship they were exceedingly pleased. Nor was any
body troubled at these things that all Men thought conduced to public good,
but only the Family of the Anicii; because they alone having almost all the
Money in the City, were sorry to see things go so well. But when Alarichus
wisely advised Attalus to send a convenient Army into Africa and to Carthage,
thereby to depose Heraclianus from his Dignity, lest he, who was Honorius's
Friend, should obstruct their Designs, Attalus would not hearken to his
Admonitions, but being possessed with those hopes which the Soothsayers gave
him, and persuaded that he should conquer all Africa and Carthage too without
fighting, he would not send forth Drumas, who with those Barbarians that he had
with him, might easily have turned Heraclianus out of his Office; but
neglecting Alarichus's Advice, gave the Command of all the Soldiers in Africa
to one Constantine, yet sent no good fighting Men along with him. But in the
mean time, whilst the Affairs of Africa were at an uncertainty, he undertook an
expedition against the Emperor, who was at Ravenna. Whereupon the Emperor was
so troubled and frighted, that he sent out Ambassadors to desire that the
Empire might be divided between them. But Jovius whom Attalus had made Prefect
of the Court, said that Attalus should not leave Honorius so much as the Title
of an Emperor, no not a whole body: for that he would send him to live in an
Island, and maim him in some part of his body. At which haughty expressions all
Men were affrighted, and Honorius was just ready to take his flight; but when,
for that purpose, he had gotten together a vast number of Ships into the Port
at Ravenna, six Regiments of Auxiliary Soldiers arrived there, which were
expected whilst Stilico was alive, but came not out of the East till that time;
being in number six thousand. At whose arrival Honorius being awaked (as it
were) out of a dead sleep, he entrusted the keeping of the Walls to them that
came out of the East, and resolved to stay at Ravenna, till he had better
intelligence concerning the Affairs of Africa. And if Heraclianus got the
upper-hand, that then, when things were settled and secure in those parts, he
would make War with his whole Army against Alarichus and Attalus: but if, on
the contrary, those that he sent into Africa, were worsted, that then he would
sail away into the East to Theodosius with those Ships which he had in
readiness and relinquish the Western Empire.

And thus it was with Honorius. But Jovius, who was sent Ambassador to
Honorius (as I told you before) began to think of treasonable Designs, being
corrupted by Honorius through other Men. He therefore told the Senate that he
would be no longer an Ambassador, and withal spoke some unhandsom words before
them, as, that they ought, since those whom they had sent into Africa had
failed of good success, to send Barbarians into the War against Heraclianus.
For since that Constantine was slain, their hopes, from that part of the World,
were in a wavering condition. But Attalus being enraged, and having employed
others to give Orders what he would have done, there were others sent with
Money into Africa, to assist in the present juncture there. Which when
Alarichus understood he was displeased at it, and began to despair of Attalus's
concerns, who went about things so rashly as if he were a Fool, without either
reason or prospect of advantage. And therefore when he had considered of these
things, he resolved to draw off from Ravenna, although he [formerly] determined
to prosecute the Siege, till he took it. For Jovius had persuaded him so to do;
who when he heard that the General sent by Attabus into Africa had utterly
missed of his aim, he applied himself wholly to the Affairs of Honorius, and
was always speaking ill of Attalus to Alarichus, out of a Design that he had to
make him believe, that as soon as Attalus had secured the Empire into his own
hands, he would first contrive the death of Alarichus and all that were akin to
him. But whilst Alarichus continued constant to the Oath which he had given to
Attalus, Valens, General of the Horse or Cavalry, was taken off upon suspicion
of Treason: and Alarichus in the mean time went with his Army to all the Cities
of Aemilia, that had denied very easily to receive Attalus as their Governor.
And some of them he quickly reduced; but having besieged Bononia which held out
many days, without being able to take it, he went toward Liguria, to force that
Country also into an acknowledgment of Attalus for their Emperor.

But Honorius having sent Letters to the Cities in Britain, by way of advice
for them to look to themselves, and rewarded the Soldiers with the Money sent
from Heraclianus, he lived at all ease imaginable, since he had contracted the
love of the Soldiers in all places. And Heraclianus having seized and guarded
all the Ports in Africa with all security, so that neither Corn, nor Oil, nor
any other provision could be carried into the Port of Rome, there fell a Famine
upon the City, more grievous than the former; and the Market-men [or those that
sold things in the Market] concealed all their goods, I^^gr^ssers, Forestallers.
out of hopes to get all the Money to themselves, by setting what price they
pleased upon their Commodities. By which means the City was reduced to such
extremities, that those who hoped that Man's flesh would be eaten, cried out in
the Hippodrome, or place for Horse-Races, Lay a certain Rate upon Man's f^^sh.

Upon which occasion Attalus went to Rome, and called the Senate together, who,
after some Debate, were, most of 'em of Opinion, that the Barbarians and the
Roman Soldiers, ought to be sent into Africa and that Drumas should be their
General, as being a Person that had given great testimonies of his fidelity and
good will already. Only Attalus and a few more did not agree in judgment with
the majority of the House, nor was he willing to send out any Barbarian as
General of a Roman Army. Now this was the first time that Alarichus had an Eye
upon Attalus to take him off or depose him, though Jovius had formerly by
continual Calumnies and false Accusations instigated him thereunto. Wherefore
to put his Design in execution, he brought Attalus out before the City
Ariminum, where he then lived, and taking off his Diadem, and stripping him of
his Purple Rope, he sent 'em to the Emperor Honorius. But though he reduced
Attalus to the condition of a private Person before all the People, yet he kept
him and his Son Ampelius at his own House, till he had made Peace with
Honorius; and then he procured their Pardon. Placida also, the Emperor's
Sister was with Alarichus, in the nature of an Hostage, but had all the Honor
and Attendance belonging to the Quality of a Princess.

And this was the State of Italy, whilst Constantine gave his Son Constans a
Diadem, and from a Caesar made him Emperor: after he had deprived Apollinarius
of his Office, and made another Person Prefect of the Court in his room. In the
mean time Alarichus went to Ravenna, to confirm the Peace with Honorius, but
Fortune found out another Obstacle beyond all expectation, and pointed out, as
it were, what should befall the Commonwealth. For whilst that Sarus lay with a
few Barbarians in Picenum, and joined neither with the Emperor, nor Alarichus
neither, Ataulphus who had a grudg against him, upon the score of some former
difference, came with his whole Army to that place where Sarus chanced to be.
But as soon as Sarus saw him coming, he, finding himself not able to fight him
(as having only three hundred Men) resolved to fly to Honorius and be his Ally
in the War against Alarichus. --

A Supplement of those things, that are wanting in Zosimus:
SOmething is wanting, but Photius in his Bibliotheca says, That the History of
Zosimus ended with the taking of Rome by Alarichus. Now seeing Zosimus is
deficient in this Point, and that no particular History of things relating to
the Sacking of Rome, is any where else to be found, I thought fit to give you
the following Account out of Baptista Egnatius.

Alarichus had besieged Rome for two years together, nor had Honorius, who then
lay idle at Ravenna, either Courage or Power to relieve it. For being concerned
for nothing less than for the safety of the City; now Stilico was dead, he had
constituted no General over the Army, to manage the War against the Gotths. And
that put the Gotths upon besieging the City, seeing the Roman Soldiers were
either run away or very slothful in their business. But the Barbarian Enemy
having in vain besieged it, nor being able to take it by Storm, was fain to
make use of Stratagems and Policy. They pretended a Journey into their own
Country, and therefore chose out three hundred young Fellows of great strength
and courage, whom they would bestow upon the Roman Nobility as a Present, but
instructed 'em beforehand to oblige their Masters with all observance
imaginable, and that upon a certain day prefixed, about Noon, when the Nobility
were either asleep or otherwise unmindful of business, they should meet of a
sudden at the Gate called Porta Avinaria, where having surpised and killed the
Guards, they should open the Gate for them who would be there at hand. In the
mean time the Gotths delayed the time of returning home, upon a pretense that
they wanted one thing one or another still, till the three hundred Youths
making good use of their opportunity, upon the day appointed, opened the Gate
to their Countrymen; and the Gotths when they were let in fell a plundering all
the City, though they did more dishonor than damage to the Citizens. Now there
are some who think, the Gate was opened by the contrivance of Proba a Woman of
Quality and great Wealth, who pitied the Roman People that died of the Famine
and several Distempers, like rotten Sheep. But two things upon this occasion,
are worth our Observation: the one, That there was an Edict made by Alarichus,
that whosoever fled into the Churches of the Saints, especially of Peter and
Paul, should have no violence offered to 'em; which was accordingly observed
with great care. The other was, That when the news was brought to Honorius at
Ravenna that [ Roma, i.e. Rome] was destroyed; He thought they had meant a
certain stout Gaul, whose name was Roma, and admired very much that he should
be so soon gone, with whom he had a little before so merrily diverted himself.

THE END.

