THE Hartford-shire Wonder, OR; Strange News from VVARE

Being an Exact and true Relation of one Jane Stretton the Daughter of Thomas
Stretton, of Ware in the County of Hartford, who has been visited in a strange
kind of manner by extraordinary and unusual fits, her abstaining from
sustenance for the space of 9 Months, being haunted by Imps or Devils in the
form of several Creatures here described the Parties adjudged of all by whom
she was thus tormented and the occasion thereof with many other remarkable
things taken from her own mouth and confirmed by many credible witnesses.

Job 1. v. 12. And the Lord said unto Satan; behold all that he has is in thy
power, only upon himself put not fotth thy hand.

LONDON, Printed for John Clark at the Bible and Harp in West-Smith-Field near
the Hospital Gate. 1669.

Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with a true modern story, which deserves to be inserted in
a Chronicle rather then a penny Pamphlet being for the strangeness thereof not
easily paralel'd; and were there not sufficient persons both in Ware and
London, to justify the truth thereof, might not gain credence though with some
of an easy belief, but this thing being so well known I shall not insert any
more testimonies here for the truth thereof, it being a labor as superfluous
as he who took on him to praise Hercules whom no man dispraised. By this learn
not to trust to those who pretend themselves Cunning men, Wizards or
Astrologers, for all knowledge that is not from God is vain, wicked and
hurtful, not only to them that practice them, but also to those who being in
trouble think to gain remedy by them; and remember that saying in the second of
Kings cap. 1. v. 3. Is it not because there is not a God in Israel that ye go
to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron. Read remember, and avoid, which is
the hearty wish of

Thy faithful Moniter M. Y.

THE Hartford-shire VVonder, OR Strnge news from Ware.
SOme there be which entitle this the Iron age, because of the stubbornness,
and Iron hearted inhabitants that live therein; though I think it may as
properly be termed the age of Wonders, considering two so eminent wonders which
have lately happened in the same. viz. That of the Darby-shire Maid, Martha
Tailor, her fasting from all sustenance for so long a space, and this other of
one Jane Streator, a maid of Ware in Hartford-shire, no less strange and
wonderful then the other, of which I am now about to relate.

This Jane Stretton was born at Ware in Hartford-shire aforesaid, about the
year of our Lord 1649. Being the Daughter of one Thomas Stretton a Wheel-right,
who with his wife are now living in the same Town. It so chanced that this
Thomas Stretton lost a Bible, which he valued (as every one should do the word
of God) at a high price, and being very desirous to have it again, it so
fortuned that he did light into the company with one of his Neighbors who was
such a one as the Country people term a Cunning man, Wizard, or Fortune Tellers.
such of whom the Lord says in Deutrinomy Chap. 18. v* 10. 11. 12. There shall
not be found among you any one that uses devination, or an observer of times,
or an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar
spirits, or a Wizard, or a Negromancer,; for all that does these things are an
abomination unto the Lord. This person thus qualified was by Streaton desired
(if his art could reach so far) to tell him who it was that had his Bible? to
which the other answered, that he could if he would: Stretton as bluntly
replying again, that then he must be either a Witch or a Devil, seeing he could
neither write nor read, these words struck home, and a guilty conscience being
wounded will soon ranchor, his heart is inflamed with the fire of revenge, but
for the present he covers it with the ashes of dissimulation; he will not vend
his malice at present, but like the Ram goes backward to return with the
greater force; love and friendship is written on sand which every puff of wind
will blow away, but malice and envy is engraven in Marble or Adamant, time
cannot obliterate or wear it out; and that which is worst, our Natures are such
that one discourtesie shall wash away all the friendship that twenty benefits
have implanted in our hearts.

But Malice sleeps not though it may wink, within a month after the wife of
this Fortune Tellers or Cunning-man which you please to term him, comes to
Strettons, desireing of this his daughter Jane, (who was newly come out of
service) a pot of Drink: she being ignorant of what had passed betwixt her
father and the other, willingly does it: Innocence dreads no danger, the child
will play with the Be for his gaudy coat, and mistrusts not his sting, soon
after she is taken with violent rageing fits, which torment her greviously, yet
no mistrust of the cause of her malady, from what was too much afterward
apparent to to be seen: the Devil is a sly theif, and though he keeps his
servants poor, yet he indues them with a plentiful stock of malice revenge, and
dissimulation.

About a week after the same woman comes again and desires a pin of her, (by
small means great mischeifs may be perpetrated) the silly maid mistrusting no
mischief, as not intending any, bestows one on her, when on a sudden her fits
waxed far more violent then before; her body swells like a bladder puffed up with
wind ready to burst, all her members were distorted, and as it were put in the
wrack: going to the next Meighbours, her head being intoxicated by the violency
of her fits, she falls down against the door and beats it open, lying in a
deplored spectacle of pity, tormented any one would have thought enough for
the satisfaction of the most inveterate malice.

But her misery ends not here, the squib is not run out to the end of the rope,
where the Devil has an inch given him, he will take and ell, and as it is said
of Rebels, that when they draw their sword, they must throw away their
scabboard, so wicked persons think that when they once begin they must make an
end, their malice is like an inperfect book, it has no Fi^ts to it, they will
willingly loose one eye to put out both of their Neighbors. Her fits increased
more violently, the last time the woeman saw this Maid she sounded away, and
lay for the time as it were deprived of life, after the recovery of this
sounding fit, her senses being in part recovered, yet her body still remained
as infirm as before; In six months space she neither eat any thing, nor
avoided any excrements, for where the cause is taken away, the effect must
needs cease. But such a wonder as this could not be confined, it was strait
spread abroad, and as we English are like the Athenians desirous to hear of
News, and to be ascertained of whrt we hear, so the report of this a strange
wonder draws a great concourse of people to the house, to the disturbance not
only of the maid, but also of Thomas Streton himself: wherefore to purchase a
quietness to himself, he removed her to the house of one John Wood a Neighbor
of his, yet not without such provision but that she had continual attendants
both night and day by her Friends and Relations, who now at last be:began to
distrust that her sickness proceeded from more then an ordinary cause.

Several days and nights was she thus watched, it being a miracle in Nature
that a corporal body should continue without the assistance of food, when at
last to the spectators plain view, there appeared the resemblance of Flax and
Hair to fall down upon a white sheet that was laid over her bed, which they
narrowly taking notice of, and perceiving her tongue to hang or loll out of her
Mouth, upon a nearer view found the perfect resemblance of Flax, Hair, and
Thread points to be on the same; which being by them removed, there presently
proceeded from her mouth two flames in resemblance of fire, the one of a red
color, the other blew, and soon after, in some short distance of time, eleven
pins; in several crooked forms and shapes, some bowed one ways some another.

The report of these more strange accidents soon flew about, not only all over
the Town of Ware, but to the adjacent Villages, and more remote Towns, so that
people came in multitudes to see her, some out of pity, to help and comfort
her, others out of curiosity to be ascertained of the truth of these relations,
and some who were diffident of any such thing as Witchcraft or conjurations,
who being fully satisfied in the truth of what is here set down, went home
fully convinced of their errors.

In all this her extreme tortures, she complained continually of an exceeding
pain in her back more then the other parts of her body, as if she were
continually slashed with a kife or had her flesh cut and mangled, and the
people about her with setting her up in her bed to give her some ease, found a
naked knife there, no body knowing how or which ways it should come thither.

Several things were applied unto her, and as it is usual for the Toothache
every one has a particular Medicine, so in that concourse of people there
could not but be many advisers, sum to this thing, and some to that, but none
that appeared profitable to the Maid, who was more violently tortured still
then before; It now being apparent that her distemper proceeded from the malice
of the Devils Instruments, on whose body God had permitted them to exercise
their envy, her tongue lolling out of her mouth in so sad and lamentable a
manner as struck an astonishment in all the beholders; and to convince them
that it was done by Witchcraft and such Diabolical means, they could see the
Devil or his Imps, or what it was we cannot determine, but sometimes it was in
the shape of a Toad, at other times it resembled a Frog, and at other times
again in the form of a Mouse, for as the Devil can transform himself into an
Angel of light, to deceive people, so he can turn himself into any beastly
shape to torment them.

And now that her Distemper was so evidently known, and that the Neighbors
were informed of the preceding passages betwixt this Inchanter,
Fortune Tellers, cunning-man, or what you will term him, his Wife, and the Maid;
they adjudged those 2 parties the absolute cause of the Maids, perplexity,
resolved by violence to fetch them before her, in the interim she being in a
vielent fit, some of the some from her mouth was put into the fire, there to be
burnt, the parties that were gone at that time lighting on the woman and
telling her their resolution to carry her before the maid, she made them this
answer, that if they had not come, she could not have stayed any longer from
her.

Three several times was this Flax and Hair with the likeness of a Thread point
seen upon her, before very credible witnesses who are ready to attest the same
uptheir Oaths.

The time that she began to be thus strangely tortured is Michaelmus last was
twelve month, during which time if we seriously consider every particular we
shall hardly find her parallel, viz. her extraordinary tortures, by swellings,
som^ings, and other pains, her abstinency from all food, for about the space of
nine months, save only some few liquid meats impossible in humane reason to
have preserved life, her being haunted with Frogs, Toads* Mice and the like, or
worse instruments in their likeness, the knife found in her bed, none knowing
by what means it came thither, and her pains as it were answerable to that
instrument; all which being puttogether and througly considered, we may admire
that such weak earthly bodies of ours should hever undergo such unspeakable
misery, we b^ing like glass apt to be broken with the least knock of misery,
like straw or stuble which the least fire of affliction consumes away, a hair
being sufficient to choke us, a little stopping of our breath to stifle us,
that if we will make compari^ons of instability there is nothing more fit to
resemble it then the life of man.

At present she takes nothing but surrups and such like liquid ingredients,
being in much pain and misery, yet it is hoped by the blessing of God and the
endeavors of those under whom she is in cure, that at last she may be eased of
her misery, and let none look aversly upon her in this respect, though she can
say with the Prophet, Behold and consider if any griefs be like unto mine,
seeing David says, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of all. And when God had permitted Satan to afflict the
righteous Job, giving him power over all his substance, goods, chattels and
body, yet still there was a reservation, only (said he) thou shall not touch
his life.

Whom God loves he chasteneth, that having Hell here, they may have there
heaven hereafter, for better it is with poor Lazarus to lie at the doors,
having the dogs licking our sores, then with the rich Glutton to fare
deliciously every day, and afterward to be tormented in hell.

Some are of that belief that stories of witchcraft are but idle Chymeras, but
we know that no part of Scripture was spoken in vain, and one place thereof
says, thou shall not suffer a Witch to live, those who are so, I wish them
grace to repent, and get out of their damnable estate, and should admonish all
persons whatsoever not upon any loss or disaster to go to these South-sayers,
Wizards, or cunning-men, for as the Scripture says in one place, Cursed be the
Image, and the Image maker, so I say there can ^o blessing be to those who are
either Wizards, or go to them for help and Council.

For the truth of this Relation I might (if there were occasion for it) insert
the names of several Eminent Persons both in VVare and London, who freely
offered to attest it, but the thing being so near hand and obvious to our eyes,
I count it needless, for who will cry out the Sun shines, it being therefore a
vain thing to go to prove that which we suppose none will deny, desiring thee
to accept of my pains herein, I take my leave.

FINIS.

