A SERMON EXHORTING TO UNION IN RELIGION.

PREACHED at BOW-CHURCH, May 20th, and Published at the Desire of the AUDITORY.

By E. YOUNG.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Church
Yard. MDCLXXX VIII.

St JOHN xvi. 31, 32. Do ye now believe? Behold the hour comes, yea, is now
come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me
alone.
THIS Day in the Calendar of the Church bears the name of Rogation-Sunday, as
being the Head of a Season set apart for more than ordinary Prayers and
Supplications unto God. The Calamities of a Particular Church begun the Usage;
but the Piety of the Universal thought fit to continue it, as well to deprecate
the like Calamities, as also to implore more instantly the Spiritual Presence
of Christ with his Church, at the same time when we contemplate his bodily
absence by reason of his Ascension.

Suitable to this purpose, there is a Gospel selected for the Day, in which our
Savior himself treats of the Nature and Efficacy of Prayer. Being now about to
leave his Disciples he recommends Prayer to be to them (as it were) the
Equivalent of Himself; to supply them with all the Consolations of his own
Presence; and so to fill up their Joy, that they should want none, though he were
away: Ask (says he) and you shall receive, that your Joy may be full. For he
tells them, that though he was going from them, He was only going to the Father,
and there to be their Advocate, and to secure a Return to all their Petitions:
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he shall give it you. Besides
this, He tells them, that the Father himself loved them, and that the Comforter
should come and abide with Them, till such time as They should come and abide
with Himself in the Mansions of Heaven. The Disciples having their Affections
raised and made warm by this obliging Discovery, immediately declare themselves
Believers, convinced, enlightened, satisfied: Now we are sure that Thou know
all Things; Now we Believe that Thou came forth from God. To which our
Savior makes this reply in the Text, Do ye now believe? Behold the hour
comes, yea is now come, that, etc.

Which words may be distinguished into Two general Parts, ( viz.) The Rebuke of
a Present fault in the Disciples, and The Warning of a Future. The first words,
Do ye now believe? is a manifest Rebuke; and it may seem to charge the Faith
that the Disciples had now professed with a Threefold Defect, That it was Late,
That it was Cheap, and That it was Mistaken: For each of These may be naturally
inferred from the import of the Question. ( ex. gr.)

First, Do ye now believe? But why did ye not believe sooner? Have you not had
sufficient means of Conviction till now? Have you not long since seen my
Miracles, and heard my Doctrine? Have I not told you heretofore, that I came
forth from the Father, and that I and the Father are one? wherefore your Faith
is reproachable, for that it is so Late.

Secondly, Do ye now believe? But what does it cost You to do so? What
temptation have you to the contrary? Your Faith now only lays hold of my
Promises, and is not at all discouraged by any of your own Fears: For what
Difficulties are you brought to? What Peril do you run by this private
Confession of me? And therefore your Faith is not to be boasted of, it is rather
reproachable, for that it is so Cheap.

Thirdly, Do ye now believe? i. e. Are you sure you do believe? Do you not
think too indulgently of your selves? Have you examined your own hearts, and
secured the Grounds of your Confidence? Indeed you seem to your selves to
believe; but I (who know you better than you do your selves) find that you do
not believe as you ought: For a true Faith will never be a Deserter; but you
will by and by desert me: And therefore your Faith is reproachable, for that it
is so mistaken.

Perhaps all these Three Defects were to be found in the present Faith of the
Disciples, at least in some measure: But I am sure they are actually and
ordinarily found in the Faith of other Professors; and therefore let us make
some short Reflections upon them.

I. Upon the Lateness of their Faith. None may deny, but that the Disciples did
believe before; They had made the same Confession before: But yet we must
acknowledge that their Faith was hitherto weak and laboring and perplexed. And
the Reason of all, was the Prejudice they were bred in, ( viz.) That the
Messiah was to set up a Worldly Kingdom. So that when our Savior discoursed to
them concerning Persecution and the Cross, though the Veneration they had for his
awful Goodness, would not suffer them to disbelieve what he said; yet their
rooted belief of another thing inconsistent with this, could not but hold their
Faith under an intricate suspense: But now (This Evening) our Savior had by a
more free and full Discovery weeded this Prejudice out of their Minds: He had
satisfied them that the Messiah's Kingdom was Heavenly; That the Redemption by
Him was Moral, not from Suffering, but from Sin; That the World, and They, were
of different Families, different Fashions, different Fortunes: From which
Discovery their Faith grew consistent, it no longer contradicted it self; and
therefore it was now professed, as if it were perfectly New; Now we Believe.

Let us observe from hence, That, No Man can have an approvable or steady
Faith, till such time as he has rendered himself Indifferent to the World. When
GOD trained up Abraham, as a Pattern to those that should afterward Believe,
be began with him at this Point, He was to take God for his All: God was to be
to him instead of Country, and Friends, and all other Interests: God was to be
to him both his Shield and his Reward; i. e. For him to have sought for either
any Deliverances, or any Advantages, but such as perfectly comported with his
Relyance upon God, had been absolute Infidelity in him: And the same it must be
in us. The same God offers himself to us in the Gospel, but together with his
Cross; So that all Worldly Comforts, excepting that of Internal Peace, are
absolutely contingent to our Covenant; And if we will not receive Him upon
these Terms, we are already judged unworthy of Him. He then is a Christian
Believer who has set down and considered, what expense he can be at for
Salvation: who has put Temporal and Eternal good things into different Scales,
and weighed them apart; and then resolved which to choose, though perhaps they
were never to meet, from the moment of his Choice: Who can say to himself -- I
am engaged to follow my Master, and this is the only point I aim at: I will
therefore be humble and charitable and inoffensive; I will be Moderate in my
Desires, and Temperate in my Enjoyments, Honest in my Dealings, and Faithful to
my Promises; I will not Strain my Conscience in hopes of Advantage, nor be
wanting to Truth for fear of Disobliging: These are the only Arts of Living,
that I desire to be acquainted with, and if it shall please God to bless these
to me with worldly prosperity, I know my self obliged to greater Thankfulness
for my present Comforts; but yet, if these fail, I will not be less Thankful
for my future assurances.

This is a Faith founded upon a Rock: But he whose Piety varies and fluctuates
according to the different faces of the World; that swells at Gain, and ebbs at
Loss, and sometimes sinks either in the calm of Pleasures, or under the
pressure of Affliction; such a one is (as the Apostle expresses him) like a
wave of the sea, driven about and tossed; let him not expect to receive any
thing from the Lord. In a word, It is worldly adherences that make men late
Believers; nay, occasions that multitudes who in view of a subsequent Faith
have renounced the world from their Cradle, have not yet arrived at that Faith
(then presumed on) to their Graves.

II. The Second thing to be reflected on is the Cheapness of the Disciples
Faith; and that must be estimated from the encouragements that they had just
then received: They had just received full assurances of their Master's
endearment, of the Love of the Father, of the Cohabitation of the Spirit, of
the Income of their Prayers, of a Future eternal Reward: And no wonder if the
warmth of such encouragements as these made their Faith spring up to a
promising blade; but yet we see that for want of a deeper root the next Trial
made it wither. Let us observe from hence -- Never to trust that Religion that
grows from an occasional Complacency or Elevation of Spirits. A good Humor
makes a good Christian very cheaply, but very deceitfully: While we contemplate
the indulgent Love of Christ, and the precious Promises of the Gospel; the
present however, and the future Advantages of being Religious, how easy is it
to pass into a Resolution of being so? While the Providence of God seems to
smile upon us in the Success of Affairs, how forward are our purposes to be
Thankful? While men give us respect, and flatter our Inclinations, how prone a
thing is it to be Courteous? While no body does us any Injury or Affront, how
gloriously can we pronounce our selves in Charity with all the world? But in
the mean time there may be nothing of a grounded Religion in all this; It may
be no more than the Natural result of the present state of our mind; which
being at ease with the posture of things without, is not willing to rifle its
own enjoyment by any disturbing Passions within. This therefore is not to be
trusted to: But he that will entertain any reasonable hopes of his own
Christianity must find it in the experiences of Temptation; what he can Forgive
when Injury provokes him; what he can Suffer when Danger presents it self; what
he can forego of his own to promote the Interests of Piety: And without these
Experiences all our Professions, though never so courageous, are but like
Ephraim's carrying about his Arms and his Bow as the badges of his Valor, and
yet running away in the day of Battle.

III. The last Circumstance we are to reflect upon, is, the Disciples Mistake
of their Faith: It was their own hearts they pronounced upon, and yet they were
deceived; and they cried very unseasonably, now we believe, just at the moment
when they were ready to confute their Pretense. Let us observe hence -- That
men are naturally apt to harbor too indulgent an opinion of themselves. It
must be acknowledged that we are all too apt to do so; notwithstanding that (as
we may learn from the present Instance) such an Opinion be extremely
treacherous, and the readiest way to prevent that good in our selves, which we
too fondly presume. A good Conceit of our selves is a very comfortable Passion;
it sets us mightily at ease; and so it has always a sure friend of our Nature:
on the other side, it breeds Carelessness, and prevents Diligence, and hinders
Proficiency, and so it has always a sure friend of the Devil: and no wonder
then that it so universally steals upon us. But besides these Two Causes, many
men have a Third, why a Redundance of their good Opinion should light upon
themselves, and that is, Because they spend so little of it upon others: Their
ill thoughts and their Censures spend themselves all outward; and so their
good ones fall of course to their own share. But alas! how unreasonable as well
as unjust a thing it is for any to censure the Inwards of another, when we see
that even good Men are not able to dive through the mystery of their own. Be
assured therefore there can be but little honesty, without thinking as well as
possible of others; and there can be no safety without thinking humbly and
distrustfully of our selves. Had the Disciples but distrusted that Faith, which
they so confidently pronounced, they had infallibly secured it; had they but
cried (as once before) Lord increase our Faith, instead of Now we believe; they
had infallibly prevented the shame of their approaching fall. But as it is the
first Method of God's good pleasure to give Grace unto the Humble, so the next
act of his Compassion is to bring the Confident to shame; That they may be made
acquainted with Humbleness as a Necessity, who were not wise enough to prefer
it as a Virtue.

Which brings me upon the Consideration of the Remainder of my Text, Behold the
hour comes, yea is now come, that ye shall be scattered every man to his own,
and shall leave me alone. In which words we may observe, that, as the Disciples
Crime was the leaving of their Master, so the Occasion of that Crime was their
Scattering, and the Reason of their Scattering was their (...), the concern
that each of them had for their Own: Ye shall be scattered every man to his
Own, and shall leave me alone.

To form you a proper Instruction from this Passage, I shall infer these Two
Propositions from it: 1. That when Christians divide, they leave their Master:
And, 2. That it is (...), our Own things, and not the things of Christ that
makes us divide.

1. When Christians divide, they leave their Master. Where you may perceive I
use the expression of the Text, in a sense that is only Analogical; For by
leaving Christ, in the Text, is meant the leaving his Person; but by leaving
Christ, in my Proposition, is meant the leaving of his Interest: And so the
plainest sense of it will be this, That when Christians divide and enter into
separate Communions, they do a thing that is injurious to Christ, and
prejudicial to his Religion. -- This is a matter wherein the present Posture of
our affairs is highly concerned; and therefore give me leave, though you know it
already, to put you in remembrance of the Truth of it.

The Two great Ends of Religion and of Christ's Communion with his Church, are
the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men; and it is very manifest, that the
dividing into separate Communions is extremely prejudicial to each of these
Ends.

Let us see, (1) How it affects the Glory of God.

All the Christians in the World are in the Scripture-stile called but one
Assembly, ( Ecclesia) to intimate that though they are distant in places, yet
they ought to be but One, both in Affections and Manner of Worship. God himself
has ordained it to be so, and that with respect to his own Glory; For so he
commands himself to be honored, so to be praised; as being never well-pleased
with the Worship of his People, but when it proceeds from Unity of Spirit,
demonstrated by the Decency of a mutual resemblance. S. Paul Romans 15. 5.
argues, that both agreement of hearts, and agreement of Worship are expressly
necessary to the Glory of God; where he says, Now the God of patience and
consolation grant you to be like-minded one toward another, as it is in Christ
Jesus, that you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God. Upon which
passage Calvin makes this Reflection, Non est ergo quod jactet quispiam se Deo
gloriam daturum suo more, etc. Therefore (says he) Let no Man boast within
himself that he will glorify God after his own manner, for God has such
regard to the Concent of his Service, that he will not have his Glory set forth
by the mouths of those that separate and disagree. Thus that Author. -- I allow
that it adds to the Glory of a Prince, when we can say, that though his Subjects
be divided into several Factions, and disagree among themselves, yet they agree
in this to honor him. This is true, because the Honor that is given to men is
not affected with the Piety, but only with the sincerity of the Giver: but on
the contrary, the honor given to God takes all its value from the pure Piety
of the Giver; and therefore so long as our Conscience lies under the Taint of
such an irregularity as Division is, it is not all the honor of our Lips, that
can make amends for the dishonor of our Hearts.

No man doubts but that the Glory of God is concerned in the credit of his
Religion; and yet how highly is Religion discredited by the Divisions of those
that profess it? For since God has given Religion designedly as a Cure for all
differences amongst men, and to reduce them to a concent of Minds and Hearts;
if it shall happen any where that Religion be observed not to compass this end,
who can hinder but that the Religion it self shall fall under the blame of it?
witness those Calumnies and Reproaches that the Reformed Religion is at this
day loaded with by its Adversaries; who for this very Reason; because there are
such Divisions among us, seem to despise our Religion as false, as a Babel, as
a Beast with many heads and horns all pushing at one another. Now, though this
Argument does in truth prove no farther than this -- That the best Religion may
be discredited by its Professors (and I am sure the Devil is always most busy
to bring it so about;) yet in the mean time, this very scandal, That our
Religion is false, can never be wrested out of the mouths of those that seek to
blaspheme it, till such time as the composing of our Differences shall take
away that occasion that they have so unhappily given.

(2) If our Divisions have so ill an aspect toward the Glory of God, there is
little hopes they should look better toward the Salvation of men: let us
consider then in the next place with respect to that.

The Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 4. 15. That Christ is the Head, from whom the whole
Body being fitly joined and compacted together, receives supplies in every
part, to the edifying of it self in Love. And a man need not make use of more
words than these, and that Idea that is in them, to demonstrate how necessary
Charity is to Edification, and Union to all the good Influences of God. I know
it is possible some may satisfy themselves that they maintain Charity
notwithstanding they break Communion; but we find by sad experience that this
is next to impossible to be done: For when men's differences are about matters
of Religion, Passion slides in under that fair pretext, and lays claim to
Conscience it self; and it becomes a piece of Zeal to be Uncharitable. Nay we
may further observe that when the matter men differ about is very little, their
Animosities are generally the highest; and the smaller the distance, the wider
the breach: Insomuch that most can live more friendly with an Infidel that
differs in the object of Worship, than with another Christian that differs only
in the Form. The reason whereof must be this, That when the Opinions of others
are at a great distance from our own, we look upon them as a simple Persuasion;
but when they come near to ours we are apt to look upon them as a kind of
Affront; presuming -- That where the distance is so little, it is not so much
the Matter of the Controversy, as the Malice of the Party that keeps up the
Difference. And this is a Prejudice that naturally inflames men to revenge, and
breeds a Canker in Religion, that eats up the spirit of it.

But (without all this) supposing a man that breaks Communion, to maintain all
other Charity as much as possible; supposing him to bear malice to none, to
censure none, to pray for, to wish well to all; yet all this is short of the
duty of Brotherly Love, i. e. That Love which one Christian owes to another:
for Brotherly Love is not to be expressed but by Communicating in Religious
Offices, in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, (as the Primitive Fellowship of
Christians is expressed in the Holy Scripture) which offices have therefore in
all Ages been looked upon as the necessary Tests and Symbols of Christian Love.

I need not insist on the multitude of other Evils that Division is the Mother
of: What a Harvest it is to wily Seducers, what a Rock to Unstable minds, what
a Snare to Itching Ears, what an opportunity to Men of either wanton, or
peevish Fancies, to sow the Tares of Confusion; what a provocation to God to
suffer, that they who cannot agree with one another, should be devoured one of
another. What need I say more of a thing that (we see) detracts from the Glory
of God, and the honor of his Religion, that bars the influences of his Grace,
and hinders Edification, that is an Immorality in it self, and a certain
temptation to many others; what need I say more of it to make our Consciences
condemn it?

In the mean time, I do not say that Communion is to be held upon any Terms
whatsoever: I do not believe every Separation to be sinful, no more than I
believe every Union to be Sacred. Christ may be left by those that hold
together. In that prospect that the Holy Scriptures give us of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, we do not learn that it should be a divided Kingdom; but, on the
contrary, that it should be a mighty Confederacy, and extensive Union to the
setting up of an Idolatrous worship. In which case the Holy Spirit cries, Come
out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins. Whenever
therefore the Terms of Communion come to be sinful, as they must be where Faith
is innovated, Inventions obtruded, Corruptions past into a Law, and Communion
charged with such obligations as are not deducible from the Rule of Christ, but
bear a notorious inconsistence with it; There it becomes a Duty to Divide; and
they are the Separatists that force to Separate, not They who deplore the
necessity of so doing.

It Is our own Case to stand separated from the Church of Rome; but we call
Heaven to witness that it is not from any spirit of Division in us: let but the
Holy Scripture be the Rule, and primitive Antiquity the Judge, and we are ready
to abide by the Award, and unite in the issue of such a Determination. And as
they that will agree upon any other Terms, must resolve to sacrifice Religion
to a League, whereas on the other side, They that will not agree upon such
Terms as these, seem resolved to sacrifice Christianity to Faction.

2. So I pass to my Second Proposition, which is this -- That it is our Own
Things, and not the Things of Christ, which makes us divide.

It has always been, and always will be a pretense among Christians, so long as
they divide, that Religion engages them to do so: But Religion all the while
mourns under, and remonstrates against the slander. Religion implores men to be
both more Charitable toward one another, and toward Her: For it is not only a
sin to divide, but it is a greater sin to entitle Religion to the guilt of our
Dividing. The Things of Christ and of Religion are These, as the Apostle tells
us, Gal. 5. Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance: Did ever these Graces engage men to divide? the Charge of
Religion is this, as the same Apostle, If there be any Consolation in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being
of one accord and of one mind. Did ever such a Pathetical Adjuration as This
engage men to divide? If therefore the practice of men be found to run opposite
to these fundamental Graces, and most Sacred Obligations of Christianity, it is
no rashness to conclude, That they are moved by some other Springs than those
of a well-weighed Religion.

Of those that separate from our Communion, some pretend Conscience, as if our
Communion were unlawful; and some pretend Edification, as if our Communion though
it were lawful yet it edified not. Let us now fairly examine these Two
Pretenses, and see whether they are bottomed upon the Things of Christ or our
Own.

1. As to them that plead Conscience for their separating from us, give me
leave to premise, That it is not sufficient for any man's Repose to say that he
is acted by his Conscience in what he does: For we ought to consider, that
since Conscience is no other than our present Persuasion, our Conscience must
needs lie at the mercy of every thing that has power to persuade us; and hence
it oftentimes comes to pass that while Conscience acts us, it self is acted by
Passions and weaknesses, and what then must become of the Regularity of what we
do? I know every man detests the Charge of being swayed in matters of Religion,
either by Interest or Peevishness, or Pride or Appetites or Aversions, or any
thing that is either avowedly evil or shamefully weak; and therefore I shall
not charge any man with being so swayed: But yet I shall observe for the
Caution of us all, that all these things find a way to pass into our
Consciences, and there to act as securely as it were behind the Curtain; even
at that time when we should be ready to detest them in their own naked
appearance. And for the truth of this I shall appeal to some undeniable
experience.

We have known some, who out of wantonness of Wit, and affectation of
singularity, have made a perfect new Model of Christian Religion; have made a
God without Eternity, and a Savior without Satisfaction, and a Hell without
Torments; have first admired this their Scheme, and then believed it; and so
become Masters of a numerous Sect: And thus Vanity has past into Conscience. We
have known others of a moroser Complexion, who falling as it were into dislike
with that sweetness that Christianity obliges to, and those Sacraments that are
the Ties of Union, and that Gospel that so instantly presses it, have come to
believe that the very Gospel-Institutions are but Type and shadow; That every
Man has a surer word of Prophecy within himself; And that God must be served
without all Positive Ordinances: And these have sprang into a numerous Sect:
And thus Complexion has past into Conscience. Others we know whose Covetousness
has first inclined them to teach, and then the success of their Doctrine has
inclined them to believe, that the Merits of Humane Piety may be transferred
from Person to Person, and that the fruits of Repentance may be purchased at a
price: And thus Avarice has past into Conscience. Others we know, who having
let their Minds grow gross and carnal, and then finding themselves either too
much awed, or too much at a loss in their Devotions to a Pure and Invisible
Being, have introduced sensible Objects of Worship, and humane Mediators, to
whom they might address both with more boldness, and more carelessness: And thus
Carnality has past into Conscience. Others we know, who being of a temper more
Zealous and fierce, have persuaded themselves that all is Sacred, that they do
for the advancement of their own Opinions; and so have allowed and practiced
Persecutions, Murders, Outrages; and thought that in these they have done God
good service: And thus Cruelty has past into Conscience. We have known others,
who being uneasy in their Worldly circumstances, and then reflecting on that
mysterious intimation that Christ should sometime reign alone upon the Earth,
have believed (as they were willing) that the time was now accomplished; and
thereupon have cried down all worldly Government as Antichristian, and hoped to
set up Christ and themselves together: And thus Discontent has past into
Conscience. We know others, who being bred up under Masters, better skilled in
Affirming than Proving, have been taught to believe, That the most commendable
Faith is that which swallows all things without examination, and the more
Reason a man hears against himself, the more meritorious is his obstinacy: And
thus Credulity has past into Conscience. Others, who being fond of some
Opinions, which they had no other foundation to build upon, have made them
Canonical by their Dreams: And thus Fondness has past into Conscience. And have
we not heard of others, who have been as it were devoted to an Aversion from
their Youth? warned to avoid a particular Communion at the peril of their
Souls? told that it was Antichristian, Popish, Socinian, Pelagian, and made to
believe it monstrous, without ever understanding it? And thus Prejudice has
past into Conscience. If then both men's Appetites and Passions, Follies and
Prejudices, Fondnesses and Aversions, Wishes and Dreams may pass into their
Consciences, and prescribe and govern there, as we see by these undeniable
experiences they may; I need say no more to prove that even when Men separate
under that venerable pretext of Conscience, they may yet separate for those
things which Christ will never own to be his. -- Let such therefore bring their
Conscience to its proper Light: For as it is necessary for all to be guided by
their Conscience, so it is as necessary that Conscience it self be guided by
the Word of God. Now we readily acknowledge that the Scripture does in some
cases authorize us to separate: Come out of her my people, says the Holy
Spirit; Rev. 18. 4. Come out from among them and be ye separate, says the same
Spirit, 2 Cor. 6. 17. But let it be considered that in both those places the
Cause alleged to justify the Separation, is an Idolatrous Worship and nothing
less: Let those that separate from us therefore instance, where is that
defiling Pitch, where is that dangerous Contagion to be found in our Church?
How has our Church fallen from the Faith, how has she corrupted the Doctrines
of Christianity? Till they can do so, their Separation cannot appear to have
any Authority from Scripture; and therefore it must be a Separation of that
kind which the Scripture every where condemns for a sin.

But here comes in the Second Plea, with a mien of greater Sobriety; I mean the
Plea of those who cry -- Your Communion is Lawful, but it edifies not, and
therefore since we have the liberty of Separate Assemblies, Religious Prudence
obliges us to go there, where we can edify. -- My Friends, however we suppose
all humane Laws for Unity of Worship are Dispensable at Pleasure; yet I hope it
will never be an Opinion among us, that the Laws of God requiring the same
Thing are so Dispensable. I have urged our Union from the obligations of
Scripture and Inferences of Moral Reason, and I hope these are things that
would stand undissolved among us, though all human Laws were repealed -- But let
us come to examine the Plea it self.

Men cry they edify not in our Communion: but how comes this to be possible?
Is it possible that a People, particularly in this City, should not be able to
edify under their established Clergy, whose Pious Labors all the World both
applaud and profit by? Was there ever any Church in the World that has furnished
the Piety of its Congregations with so many excellent Treatises both of
Practical and Devotional and Controversial Divinity as this has done? and yet
is it possible that men should not be able to edify under such a Ministry as
this? I must confess it is possible, but the reason of the possibility is
Scandalous; For it is Prejudice that hinders our Edification; Prejudice that
would hinder a man from improving under the labors of an Angel. None deny but
that our Savior was a most Edifying Preacher; and yet it is as evident that a
great many of those that heard him were never the better for all that he said.
They were such who for their particular reasons spread about ill Characters of
him; and entertained a mean opinion of him; and with this Prejudice they
hardened themselves against all the influence of his Preaching. Prejudice is a
thing whereby Christ has always suffered; and doubtless he does so now in a
high measure among us. -- Could but the wooings of God once prevail upon us to
lay this aside; could we but once come to the Congregation prepared with
Meekness and Patience and Love; then every word would sound both more
Instructive to us and more moving: Then besides all other possible
improvements, we should be sure to reap this ( viz.) the mortifying of an
uncharitable Appetite, which at present is the occasion both of public Scandal
and Calamity; and I am sure this would be a better measure of Edification, then
it is possible for us to arrive at in any separate Assembly.

But I am aware, that the greatest Prejudice is still behind; it is that which
lies against our Public Prayers. For it cannot pass the observation of any
man, nor the grieving of any good man, to see how when a Congregation is met to
worship God, and are joined in an Order of Prayers so agreeable to his Worship,
there shall be some notwithstanding, who seem studiously concerned to show a
disrespect to the service: Which is a behavior so offensive, that though it may
consist with an unthinking zeal; yet it is impossible that it can sit easy upon
the Conscience of any man, that shall once come to be reflexive as well as
Religious. Let us enter a little into the Merits of the Cause.

What man can say, but that in the whole course of our Prayers, the Conceptions
are both awful and pious, and the expressions both proper and affectionate?
What man can say but that the Praises there are suitable to the Majesty of God,
and the Confessions proper for the humiliation of Sinners, and the
Intercessions expressive of all the duties of Charity, and the Supplications
extended to all the ordinary exigencies of Mankind? I know no sober man can say
to the contrary. But then here lies the offense, they are common and known
beforehand, and prescribed, and always the same; and this is nauseating; and
this causes that they do not edify. I confess I cannot think of any Argument
to keep this Plea in countenance, but one, and that is this, ( viz.) That it is
ordinarily in the power of sudden and arbitrary Prayer to beget attention more
than that which we were acquainted with before: But let me likewise observe
that Piety has no share in the producing that Attention: for attention to any
thing that is New to us, is the necessary product of simple Curiosity: And this
is the Reason that chains our Ears to an extemporary Speaker; our Imaginations
are held busy in apprehending his Matter, in weighing his Words, in estimating
his Talent, and in watching after somewhat that may possibly be peculiar and
surprising: Whereas when this is done, and the Prayer ended, our very dislike
of having the same Form again, is a plain proof that our Curiosity affects us
more than our Devotion: For if the Form we have heard were in it self good and
properly expressive of all our concerns with God, a sincere Piety would never
nauseate the eternal repetition of it. Methinks it were but just that, when men
come to worship God, they should rather consider what pleases God, than what
pleases themselves: Now can any one say that God is not pleased with a set Form
of Prayer? How comes it then to pass that whereas the Holy Scripture makes
mention twice of the Devotion used by the Church Triumphant in Heaven, we are
taught in both places that it consists in a set Form, (Consult Isa. 6. together
with Rev. 4. and you shall find it so.) Now I hope none dare charge those
Blessed Spirits (as they may when they please the Ministers of our Church) that
they use a set Form either because of Poverty of Invention or Laziness of
affection: No, They use it in Testimony that what is always good and proper,
ought always to please; and that it is only the untutored infirmities of our
own Imaginations that makes us hunt after Change. But beside this; we know well
enough that the power and energy of Prayer cannot consist in any variety of
words, but only in suiting our affections to the words that we use: Now when we
know beforehand the words that are to be used, or may have them before our
eyes; our Soul is at perfect leisure to fuit and raise and change her
Affections, according to the importance of every Word: Whereas while the Soul
is held in suspense about the meaning of a Sentence, till such time as it be
finished (as it must necessarily happen in extemporary Prayer) she is in a
great measure deprived of this advantageous leisure; and though the Imagination
be still kept busy, yet the affections can never follow, but by starts and
with disorder. And yet more than this -- Whereas it is apparent, that Curiosity
does beget attention in Prayer, as well as Piety, and yet the latter only can
be acceptable to God; a Man cannot have the advantage, but only from a set
Form, to discern whether his attention be truly pious or no; because he can
then only judge how far Piety does move him, when it moves him alone, and
Curiosity is disengaged.

If therefore it be our Prejudice that hinders our Edification, as it certainly
appears it does in this instance of Public Prayer; which an humble preparation
of heart may make a better use of to all the ends of Piety, than it possibly
can of any extemporary Form; I hope we cannot say our Prejudice is a thing of
Christ's; and therefore it is our Own things, that in this instance likewise
occasions us to divide.

And now You our Brethren who have fallen out with us by the way, Consider (I
beseech you) how we shall answer it at our Journeys end. Our Quarrel is, that
we will not walk by the same Rule; and yet we are commanded to walk by the same
Rule. Our Defense is, that we imagine another Rule to be better; but still what
we contend for is only an Imagination, and what we contemn is a Command: Nay,
were we certain that the Rule we propose is better; yet we are as certain, that
Love is better than that. How triumphantly has it sounded of late from one side
of the Nation to the other, That God is the only Sovereign of Conscience? Alas,
that he were so! But he is not: Were God once the Sovereign of our Consciences
in Deed, as we all acknowledge he is in Right; Farewell Separation: Our Mind and
Way would then be but one; as our God is but one, and he not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace. Could we but once descend from our high pretenses of
Religion, to the Humility that only makes men Religious; Could we but once
prefer Christianity it self before the several Factions that bear its name, our
Differences would sink of themselves; and it would appear to us, that there is
more Religion in not contending, than there is in the matters we contend about.

And you our Brethren, the Pastors of those that separate, (for I am willing to
cast away a few words in the air, though there be none here concerned to regard
them.) I say you our Brethren, the Pastors of those that separate! What shall
we do to conciliate or oblige you? Would you have us come off from the
establishment to meet you? but that is not in our power: Do you think That
Establishment so extremely blameable? But why will you always be Judges where
you are Parties? we desire not to be so: Let all former Ages, and all the wise
Men of the Indifferent World at this day be Judges betwixt us: In the mean
time, why do you not youchsafe us your correspondence? Why do you not seek the
fruits of Peace in the methods of Peace? Come and see whether we are those
supercilious, those untractable, those selfish Men: See whether you should not
be welcome to our Friendships, if they were thought worthy: See whether you
should not be welcome to our Fortunes, if they were thought needful. Cannot the
Consolation of Christ, and the Comfort of Love, and the Fellowship of the
Spirit, and bowels and mercies avail any thing to cement us? Must our own
particularities continue to divide us, though the things of Christ conjure us
to unite? Will you have no regard to the Requests of our Church, though all the
Cords of Prudence, as well as Love, draw you on to her Communion? If it must be
thus; In my poor Judgment, It is a most unreasonable enmity, that the Church of
England labors under; and I pray God it may be duly repented of, before it be
brought to a severer Bar.

Finally, My Brethren, You, whom the Grace of God has settled in a just
affection to our established Church; Reverence your Church above all other
Churches; but Christ himself above every Church. Hold fast your Profession
without wavering; For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and
his Reward is with Him; Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: Let your Moderation be
known unto all men: Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. And
the God who has loved us, and given us good hopes through his Grace, comfort
your hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work. To whom be Glory,
etc.

FINIS.

