ENGLANDS SHAME: OR THE UNMASKING OF A Politic Atheist: Being a Full and
Faithful Relation of the LIFE and DEATH of the Grand Impostor HUGH PETER'S.

Wherein is set forth his whole Comportment, Policies, and Principles exercised
from the ingress, in the Progress, and to the Egress of his Unhappy Life.

By WILLIAM YOUNG, Dr. Med.

LONDON, Printed by Da. Maxwel, for Theodore Sadler, next Door to the Golden
Dolphin, over against Exeter House in the Strand, 1663.

TO Her most Excellent Majesty HENRIETTA MARIA, The Mother Queen of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland.
May it please your Majesty,
TO revive the eternized and blessed Memory of your Royal Husband andour now
glorified King, who lies embalmed with the merits and blood of his undoubted
Savior and Redeemer, by such an incompt and unworthy pen as mine is, were
cause sufficient to pull down the high displeasure of your Royal Majesty upon
my self, and such presumptuous ones: But I do with all humility, supplicate
your Majesty's goodness and virtues, graciously to pardon this sinful boldness
of him who desires only to imbellish and set forth the unspotted innocence and
admired patience of so divine a Martyr as he was; and with faithfulness and
courage (maugre all dangers) to emblazen out the shame and malice of his
undeserved Enemies: So will my continual and inexpressible sufferings for his
sake and interest be sweetened, my losses be repaired, and ny services
sufficiently rewarded: they being but so many monuments of duties performed,
and evidences of my incessant desires and studies by al^ means to explicate my
self

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant, W. Young.

To the impartial READER.
Courteous Reader,
SInce the Imprimatur to this Book and the greatest part thereof was composed
and printed, I understood of a Pamplet formerly published in commendation of
this triumphant Enemy over the Church and State, (tam moribus quam doctrina)
magnifying him for his virtues Moral and Theological. In our small
acquaintance, I did observe him so well in these and all other his actions,
that I knew him intus and in cute; therefore do attest, that I ever found him
barren therein; only a form of them he observed, and that very covertly, which
I espied thus; he could not patiently behold the faces of poor Beggars, but
would answer their piteous and piercing cries for alms or relief, with
unbeseeming threats of stocking and whipping them: O admiranda charitas! He was
invective against Drunkards and drunkenness, forgetting the old Proverb,
Loripedem rectus derideat, aethiopem albus: to pull out his own moat, before he
intermeddle with the beam of his brothers eye: for though he dissembled
temperance, he would drink plentifully of Sack or Strong beer, provided it
might be done in private and gratis; for once I found him tripping in this
virtue thus.

After he with another of his acquaintance had drank off several Tankards of
March Beer, and that at single hand in his own Chamber, a Gentleman coming in
to visit him, he fell out into an unexpected passion, and would have beaten the
Gentleman, (though a Justice of the Peace of his own stamp and coining) had not
I interposed my self, and interceded between them: Then as one Maudlindrunk
weeps, cries, and prays, then calling for the other Tankard, becomes
reconciled, (and then to bed mother) crying out the next day, that he did swim
in his Bed all that night. I have often prevailed with him to write Letters of
favor for distressed people, to his selected Friends, Sir Henry Vane, Cromwell,
Ireton, Lenthal, Salaway, Harrison, etc. but all proved ineffectual, for that
their secret Compact was only to receive Letters in a friendly manner, but not
to proceed further by them; by which subtilty they be came lodged in the
affections and expectations of most people.

For his Qualifications in other commendable parts, both Divine and Natural,
the ensuing Treatise will sufficiently inform thee; the sum of which, is only
his own Relation, and my Observation of his intricate proceedings, not easily
discernable, especially by those who depended upon his Flatteries, or such as
were transported with zeal, that might rather be accounted madness than sound
Religion.

I have herein been careful to avoid reports taken upon trust for that fama
mendax; and I had read many things of him, of which he was ignorant. I confess,
I could have furnished thee with many Comical Expressions of his, uttered in
public in the Pulpit, and privately in Civil Societies; but I was importuned
only to a sober and faithful Discourse of him, thereby as well to satisfy many
who out of ignorance and dotage on him, and his delusives, did, and still do
admire and diolize his Name and Fame; As also, to vindicate my self in
performing my duty to God, my King, Church, and Country; thereby setting forth
Gods Justice, and my own detestation of concealing so execrable a sin and
sinner. If it fail thy expectation, know that it was penned at some few spare
hours in a fortnights retirement into the Country, where I was deprived of all
Books, and other convenient Helps for a work of this Nature. Take therefore in
good part what thou likest, and leave the imperfections to me, for they are
mine, and I am thine,

In all Friendly Offices, WILLIAM YOUNG.
Wit was his life, then it was fit,
Death should succeed th'ending of's Wit.


THE AUTHORS APOLOGY.
I Have in this Task undertaken one that has overtaken many; Vas ignominiae, a
contemptible fellow, a Matchivilian, one that would pretend love, but intend
mischief; his chiefest amity, was but dissembled enmity, having words as soft
as butter, or oil, yet the poison of Asps was under his Tongue; For his Ave did
threaten a vae, which I ever warded off by minding Solomon's Cave, Though he
speak favorably, believe him not, Prove. 26.25. in seeking to find him out, I
had almost lost my self; as I have lost my means thereby some years since; and
though no man remembers the afflictions of Joseph, A^o^ 6 6.
or the burden of Ephraim, yet in the midst of my unhappy Solitudes, I mind
that Divine Cordial;

Men's mea ne tristes Christus tibi cuncta ministrat.

Munera quae vitae funera quaequae levant.

To be left remediless, and assigned over as a Spectacle for Derision, or a
Byword to all Regicides, would set a stop to true Loyalty, and urge a true
Subject rather with Stilpo to set his finger on his lips, and seal them up to
silence, than like Atlas to bring the World about his ears; a Reprobate to true
Allegiance might soon yield to Temptations, to cover the most horrid of
Treasons; but the Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. and those heavenly Appeals from the
innocent blood of my Martyred King sounding in my ears, 1 Pet. 2.13.
and commanding me instrumentally to set sorth his unspotted innocence by
bringing this his most pernicious Le^ch to a condign punishment, extirpate an
Incendiary, that thirsted for the destruction of the King, Country, Church, and
People, and satiate himself with innocent blood, masking all with the Vizard of
Religion.

I have often seen those sad Ecstasies, and heard those direful expressions
uttered by this Regicide, and that frequently upon the apprehensions of wrath
and shame due for that infernal Conspiracy of his, crying out, That he was
innocent of spilling the Kings blood, when there were no discourses which could
mind him of his Murder used by me or any present; but forced thereto by the
dreadful dictates of an accusing conscience, he would thus trumpet out his own
shame and ruin. S. Bernard says, Tuta conscientia praestari possunt, quae
propter conscientiam praestanda sunt, That may be done with a safe conscience,
that is to be done for conscience sake.

Then when the Word of God, the cries of innocent blood, Loyalty, his Countries
ruin, the tears of his Mother then Church, and a man's own conscience do all
unanimously awaken him to a necessitated duty that lies incumbent upon him, nay
him alone and none other but he, and to falter in the performance of it, were
to season the peace of his conscience with such corrosives as this Impostor
had; nay to be his coheir of hell and hellish fears: Who but a damned
Reprobate could resist, or sit down in silence?

These impulsive causes gave me encouragement to act what I have acted, and do
rest so well sati^fied in what is done, that instead of growing reluctant, I do
cordially joy in this, that providence should select me to be the Agitator:
neither shall it repent me, that I was the first that objected this Treason to
his charge in the Parliament, as Judge Terril can testify.

Many hard sentences have passed on me, and I am daily reproached for it, and
branded with names of ignominy.

To reward good with evil is divellish, the Prophets were so, the Apostles so,
nay, our Savior was so rewarded: Why then shall I grudge to drink of that cup
of which the Son of God, and the sons of God have plentifully drank: It is an
honor to me, that I am clothed with dishonor, for honoring the memory of my
unparalleled Prince; quitting my Country of such a fi^ebrand, and setting an
end to the Churches sorrows, who labored to be delivered of such a false
Conception and horrid Viper, quasi vi parens, that did eat out her bowels:
Neither Ishmaels tongue, Achans Wedge, nor Nebuchadnezzars menaces, should sow
up my mouth, fright^n my spirit, or restrain my conscience from giving Traitors
their due benevolence, and to stigmatize them as I have done this false
Prophet; nay, you shall as soon persuade old Eleazer to eat swines flesh, limn
the water, write on dust, and my five fingers to grow of one length as to make
me guilty of concealing Treason against the person, parts or power of that Holy
and Anointed of the Lord, my dread Sovereign.

Let Satan cry, I will deter thee, the world cry, I will forsake thee, and the
wicked cry, we will allure thee; I will rest upon this, Hominis invidia, non
nocet ubi Deus amat, Envy cannot injure him that God loves: My Loyalty will
crown me, my Magnanimity will support me, and my conscience, which is mill
testes, a thousand witnesses, will satisfy me of well-doing. Sola sufficit
pietas Religion is my portion, and I am thereby invited, encouraged and
supported in yielding both active and passive obedience to that potestas
supereminens a Deo ordinata, that supreme power, established or decreed by God
alone; My King, my Country, the Church, and my own conscience, et absque, hac
neque men's, neque vires, neque eventus, Neither knowledge will, nor good
success.

What honor is it for a man to be a tamous Rebel, a learned Heretic, or an
uncharitable Christian? as much as to have the species of a man, without the
similitude of God; to be a painted Sepulcher, or Gods fool, Luke 21. Virtus in
se lucida, sed inter malos lucidior, Virtue of it self is amiable, but more
splendent amongst vicious persons; like a Diamond set injet. As Noah's
perfection was more and more amiable, by how much more vile the world was: He
that will preserve a good Memorial to posterity, must live well: Diu vivere,
est been vivere; To live long, is to live well; that his name and fame may
smell like sweet Spices in the braying. For it is commonly true, Qualis vita,
finis ita; as a man's life is, such is his end, as in this, diliro seen, mopish
old man, who had spent his Sixty three years of living so slavishly, as if he
delighted as well in his life time, as he did at his death ululare inter Lupos,
to howl amongst Wolves.

But why do I stir up his ashes? Molliter ossa cubent, Let his bones rest in
peace, says the heathen; yet in that heaven has not thought him worthy of a
Funeral, in memory of our small acquamtance, I shall set forth his Life, as a
pattern of, but not for Rebellion; for that needs none in this our Island; Proh
hominum fidem! O the fidelity of men!

Englands Shame: OR THE UNMASKING OF A Politic ATHEIST IN THE LIFE and DEATH
OF HVGH PETER'S
BE it that it is an Aphorism upon Divine Record, Isai. 59.2.
The name of the wicked shall rot. Quia indignus est amore and favore Dei,
being unworthy of the love or account of God, yet succeeding Ages have
continued a Registry of the actions of Julian the Apostate, Judas the Traitor,
and Novatus the Heretic; all which if lost, they might again be revived in the
story of this Levite, the son of a Levite, who being but an Ignis fatuus, a
vapor, was carried through our Horizon like a moveable Star, either Jupiter or
Mars superintendent Orbs; rather Saturn or Mercury, as the sequel proves, but
at the best but a blazing Comet which was soon shot, and his light went out
like a snuff; Sic redit in nihilum, quod fuit ante nihil; Thus he that was
nothing, became worse then nothing; for in Apostasy and wicked policies, he did
equalize and imitate Julian, his treason was not unlike that of Judas, and for
his Heresies he far exceeded Novatus; the one being execrable, the other
unparalleled, and the last damnable.

In his infancy he was by his Father brought up near Foy, the place of his
Birth, in Cornwall; his indulgent Parents had him frequently Catechized in the
Fundamentals of the Protestant Religion, or Church of England, kept him strict
to the hearing of Common Prayers by our Liturgy commanded, both for public
and private duties, and had him bred up in a School of good Narture, where he
profited much in Moral Precepts and Learning, until he was sent from thence to
the University of Cambridge, and there was admitted into Jesus College.

But his former Education not being sanctified, nor the name of Jesus setting a
limit to his boundless liberty, to which he was remarkably inclined from his
Cradle, and was so overswaied by that vitiositas haereditaria quae neutraliter
aversi sumus omni bono, and ad omne malum propensi, that hereditary evil
whereby we are averse to that which is good, and prone to sin, that neither the
Word of God, nor the Works of God could deterr him from impiety, till he became
altogether independent to the will of God, quasi privatus gratia Dei, as having
lost the favor of God, through affective ignorance, he precipitates himself to
evil practices, making good what had been spoken of him in former Ages by the
Devil and his Confederates, That a Chicken should arise out of the West; which
should fly over all England, and do much harm to most men.

A Chicken! He was a Cockatrice or Basilisk, whose eyes were pestiferous to all
men; nay, to himself at the last. There the torrent of an over-weaning conceit
of his own Genius, made him addicted to, and guilty of libelling, until he
smarted for it, for his lashes were repaid with lashes; durus sermo, an hard
saying, to physic the tail to cure the tongue; that virgula divina, divine
rod, could not reduce him;

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit edorem,
Testa diu, -- -
This Casket of counterfeits, retains the sent of his first seasoning, till at
the last his irreluctancy made him more obdurate and irrefragable to the Civil
Government of that Collegiate Society; Consuetudo poccandi tollit sensum
peccati: custom of sinning takes off the sense of sin; and least he should
become exemplary to tender judgments, was expulsed the University.

Now he being delivered over to a careful life, least his bread be that of
sorrow, and his clothing dishonor and poverty, he having no way left him to
subsist by, like an English Gusman, resolves upon ingenious shifts, for that he
ever delighted more in wit than grace, till at last, forgetting his abstraction
from an Orthodox Minister (his Father) and the place of his late matriculation,
the said Universitie, after his two years residence were thus nigh finished, he
as an Exile hastens to London, in assurance to find therein men of his temper,
with whom he might associate and solace himself, and in a short time fitted him
for the life of a Stage Player in a common society, from whence after venting
his frothy inventions, he had a greater call to a higher promotion; namely, to
be the Jester (or rather a Fool) in Shakespears Company of Players: Omne simile
est appetibile sui similis, every like desires his like: There he so long
sported himself with his own deceivings, till at last like an Infidel Jew, he
conceived preaching to be but foolishness, and time spent in Gods House to hear
his O^acles, was a means to destroy his, and his accomplices vain recreations.

And so it proved with him; for in a short time after going on the Lords Day to
hear one Doctor Dee preach at S. Faiths Church, that he might have a Subject to
sport himself with, instead of finding occasions to deride learning, that
learned Nuntio powerfully pressing to the Conscience the burden of the Law, and
hainousness of sin, like another Felix he was smitten with a horror of
Conscience for his gilded sins, which he had so seemingly extenuated, and
thereby he became almost a Convert; Oh then quam foelix Evangelizare, How
welcome are the glad tidings of the Gospel? He thus well nigh engulfed in
despair, Lex lumen and dictamen est rectae rationis in intellectu, the Law is a
light and dictator of right apprehensions in the understanding: He deserts his
companions and employments, and retiring to his Chamber near Fleet Conduit in
London, continues there between hope and despair for one whole year and more:
But that he and others of his conviction might experimentally find quod Deus
est pater and fons misericordiarum, God is the father and fountain of mercies;
nay, God is an inexhaustible treasury of mercies, though Christ be his Cabinet
wherein he has shut up all his Jewels, that there is no sin so foul that mercy
cannot hide, nor any degree so desperate, as that God cannot redeem from it, he
gives him a further taste of his goodness, and earnest penny of mercy, so that
I may say, O admiranda charitas, and chara tranquillitas, quaminvestigamus ex
gratuita Dei misericordia; wonderful love and much desired peace, wherewith we
are invested out of the free mercy of God; his mercy rejoices more in our
Salvation than his Justice does triumph in our confusion, it being his
inseparable property to be found ever giving, forgiving and forgetting;
forgetting injuries offered to the sacred eyes of his glory, forgiving sins,
and giving gifts and graces to fit men for the life of grace, and interest them
in the life of glory; his suffering growing occidental, the night of his
heaviness thus drawing to an end, the day of his rejoicing began to dawn.

A Gentleman living near Malden in Essex, then a Lodger in the same house,
hearing of his distemper, as it well became a Gentleman to foster Learning, and
show remorse, enquires of his parts and education, and thereby concludes him a
fit person to be settled in a Free School of 24 l. per annum, then void in that
County, and at his disposal.

The proffer thereof was no sooner made unto Peter's, but he presently and
thankfully accepts of it, concluding it a testimony of Gods mercies yet
reserved for him; But these proved to be but hypocritical expressions, as most
of his actions were; Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas, a counterfeit
holiness is a double impiety: For after some applause amongst the Vulgar, and
Peter's pence were hoarded up, he falls into a Tympanie of pride, and then
Ephesian-like, the vainglory of the one made him forget his God, and the value
of the other to muzzle himself in a heedless neglect of that love he found in
his late recovery; so that his lusts over-poising him, and his lucre raising
him to a high esteem of his worthless worth, he feigns himself a Suitor, or
rather a politic Servant to one Mistress Read a Widow woman dwelling near unto
him, (though she was famous for her excellent endowments, and had made liberal
contributions to cherish him in the ebb of his fortune, had children, and an
estate of two or three hundred pounds yearly) he neglects no opportunities to
ensnare her by captivating of her to satisfy his burning desires, and
insatiable thirstings after her person and estate.

Many Comical expressions (in which he was well versed by his former employment
in the Playhouse) and enticing glances passing from him at several times,
thereby to hint to her his Design, they were received to be but as jocular
Discourses, concluding with her self that such a Pedantick Peasant durst not
clothe him with so much Impudency as to esteem himself worthy of her Virtues,
or prove so bestially ungrateful, as to requite her former charities with an
attempt of her dishonor and ruin; thus would she always bury them in a
scornful silence, and heedlesly neglect them; until at the last he one morning
finding her Chamber door open, and she sickly in her bed, he with confidence
(or rather impudence) entered the Door, and pretended a friendly visit; but
sitting on the Bedside, did at last cast himself upon it and clasped her in his
arms; at which a Confederate of his, formerly fitted for the design, was by a
private sign summoned into the Chamber, where finding them thus contesting, he
saluted them with a God give you joy: Then presently both he and Peter's publish
it that they were both bedded together: Her modesty was such, and her
reputation like to be traduced in public; to salve all, she citra voluntatem,
against her will, unwittingly condescenced to a clandestine Marriage, though it
was far above his merits, and much beneath her virtues: but this forced love
not being real, or sincere on either part, it brought upon them both that
plague of contention which is usually the Harvest of such Marriages: Both being
by the clamours of the Country forced to live in London, their estate is
thereby much impoverished, and they inclining to necessity: he having within
himself some gleanings or relishes of a Church Economy, after some overtures
of preferment were made unto him, should he take holy Ordes on him? He resolved
to dissemble what he ever loved, and lived by, even Schism and Sedition;
Schismaticus communionem Christianum abrumpit, a Schismatic is he that breaks
off all Christian community; a conviction and conversion being pretended, and
authentic Certificates framed on his behalf, he had (by the Intercession of
foam Friends) an access to Doctor Mountain then Lord Bishop of London, and was
by him amongst others ordained Priest and Deacon, he taking the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and vowing that votum morale, and religiosa
pollicitatio eternal Vow, and religious Engagement (in the presence of God and
the great Congregation) viz. Canonical obedience, in rebus licitis and honestis
in things lawful and honest, sealing the sincerity of his heart herein by
receiving the Sacrament, and thus becomes an Hypocrite upon record, and in man's
account; when as all oaths and vows should be taken sano judicio, with a
right understanding, as well as libera voluntate, a freedom of the will, that
they prove not to be arbitrary, as it is frequently urged by the Schismatics
of these times.

He having thus, like an old dog Fox, gotten into the Vineyard to destroy the
tender grapes, he bends his studies to become popular, and finds it both
pleasing and profitable to be applauded amongst the female sex, not forgetting
that the weakest judgments were soonest corrupted, and the women's hearts once
dissolved, would soon be cast into his mould: They cry him up so loud, that his
name does echo over all the City, and his friends grew numerous, insomuch that
one of the greatest Parishes, St. Sepulchers, must be assigned for his Sea, to
inveigh and act against that Perpetua Ecclesiae Novi Testamenti Gubernatio and
inspectio, That perpetual Government, and overseeing of the Church of the New
Testament, Episcopal Government: for there he continued a Lecturer near twenty
years; and here of a Protestant turns Independent dependant, persisting in his
Apostasy to his former vow, still adhering to his effeminate Flock, and
pleasing the women especially of that Parish, more especially the Butchers
wife, but most especially the Vinteners wife at the sign of the Goat; so that
he could at pleasure command ordinary flesh for his paunch, the Goats flesh for
his cat, with the best wine into the bargain.

But he being detected, was prosecuted by the one at the Law, and by the other
at club Law, till he found it fatally true, That he must needs go whom God
leaves, and the devil drives; and so he provides and ships himself for
Roterdam: Sic transit Hugo, thus vanishes Hugh.

But this Gadarene having thus brought his hogs to a fair market, and rendered
himself scurrilous upon record, as appears by the Regstry of Londons Diocese,
will not part with his Dalilahs at so cheap a rate; nay, his Hugonots of
England were so bewitched with his confident assertions, That he was enforced
only to escape the tyranny of Episcopal Government, that they sighed at the
loss of such a precious villain (a precious one indeed, that made no conscience
of breaking his oaths, performing his vows, nor supporting the dignity of his
function, but makes a shipwreck of all these) though their wives had greater
cause to lament their loss of him then their husbands had.

So that as he had them at his beek, he must receive from them some tokens of
love, which was seen in their liberal contributions gathered for his voyage;
then many prayers must be set up for this Jebusite.

But observe the issue. Peter's now arriving at his wished Canaan, the Land of
Promises, is triumphantly received into the sanctified parlour of Roterdam, and
there welcomed with kisses of the holy. O quam jucunde and honefle! O how
sincerely and honestly! But nature having the predominance in him, far exceeding
grace, he not able to wash himself of his black spots of lying and whoring,
falls to his wonted practices; that as he had obtained his Ordination by lying,
and belying the holy Ghost, avowing his c^ll to that function to be from
heaven, he follows his old Trade of lying, for that that trick never failed
him, but once at the Old Baily in London, being the day of his Trial and
sentencing to death.

The Pastor of that Congregation was at that time one Thomas Bartlet, a Doctor
of Physic, and an English man, who lived plentifully by their voluntary
contributions, and maintained his wife and diverse children in an handsome
equipage.

This morsel made Peter's his teeth water, and having according to his old wont,
an evil eye upon other men's welfare; to wreath himself into comes acquainted
with this Doctor,

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen,

Tuta frequensque licet, sit via crimen habet.

A safe and easy way it is by friendship to deceive.

As safe and easy as it is, it is knavery by your leave.

Thus like a second Janus, having two faces under one hood, a Magus with two
tongues in one head, or a Judas, bearing two hearts in one breast: to squeeze
Bartlet out, and wind himself in, a scandal must be forged against Bartlet,
then will his familiarity prove Bartlets ruin, for these aerie Spirits are so
volitile in their good estimation of all men, that they are as changeable in
this, as in maintaining their Moonshine Doctrine; and are as easily induced to
believe a lie, as they are seduced to lying opinions.

This Conventicle concludes both these collapsed brethren to have been of
pristine acquaintance, and therefore do easily lend an eareto their reports,
especially that of him, who could best glaze it over with religious phrases,
and present it in that shell of a desire of Godnesse and Holiness.

Thus these Brethren began to grow into competition; then Hugo a Master of Art
in that of lying, impeaches Bartlet of Bigamy, and impudently affirms, That he
had a wife in England, as well as that with him. Nay, Hugo, forgetting his own
shame and adulteries, to prevent any obstructions, whispers it abroad amongst
his Gossiping crew, who takes it for an Oracle, as coming from the mouth of a
godly, zealous and honest Divine, viz. Religious Mr. Peter's. God have mercy
Parson, of all knaves, none like a Priest knave.

This Physic wrought so pathetically with these squeezy stomacked Christians,
who are apt to surfeit at any other man's failings, that it made them spew out
Bartlet, and Peter's as an immaculate man, must be settled in his stead. A
blessed Reformation, and no doubt, but many of that Gang might find good
content thereby, as the wise of one Franklin, an English man, keeping a
Victualling house in that City did commonly find; for Hugo found no life like
to Lechery, being it produced him there also, as well as in Smithfield in
London, both meat and money; and in that Lying and Whoredom proved so
profitable and pleasing to him, he becomes as devoted to it, as the Heart to the
Tamarisk, who will not be beaten from it: nay, the Butcher, the Vintner, nor
the Victualler shall beat him into better manners, for that he was as
senceless, as sensual; though Mr. Franklin might have spared some stripes for
Country sake, and some for Religion sake) but it seems in that company like
Priest like people, pares cum paribus facillime congregantur, equals do easily
agree with their equals, they are liable to correction, and I wish that those
houses were well furnished with such Arras.

Thus his Minion after a furfeit of his being too chargeable to her box, to
preserve the good esteem her Husband had of her, (for Cuckolds are soonest
deluded, and most contented) as also to have some other sport for her money,
she acquaints her Husband of Peter's his frequent attempts made to to beat up
her quarters; an which Franklin grew zealous for a Conference with this Pastor,
and observing at his next coming that he had his former appetite, entertained
him only with Crabtree sauce, and of that gave him his belly full.

But in fear of worse punishments he falls distracted, and so continued for
near three years; after his recovery he had a Miscellany of judgments following
him; for he had the head of a Fox, the heart of a Crocodile, the back of an
Ass, the reins of a Goat, and the claws of a Vulture: Of a Fox, subtly
contriving mischief undiscernable. Of a Crocodile, destroying whole Families,
and then dissembling sorrow for their ruins. Of an Ass, infatigable in bearing
reproaches. Of a Goat, sparing no woman in his lust. Of a Vulture, few men
escaping his claws. Nay, an Anthropophagos, devouring, shall I say, whole
houses, nay Parishes, yea Counties at once: Witness his Monuments in Wales,
which shall be spoken of hereafter.

This subtle sheep having again appeared amongst his little ones, is reputed to
be a scandal or offense to the Lambs, in regard of his backsliding at
Franklins: But least the wicked ones should make them also a word of reproach,
they will clap their ears to their heads, (I had almost said horns) and to set an
end to all controversies about him, they raise a stock of 500 l. and Hugo must
be entrusted therewith as their Factor for New England, from whence they
longingly expected the product for many years, but it lay in Hucksters hands,
and was never accounted for, until the happy farewell, or direful Catastrophe at
Charing Cross: who can without amazement consider the presumption of this
Miscreant, in committing himself to the mercy of the merciless seas, when after
a shipwreck of his conscience, elata manu; with an high hand, neither the
terrors of death, which might suddenly surprise him in his sinful resolutions,
acted destinato concilio, with an undaunted resolution, nor the judgments of
God to which he was liable, could civilize this Propagator, but as an
Instrument preserved to ripen his sin, Peccatum perpetrans scienter and
volenter, wittingly and willingly filling up the number of his sins; or for a
more shameful end, he refolves a further Precipice himself into uncleanness,
earnestly doing and allowing of the erroneous courses of man, though they tend
to death, till he becomes anathema maranatha, accursed: After his arrival into
New England, he like a Dog falls to his old vomit, for having buried his first
Wife, marries another, who by his ill usage proved as mad as himself, and had
issue which does patrisare and matrisare, the reason in nature is, partus
sequitur ventrem, then as he grew popular, so he grows rampant, until several
Excommunications were issued out against him for you know what, that had he not
been protected by the Presbytery of that Country, he had received his desert
there, and prevented Dun in England, and saved his Daughter the charges of so
many crammed Capons, and bottles of Sack wherewith she bottles of Sack
wherewith she cherished him in Newgate, after his trial and condemnation: Now
of an Independent he becomes a Presbyterian, an aliquid nihil, or a quid non, a
something, a nothing, and what not? or he would not lose a hair for Religion
nor any wise man give him one for his honesty.

The Classical Clergy there finding him fittest for their design, to sti up a
Commotion in England they ever delighting to fish in troubled waters, do give
him his Mission, with their benediction; where finding a Parliament according
to their desires, like another Masianello, he ansewers their Chorus, and cries
also King and Parliament.

Thus taking his part from that ill-runed Quire, he roars it up and down the
City and Country, yet driving at the destruction of King, Parliament, and
People: That as he was the Patron of Blasphemies, the Patriot of Rebellions,
and Mirror of all Apostates and Impostors, so was he the quintessence of
cheating; nay, all the wit in London could not epsy him until he had jugled
their Plate with the Bodkins and Thimbles into Guild Hall, and that he might be
more capable of employment, and seem less criminal, he utterly disavows his
Ordination or Consecration by Bishops, qui jus vocationis habent: who have the
right of ordination. Thus hardening his heart, and left to that privatio gratiae
assistentes, loss of prevent ing Grace, he was hoodwinked and subjected to that
ipsissima excoecatio and induration, that superlative blinenes and hardness of
heart, which rendered him incapable of timely repentance; sera poenitentia raro
vera, late repentance is seldom sound.

That he might not become vagrant from his first undertakings, he composes
Canons to walk by:

The first is, To admire and flatter the Gentry:

The second is, To delude and blind the Commonaltie:

The third is, To excite and cherish the Soldiery.

This is done, by applauding the one, Lying to the other, and Preaching to the
rest, telling them, That they gained Martyrdom, and carried Jesus Christ in
their Knapsacks; as if knavery rather then conscience, Prattling rather then
Preaching, and Rebellion rather then Religion, were most fitting for Gods
Oracles.

Thus after sometime, England whose hills were like Sion, valleys like Eden,
was become a Golgotha, a place of skulls, a grave, O quam dira cano. Oh what
sad things do I relate.

The Sophistry he used to understand his company, and that none might escape
him, was first to endeavor to find their conscience in point of Allegiance and
Church Discipline, not valuing their tenants in point of Doctrine; for he hovered
several heretics of all sorts, t^ough blasphemous or damnable; nay, his
religion consisted only of blood and benefit. He would defend opinions contrary
to his own fained heresies, till he found them zealous in their assertions; if
disliked he would by threats, persuasions, large profers of pre^e^ments,
ende^vor to alienate their affections, and become his proselytes; nothing
therein to be done, more than to confound them in their judgments, and that
either speaking in the general ( Schismatici versantur in universalibus,
Sc^smaticks speak always in general terms) or new coined phrases, or
proposing Gods glory to the end of his design.

Were he detected, he would destroy all by railings, denying his words,
frien^ly professings, mixed with jeer^ngs and appealing to God to witness the
contrary.

Were you once his captive, he spares no m^nner of insolency to sub^ue you,
ride you as an ass to your final ru^ne: He minded neither good nor evil as he
ought; for all the wiles of men could not engage him to promise any thing,
neither would he in familiar conference or serious discourse, speak really as
he thoug^t with himself; for that he had studied to delude, and would almost
confound an Oed^pus to unfold the riddle of his heart, being matchless and
boundless herein, until our meeting at the Old Baily.

He thus armed Cap-a-pe with mischievous resolutions, and horrid principles,
resolving to join himself unto Baal peor, and eat the sacrifices of the dead,
sets himself to war; against whom? his God, his King, his Country, his Kindred
and his Conscience, where Jehu-like, he satiates himself with blood.

But to regain the character of a well-affected and zealous Christi^n, he
joines himself unto the Scottish interest, marches into Ireland with the Lord
Forbish, where he leaves him engaged, and then for England with a packet of
lies of his great s^fferings for Gods Cause and theirs, which in few years
proved an old cause, yet died in its infancy, or swathing clothes.

A Comical, scurrilous, malicious, oftentimes blasphemous manner of Preaching
and Praying was frequently and publicly used, thereby to set out his name and
zeal, that herds of ignorant people might crowd to observe his insolences,
though few can repeat one sound orthodox Sermon of his, save that of his death,
which preached good tidings to many people. As some for such actions had no
ears, so this Pharisee had many ears: He had one for the Independent, another
for the Presbyterian; one for the the Anabaptist, another for the Atheist, but
none for the Protestant, were the Image of God never so well stamped in him;
forsooth he was Kingly affected, and I am sure the other was knavishly.

Could you but sympathize with him in d sloyalty, you might easily espy him;
for he and his accomplices tended all to one center, To dest oy the King, the
Go^ernment, and Laws, and set a Castle in the air of their own bui^ding,
under another John of Leyden, or Knipperdolling.

To insinuate himself into the favor of this Convention he would (after he had
^isce^ned the temper of some selected ones) sympathize with them in their
dispositions, languages and designs, until by his fawnings and religious
phrases, with remorseful exp^essions he could deceive them, so as to r^ck^n him
amongst ^he ^eli^iou^, and be a Licent at^ to ride them like Asses.

For which cause h b^comes their Post-p^iest, as w^ll as their Di^in^ty Jeste
at Whitehall, and the Comm^^tee bords: only Mr. Peter's ^is News were recked for
authentic, and registered as Oracles, witness the many Fifty p^unds given him
for this posta^e, which made him often aver, That he had rather be supplan^^ng
in ^ld England, then planting in New England.

The sword brandishing abroad, and the n^tion beginning to smoke, its time for
Hugo to blow the fire, that he might warm himself with the spoils of the Land;
none so persuasive to engage in wars and blood as he; yet he was always sick at
the time of fighting, for that cowardice is the fruit of a sad Conscience and a
bad cause. Nay, he valiantly deserted Essex, at his being impaled in Cornwall,
and told his Masters at Westminster a ramping lie, and that gratis, That the
Kings Forces were a terror to themselves.

Two Obstacles were grievous unto him, The Book of Common Prayer, and Bishops;
for he would often quarrel at these without a cause, unless for that one
maintained Order, and the other had questioned him for disorder; Divide and
impera. Divide and rule, was his Gospel Rule until he had brought all into
confusion; he could not set up his Babel, having sowed the Darnel of liberty,
by himself, and other his penny Gospellers, that his tongue might go throughout
the earth, Psalm. 73 9 He moves it to the Parliament, that he might be their
Mercury into Holland, for assistance and counsel to underprop their grand
Design; their President was his precept, mala locutio inficit animas, evil
words corrupt good manners: Now of their merry Knave, he is their private
Councellor, and to this end is dispatched away with much privacy; he desiring
the contentment of men, rather then God, of nature, rather then grace; having
cloathe^ himself with cruelty as with a ga^ment, like another Mephistophilus
returns with this Ma^umetan reply; That it would be good for them to seize the
King, bring him to Justi^e, set him to death, and settle a Commonwealth
amongst them here in England, expecting to run through many difficulties as
they had done.

This spark of Fire kindled pr^s ntly amongst the lig ter T^nder, and a
consideration must be voted to ^e^ay the change of this Hobson, who cherishe^
their ^earts ^y his message, for it proved we come tidings to many people,
especially the 14 Tanners in Olivers ^ittle sucking Parliament that dyed in the
birth: For that purpose 300 l. per annum out of the Lord of Worcesters Lands,
in the Woulds of Worcestershire, is appointed to be the lot of his
inheritance; Mala parta male dilabuntur bona, ill gotten goods are ill spent;
discounting the 8000 pair of Holland sheets which he zealously preac^ed for in
Holland, to make shuts for their Army of precious ones, and Saints in England,
with the Butter, Shirts, Shoes, and Bacon, which he had cheated about Bristol,
to a considerable value: dulcis odor lucri, O how acceptab^e is gai^! He love
Diana as well as a fair Nym^h, and to show he is aliquis in omnibus, something
in all, he is incomparatively a Sycophant to the prevailing part of the Army,
of which Sect soever, though firm to none, nothing coming amiss save only his
wives Nurse for aliment Moneys to support her in the Bedlam he built for her
near Marrow-bone Park. Should any shadow of peace appear, he had his inferior
order of Angels, Love, Dell, Marshal, Marketman, who by prating, preaching and
railing should obstruct it, and that shall be backed by him with false
scandals, treasonable surmises against King, Queen, and Princes; Religion must
be made a Nose of Wax, sound Doctrine held for Popery, and all Order termed as
Antichristian; when we know that Order is the good of every creature; nay,
there is an Order in Hell, for Beelzebub is called the Prince of Devils; so
that they are worse then Devils that will have no Prince; Such was this
Traitor, who gloried in the Pallace-Yard, during the Usurpation of the
Committee of Safety; saying, Can we but keep up our Army, the line of the
Stuarts shall never rule here more, neither shall we need to fear young C. S. or
any King to rule over us. Nay, to extenuate his guilt in the judgment of the
sordid Vulgar, he asperses the King and Royal Progeny, and bedirt their
transcendent honor, by raising such rumors of them as no modest tongue dares
utter, nor loyal heart believe. Parentum mores non sunt arguendi, we are not to
dispute the conditions of our parents.

The Princely Issue must be designed for Apprentiships, and to be fed like
children.

Nay, his advice to his Confederates was to work their imprisonment, and then
he conceits that he by his preaching could animate the Army to prepare
slaughter for the Kings children; witness his Invective at S. Margarets in
Westminster.

But Essex his Honor being laid in the dust, and Fairfax (as he conceits)
remaining the next man to the Crown, though God had preserved the Royal seed
for his own garden, he becomes his Achitophel, then lists himself Chaplain in
pay to six Regiments, which he continued for several years: Harrison and the
rest of the Colonels being his Surrogates or Officials, whilst he officiated
as their Vicar General.

This Scene drawing toward an end, the Trumpets sound in Oliver the Actor,
Ireton the Scribe, Harrison the Prolecutor, Cradock the Fool, Vavasor Powel the
Post-priest, Desborow the Clown, Jones the Sycophant, Pride the Devil, Whaley
the Turkey Merchant, and Peter's the Pander.

When after some pause in the government, Oliver like cauda Draconis, the
Dragons tail, arising in our Horizon with stinking vapors which did corrupt
the spirits of many; for qualis aer, talis spiritus, as is the air, such is the
temper of the spirit; looks smiling on this pimp Peter's, who had pimped for him
many years, avowing him to be asecond Moses, and one walking as close to God as
ever Joshua did: Nay, Oliver observing his temper to be unchangeable, and that
he continued religiously villainous, popular, active, impudent, and an abyss of
Treasons, does sympathize with him, till at last they become to be both of one
heart, one soul, one mind, and one voice; only whilst Moneys are to be
disbursed for Medalls for the Officers of the Army (as Prognostics, or
Favorers of Fairfax his dying power) he sollicites to be principal in the
disbursment, and thereby gains opinion of the Officers, and near 1500 l. for
himself: For as he spared no Woman in his lust, (witness the Bastard he had by
his Niece at Master Bakers House in the Strand) so he being as mercenary, as
mischievous, served no man without a considerable gain, though he was real to
none but himself, yet failed in that at last.

Fairfax now becoming a dry Nurse, Peter's is adopted a Foster child to Oliver,
whose soul thirsted for the same blood ever since his eldest Son was hanged at
Tyborn for murder.

The King discomfited and his Host all dispersed, and he taking the Scottish
Army for an Asylum; this High Priest endoctrinates that Samaritan Fairfax, to
buy the King at a price from that Judas, Lesley; which sounded well in the
Commons House, and then the bargain was stricken, and the purchasers engaging
to make him a glorious King. And so they did, for he died a Martyr, signing the
truth of his Declaration for the Protestant Religion with a full effusion of is
Royal blood, purchasing his Subjects liberty by his often imprisonments; and
vindicating the rites and privileges of his free Parliaments according to the
fundamental Laws of this Nation; he patiently and piously undergoing the stroke
of death: thereby attesting in facie coeli, before the eye of Heave, to the
glory of God, his Subjects honor, and his enemies terror, that as he loved
his Subjects, so he died for their sakes.

But though the Parliament pay the moneys, the Soldiers keep possession, and
conduct him to Merods-Hall, Holmby-House where Peter's like a High Priest of
these Jews must confer with him to find what evil he had in him; and though he
found him fraught with honor and conscience, yet his Ismaelitish tongue must
bedirt him; for that he had not the art of speaking truth, being so long
conversant in that of lying and traducing, and therefore reports the King to be
neither for worth or education worthy the office of a Justice of peace; though
Heaven and earth could give him the lie for his pains: Nay his fellow traitor
Marshall did so admire his wisdom at the conference in Caresbrook Castle, that
he did openly declare, he spoke beyond all men that ever he heard speak, both
for learning politic, divine, and moral.

See the dangers and consequences of Rebellion: when the Subject shall insult
over Gods anointed, then ribaldry shall be accounted government: and God must
with long suffering bear their insolence, which has neither bound for time,
person, nor rule, nor religion, wisdom, or justice in it. However maugre all
former Oaths, Protestations, Declarations and Covenants set up in Churches, to
witness their intentions of Kingly government, and yielding obedience to the
laws of the land, as if they were intended to outface God, or make a mock of
him; the Jewish part of the Army are prompted by Oliver and Peter's to steal
away the King from those that were but initiating Pharisees, and tottering in
judgment and Loyalty, though some were instigated to destroy him privately.
Ponit home, disponit Deus; Though Haman man insult over Mordecai, that
intercedes for his people, yet may he be hanged for his labo^: Caveto. Though
rebellion make a man happy for a season, it ends in infamy. Oliver, Ireton,
Peter's, etc. were famous rogues; yet lie and die disgracefully: Sic pereat
Barrabas, so let thine enemies perish O God.

The riot committed against the Kings person, andhe privately hurried away by
this giddy-headed multitude of rebellious Saints; the Parliament claims an
interest in him, being theirs by a right of purchase: and finding Oliver and
Peter's the grand and prime ^uggestors of this unparalled conspiracy intended
to arrest and attaint them; but the knavish part of the House giving notice
thereof, like a Gemini of Traitors, they prepare themselves for an escape to
Cambridg, but the weather proving hot, after hard riding, they halted about
Ware in Middlesex, and entered into Counsel how to settle the Nation in peace;
and in fine concluded that there was no way left for this, but to take the King
and bring him to Justice, try him for his life, and cut off his head. Hinc
illae lachrymae!

To this the whineing Saint Harrison, and the rest of the quodled or perboyled
Christians the Anabaptists say, Amen.

Then must his sacred person be transplanted from place to place, from Holmby
to Sion-house, where Peter's and Dell conspire to pistol the King privately, but
were detected; and by their impudent denying it, were enlarged thence to
Windsor Castle; where he by his piety and patience, did so aggrevate the malice
of his enemies, Oliver, Ireton and Peter's; that they held several private
consultations at Mr. Starkyes house in Windsor, and Colmanstreet in London at a
private house; there to contrive an^ act their treasonable murder; the resolve
past he must be conveyed from thence to Hampton Court, Harrison riding with him
and upbraiding him to his face; but Peter's riding before him out of the Castle,
cried, Weell whisk him, weel whisk him, now we have him: A pattern of loyalty,
one formerly a Captain for the Kings interest seizing Peter's his bridle, said,
Good Mr. Peter's, what will you do with the King? I hope you will do his person
no harm; that Peter's might be Peter's, he replied, He shall die the death of a
Traitor, were there never a man in England but he. But if the innocent must
suffer, I pray you what would have become of Peter's then, who was so ore, opere
and cord?

The Captain forced to loose his hold of the reins by a blow given him over his
hand with Peter's his Staff; this trumpeter of sorrow rides on singing his sad
note, Weel whisk him I warrant you now we have him.

From Hampton Court he is deluded to pass the River, upon assurance of a Guard
to rescue him; but thence he was violently carried to Carisbrook-Castle in the
Isle of Wight, where many overtures of peace were there proposed unto him, but
mischief or murder was the end of it: for their envy growing to a full
ripeness, nothing remains unattempted to show the r contempt of him. There
Martial must discourse with him, and all proved but a quible; Scientia nullum
habet inimicum praeter ignorantem, Learning is envied of none but the sordid
ignorant. Yea, a Private Soldier is by Peter's animated to seize the Kings
breeches which lay on him in his bed, and to take thence a book out of his
pocket, wherein was a List of his best and loyalest friends in England: this
was done notwithstanding the King held it fast and earnestly importuned the
Soldier to forbear prosecuting his wicked Treason; but he persisted to contend
with the King until he had recovered it, not daring to offend Mr. Peter's, who
afterward had him rewarded with an Officers place in the Army; for the worst
Traitor was the best subject; the veriest fiend their truest friend; and to be
at enmity with the King, was to be at peace with them.

The head thus perplexed and in imminent danger, because Peter's solicited to
expedite his trial, the body could do no less than sympathize with him in
sorrow; and though the just and legal government of this Nation seemed to be in
a dying condition, the members thereof give one groan more for their
redemption, and by assuming arms to rescue their natural Prince from this
usurped power, or redeem him from the jaws of these Lions, by taking arms
they set a stand to their bloody design, until by a fatal blow they were
enforced to silence, and to repine at his, and their unparalled subjction;
the nation thus showing they had some lise of loyalty yet lest; Peter's prepares
for an escape to the Western Islands; but a calm appearing he shrouds himself
under his old Bramble, Oliver, to p^otect him, and down he goes with him to
Wales, where he left another Monument of his cruelty; for there one Lieutenant
Bartlet, the only surviving Son of Doctor Bartlet before men ioned, being
Lieutenant to Colonel Powels Company of Foot, and taken Prisoner at that
unbappy overthrow of the Welshmen at S. Fagans in Glamorganshire, made his
Address to Peter's, presum^ng that he might receive civilities from him out of
their former acquaintance at Rotterdam; and there as a pious and penitent
Christian, makes Peter's his confessor, and gives him the account of his life
spent, desiring Mr. Peter's to pray with him to his God, and to intercede to
Oliver for his life, which Hugo promised to do; but returning to Oliver, told
him, he had left the young man in a good condition, for he had reconciled his
soul to God, and therefore it would be acceptable and well-pleasing to send him
to the Lord now that he was ready for him; then forthwith he was shot to death.

Thus did he also with Duke Hamilton who rendered himself a Prisoner unto
Peter's, and assigned him all his Jewels, etc. upon condition of life, which
promised, and the goods possessed, he delivered him over to the Martial power
to be put to death, and solicited for it.

This storm ended, on they go victoriously, encouraging themselves in their
bloody resolutions, and hasten the King for Whitehall: Only this by the way;
the Soldiers were secretly admonished by Letters from Peter's to exercise his
admired patience, by upbraiding him to his face, and so it was; for having
gotten him on board of their Boat to transport him, they would not afford him a
Cushion to sit upon; nay, scarcely the company of his own Spaniel, but scoffed
at him most vilely, as if to blaspheme the King, were not to blaspheme God, who
had established him to be his Vicegerent, our supreme Moderator, and a faithful
custos duarum tabularum legum, keeper o^ both Tables of the Law.

He being safely arrived at Whitehal, that they might the easier reach the
Crown, they do with pi^us pretenses, seconded with fears of declining, hoodwink
their General Fairfax to condescend to this bloody Sacrifice; whereas Oliver
and Ireton, would appear only to be his Admirers and Spectators of the
Regicide, by standing in a window at Whitehall, within view of the Scaffold and
the People; whilst Peter's fearing a Tumult, dissembles himself sick at Saint
Jameses, conceiting that he might thereby plead not guilty, though no man was
more forward then he to encourage Col. Axtel in this action, and to animate his
Regiment to cry for Justice against the Traitor, (for so he mostly called the
King) yea, with what triumphing insolence did he settle the chair of Fate for
the King to sit in at his ^ryal before the Court of High Injustice, thereby to
satiate his thirstings after the innocent blood of him who like a Lamb yielded
to the slaughter.

This Tragedy ended, Fairfax must be cheated of his Command, and Oliver,
volenter, nolenter, enforced to accept of the Triple Crown and Government of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, Religion, Law, Militia, Parliament, Priests,
and People: Thus Exit Fairfax; and enter Oliver with Peter's his pimping Priest,
who had prophesied unto him those things, and therefore is rewarded by becoming
Clerk to his Cabinet Councils or Cabals; Nay, this notorious Publican cannot
ask beyond his merit, though it be the final ^uine of that Church to which he
stood sworn in his Ordination, or of a Judge in the Prerogative Count, to be a
Licenser, or stand impow^ed irresistibly to beat down all sound Doctrine,
Discipline and Order, and introduce all Heresies, Schisms, and carnal villainies
into this National Church.

That as he had enraged them to excise the head, so he might encourage them to
perplex the members; and to this end strikes at the soul of the Church (the
Clergy) for that there was no more plunder left in England, and his bag not
full, and his desires that were insatiable as Hell, never crying enough, but a
quid dabitis, he resolves to live by Sacriledg, and for his assistant calls to
him Harrison that undiscernable propagator of the Nigrum Evangelii, the black
Gospel: so that Oliver now contents himself with being their Solliciter; thus
undertaking a spiritual warfarel, he from a Protest^nt to an Independent, and
thence to a Presbyterian, lastly falls into apostasy; conceiving with Julian
the best way to extinguish Religion, was to extirpate the Clergy, and that by
sequestring their Tithes and profits, silencing and imprisoning them, and so
bring all into an inevitable ignorance, and then to sow amongst them the darnel
of heresy and schism as they had formerly sown the tares of sedition, of which
much remains yet unweeded out amongst us; proh dolor!

But that they might exceed all Rebbels of former and futu^e ages, to fill up
their violence and cup with blood, they satiate themselves with the blood of
the English, Irish, and at Droghedah and Waxford, drink a deadly draught,
leaving there such monuments of cruelty, that succeeding ages will be hardly
induced to believe that men should become so wolvish, as they were in those
actions.

For at Droghedah they inhumanely massacred both men, women and children, three
days after the seizure of the Town, though they were only innnocents that had
secured themselves in the Gatehouse or Steeples, merely to preserve them from
the unmercifull usage of Soldiers, frequently practiced upon all storms of
Cities or Forts, and heat of blood; conceiving that English men would not
forget the ancient honor of being merciful, which for many years has
attended that heroic Nation; but being led by one who was insatiably thirsty
for blood, and they, these spectacles of pity, enforced by famine to appear in
the streets even in a peaceable manner; all relations for Countries sake,
Religion and Honor, was laid aside, and these famished Protestants were
massacred in the Streets, their Childrens brains beaten out before the Parents
faces, and then themselves enforced to undergo that cruelty.

Nay at Waxford having been thus entered into a merciless cruelty, they do
expedite their tyranny there; for having entered the town, they drove both men,
women and children into the River, whose dead bodies lay so in heaps therein,
that it did in a great measure stop the course of the River, and a passage
might easily be made from the Key to the otherside of the River, the dead lay
so numerous intombed in that River, as it was vauntingly related unto me by
this Peter's himself, several others of credit partaking of the History.

But Peter's becoming rich with the plunder at Waxford, and affrighted with
guilt, procures a command from Oliver, and is commissionated a Colonel; he
undertaking to raise a Regiment of foot, which must be sold over to their
assistance in Ireland; and thus clothed with mischief, he comes for Milford
Haven in Wales, sick, as in mind, so in body; but that was speedily cured, the
other never.

For being sickly, he was by one Captain Brandy quartered at my house: 1. For
that I was the only Physician known to him to reside in that County. 2. For the
continguity of my house, it being near the River: and thus we first became
acquainted. After his cure was finished, he remained there with his servants
and horses for ten weeks, all upon free quarter; during which time, I had so
endeered my self unto him, that I could unlock the closet of his heart at
pleasure, and by that means became so far his Confessor, that he did three
several times some weeks distant, very soberly acknowledge to me the manner of
contriving his late Majesty's death, with many other sad relations of their
wicked proceedings against him: nay he was so far from concealing this
treasonable conspiracy, that he would relate it me whenever I did ask it of
him; which made me tremble at the old Bailey to hear him in facie curiae, in
open Court, and in the presence of the Almighty to deny it, only slubbering
over his sin, saying such expressions might fall from him in his infirmity;
whether he meant his fits of madness, or fits of a troubled conscience, I know
not; but do believe, and that upon good grounds, it was rather in those of his
conscience, than the former.

After his raising three companies and transporting them over to sale, he
begins to observe the temper of that people; and finding many of them,
especially the Gentry, through cowardice and want of sound principling in
Religion, much inclining to a temporising, and the Clergy divided amongst
themselves, though they were privately admonished then, of the imminent danger
which was indeed against them; he there grew insolent, taking advantage of
their division; he calls to his assistance one Samson Lort of that County
Esquire, who was in his actions a second Pontius Pilate, delighting in cruelty,
and cloaking all with a pretense of love, religion and innocence.

This Second of his, so tympanizing with pride, that he was employed by so
great a Favorite as Peter's, was prompted by him, and would regard no Law, but
act according to what he thought acceptable to Peter's; witness his Warrants
issued out to search for and attach the body of Charles Stuart, (for so he
called his Majesty that now is) and to bring him before him to be dealth with
according to Justice; and his Motto in his Colors, No King, no Lords, we are
engaged.

But Olivers wife drawing Articles against Peter's, and intending to exhibit
them, for his long stay in that Country, and le^ving her Husband in danger in
Ireland: Peter's upon notice given, does with the assistance of his fellow
Tyrant Lorte, contrive a way to settle a Congregational Church of their own
invention, and that it might spread further there, calls into them one Philip
Jones of Swansey, that called himself Colonel Jones; quo warranto, I have
heard.

A Letter from this Jones was directed to Peter's, desiring him, in his own, and
Cradocks Name to leave his advice how to drive on that great design of
propagating the Gospel in Wales.

To which Peter's replied, They must Sequester all Ministers without acception,
and bring the Revenues of the Church into one public Treasury, out of which
must be allowed one hundred a year to six Itinerant Ministers to be selected to
preach in every County: What with the fear of his being questioned, and of the
Plague then increasing in that County: as also having engaged these two
Sticklers to drive on their Antichristianism, fitted himself with a pious Plea
for his delay; Viz. To settle Religion there: He hastens to London; yet could
not bauk Bristol, but must visit and strengthen the Saints there, telling them
out of the Pulpit, that he had been amongst the Heathen Welshmen, and found
them fit for nothing, but to make Clappers for wooden Bells (meaning the
Gallows) then tells them a Story of Puss in her Majesty, and so leaves them.

Oliver arrived at London; he sollicites for impowring his two Trustees, Lort
and Jones, with many others of the same Feather, and that by an Ordinance of
Parliament, to drive on their miraculous propagation of the Gospel, who like
two Champions insultingly strive to outvie one another; Asperius nihil est
misero si surgit in altum, Set a Peasant on Horseback, and he will ride to,
etc. bringing their poor Countrymen to that low Ebb, that many could be
satisfied with a morsel of Tithe Cheese.

And thus must Wales drink off the cup of her confusion, though it was sugared
with zealous pretenses, and poisoned with Heresies and Schisms; she must be
rendered as Heathenish, and these called Propagators of the Gosple; but to drive
on the Trade of Tithe gathering, they set good bargains to their Adherents, and
hire Beggars with such like, to observe the actions of the Clergy, allowing
some eighteen pence a day for their good service, and all to be deducted out of
the Revenues of the Church; the Ministers almost extirpated, and scarce a
Sermon heard in sixty miles; Jeroboam like, thinking the worst of people good
enough for the Lords service, they fill the vacancies with Cooks, Ranters,
Tailors, Weavers, Shoomakers, Feltmakers, Stocking menders, Millers,
Gingerbread-makers, Collarmakers, Carpenters, and Cheesvatmakers; only one
Academick, whose Name was Stephen Young, for that he bare a Partisan to guard
the Scaffold, at the Martyrizing of our gracious King, and was an adopted Son
to Peter's, always calling him Father.

These must be content with such pittances as are allowed them by the
propagators, rather playing at small game than sit out; and their Tenants or
Sycophants become Farmers, though some of the propagatos lick their fingers,
and carry away the sweetness of the profirt, raising their poor fortunes
thereby unto a considerable value, whilst Harrison, Peter's, Craddock, and
Vavasor Powell have the greater share of the booty: of this enough; Here only I
refer you for a full relation to a book entitled Mercurius Cambo-Britannus.
This inundation had passed over England also, had not Colonel Freeman, my self
and Mr. Gunter set a stand to their renewing of this Ordinance, to bring it
universal throughout the Kingdom: and no man more sollicitous against us, and
for this sacriledg, than Oliver, Harrison and Peter's; nay, Peter's excelling
them all, avowing before the Commitee for plundering Ministers, that the Clergy
were not worthy to keep a kennel of Dogs, or a dozen of Sheep.

And thus did he rule the roast amongst that rabble of Heresies, until
Tumbledown Dick accepted of the Government, when perceiving God to smile upon
this Nation with symptoms of his love; Peter's fained himself mad at Whitehall,
and there professes himself to be Antichrist, and says that he must shortly
be destroyed; and so it fell out; for after I had exhibited the charge of High
Treason against him, for conspiring the death of our Martyred King, he was
taken in St. Thomas in Southwark in bed with a woman newly delivered of a
child, and wife to the Blacksmith who deserted him; and though he called
himself Thompson, he was brought to the Tower, and thence to Newgate; and
though he had published a Pamphlet to vindicate his innocence, and in it
calling the holy Majesty of God to witness, that he had neither head nor hand
in acting or contriving the Kings death, he was by the testimony of a cloud of
witnesses, found guilty, and condemned, and the Tuesday following executed at
Charingcross.

But to show his end was as desperate as his life was abominable; when several
Ministers came to comfort him in Newgate, some hours before his death, and
exhorting him to lay hold upon Gospel Promises made to repentance: he replied,
What have I to do with them, seeing I am guilty of the blood of my King? Then
hearing the Bell ring, cried out, Away away to Judgment, for the Trumpet
sounds, and so goes down the stairs, thence to the Gibbet, where he behaved
himself more impenitent, not being able to pray, though entreated to it, he
dying sullenly and desperately: that as was his Life, such was his End.

Oh quam dulce mori, quum mors sit sola malorum
Terminus, and vitae fons and origo novae!
FINIS.

