A NARRATIVE OF THE Phanatical Plot, Setting forth the TREASONABLE AND Wicked
Designs Which they have been CARRYING on against the King and Government Ever
since the last Westminster Parliament. WITH An Account of the Treacherous
Contrivances against several Worthy Persons, and the Measures which they used
to take off the Kings Evidence by Subornation. To which is Added, A Relation of
the Evil Practices of John Rowse, (who was lately Executed at Tyburn) William
Lewis (who stands Convicted) and others. By John Zeal Gent.

Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers in Westminster
and London, 1683.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO TITUS OATS THE Mock-Doctor of Salamanca.
SIR,
WE find that it is Customary for the Bird of Jove to carry up her unfledged
young ones to the Sun, where if they can with undaz'led eyes, behold the
glittering Beams, all suspicion of their being Spurious is taken away, After
this example, with due reverence, I approach you, our Sun, and freely expose
this offspring of a penitent mind to your (sometimes) all-blinding Rays;
having a stock of assurance, equal to your own, when you described Don John;
that if it can (what persons of the greatest quality formerly were not Eagles
enough to do) without trembling behold your shining Case -- hardn'd brow, it
may pass muster all over the World, and mangre envy and mighty tides of
prejudiced Fanatical Critics, set up for a Truth.

And truly (Reverend Sir) I should think it Incumbent on me, to be speak your
Pardon for troubling you at this time of day, with a thing of this nature, did
not Justice and Reason, in some measure seem to warrant the presumption: For
though I must confess, I could not but suppose you as busy as any of the Rats
to free your self from the danger that threatens your Drowning Vessel, and to
keep your Neck out of Jack Ketch's Noose: Yet I thought (without being unjust
to you and and my own Conscience) I could not rob you of the Dedication of what
in every line almost shows you your self. Jupiter est quodcunque vides, You can
see nothing in it Dirty, False, Black, Treasonable or Treacherous, but it bears
your own stamp: And though you cannot properly be said to be the immediate
Cause of all, yet the second causes whence those and all our National evils
sprang, can be resolved into you, the Primum Mobile, or first Principle whence
they had their being and motion.

There is nothing contained in the following Discourse but what, to your own
knowledge, is purely matter of Fact, and an undeniable Truth; which therefore I
choose to expose to the World, in a style suitably plain, naked, and destitute
of the gaudy flowers of Eloquence and Invention, which makes the greatest
Truths more Admired, but less Authentic, more desired by curious and liquorish
Palates, (such as yours Doctor) but also more liable to be suspected by the
more solid and judicious part of mankind, which alone I coveted, and have
endeavored to please. And I do declare Religiously in the presence of Him that
knows all your secrets, and as I hope for any good in that day when there is to
be the fullness of Retribution, that I was neither by assed by any Interest, nor
moved by the Importunity of Friends, or the Threats of Foes, to write and
publish the following Narrative; and that I can attribute the doing so to
nothing, save an irresistible impulse within me, and the secret Dictates of a
wounded Conscience. The load of guilt that was lodged in my breast was
insupportable, and I could have no ease 'till I vomited up the Treasonable
Subornatious, Briberies, Perjuries and Evil-practices which lay heavy on me,
and to which for some years I have been privy, that at the sight of so much
filth the World may for the future nauseate and abandon such lewd and wicked
extravagancies.

I do not care for quarrelling with an old Friend, though the Devil; therefore
I must beg, good Doctor, that you will not take up prejudice against me upon
the first sight of my Narrative; for, assure your self, I design not thereby to
encroach upon, or usurp any part of your right: I mean, not thereby to assert a
Popish, but a Presbyterian Plot. You are now without the fear of a Rival, left
the sole Master and mannager of the former; your leading Nimrods are all fled,
and your Fellow-Swearers seeing all going down the wind, have shaken hands with
you, committing all to your own unwearied care: You may then exercise your
Talent in Swearing by your self, and move in the same sphere you used to do,
'till it shall please your juster Stars to exalt you higher.

Think not by what I have said, that I am a Papist; assure your self I am
neither Papist nor Presbyterian, so far from it, that I never was within the
doors of a Mass-house or Conventicle, but was born and brought up in the True
Protestant Religion, as Established now by Law. To give an account of my Life
in this place, I deem very unnecessary; I Will therefore say thus much negatively
concerning my self; first, that I never took a Degree in Salamanca or
elsewhere, which you are so much famous for. Secondly, that I never admired
Sodomy, or sporting my self with a Masculine Brawny Chambermaid. Thirdly, That
I am not the Son of a Canting Sedition-Preaching Weaver, but of an Honest Loyal
Gentleman of the County of Devon; and my Mother of the Family of the
Greenfields, whose Loyalty have been always manifested by their Sufferings for
His late Majesty; My Grandfather perishing in Prison in London: My Uncle Major
Greenfield Murdered by the Rebels at Plymouth, for endeavoring to obtain that
Garrison for His Majesty, etc. And most of my Relations falling into the Hands
of the damnable Sequestrators, for which my self and whole Family suffer to
this day, further I will not mention to vindicate my self, or to take away the
stains which guilt left upon my Soul, for

-- Quae non fecimus ipsi
vix ea nostra voco --
But to return to the Plot; I dare not say there was no Popish-Plot, though at
the same time it is my belief there was not the hundred part of what was
pretended; but that the few true circumstances that were found, were improved
to that height by your Industry, and the Treachery of the Fanatics to serve
for a stalking-horse to hide your own, till with more security you could
destroy the Government. Therefore I ll even rest my self satisfied as to this
point, with the Opinion of the Author of that Letter to Mr. Settle, occasioned
by his Recanting Narrative, which you may see from his own words no follows.
Postscript Page 14.
As for the Popish-Plot, though my apprehensions of it are not altogether so
dreadful to make me go mad for fear of Consecrated Knives, Black-Bills, Jago-
Pilgrims, French Armies, etc. Yet I am not for exploding quite the thoughts of
some Designs managed by the Roman Catholics for promoting their own Religion,
by extirpating all whom they call Heretics, since there were many true
circumstances, though dashed with Contradictions, and now and then a few false
Oaths. For we know very well it is possible the game may be up, though many of
the Eager Mongrel Whelps in the deep mouthed pack of Evidences outrun the
scent and hunted Counter. But on the other hand, I would have men not be
altogether so intent upon those glowing Embers, as not to discern the Bellows
(that is the Presbyterians) that blew them into a flame.

It may possibly be thought by some, that I dare not assert what I now do, but
in the interval of Parliaments; and that this Narrative, were it now Parliament
time, dare not look abroad into the World: I declare my resolution of standing
by it when ever a Parliament sits; and (if need require) of sealing the truth
thereof with my Blood. For it was once my dying resolution, and since I never
found my self in the least inclining to alter it. In March last being justly
visited for my sins with a severe sit of Sickness from the Almighty, and having
little or no hopes or prospect of recovering, I sent for a Friend, and made it
my request to him, that if it should please God to call me away at that time,
he would take care to have the following Discourse Printed and published for
the satisfaction of the World, declaring to him upon the word of a dying man,
that there was nothing in it, but what was sincere and true; which he
faithfully promised to see dome. But it pleasing the all merciful God to raise
me up once more to perform this great duty my self; I think I ought not to be
either ashamed or afraid to declare those notorious Truths before an Earthly
which then I was willing, and expected, and at last must, lay open before the
Heavenly Tribunal.

And I hope the next Parliament will be men of greater, nobler and more Loyal
Principles than to discountenance any thing that may tend (as the detecting
these Subornations, Perjuries, etc. do) to the preservation of His Majesty, the
Queen, and his Royal Highness, and to the bringing all Perjurers, Suborners,
and other Enemies of the Government, to condign Punishment: Which time when God
shall be pleased to grant us; Doctor you may expect to be Famous, as most that
ever marched through Holbourn: till which, I will, what you your self must do
at last leave you upon God and your Country, and so

Farewell.
A true and perfect Copy of the Records of Newgate against William Lewis.
AT the General Sessions of the Peace of our Lord the King, Land. ss.
held for the City of London at Guildhall of the same City, within the same
City, on Monday, viz. the 12th. day of December Anno Regni Regis Caroli secundi
Angli, etc. 28o

William Lewis is Fined 100 l. and Committed etc. And that he shall be put in
and upon the Pillory, one day in Cornhill near the Exchange of London; and
another day in the Poultry near the Stocks-Market there; and the third day in
Cheapside near the end of Honey-Lane, from the hour of Eleven to One, With a
Paper put on his Head in Writting showing his Offense. And then he shall be
returned to Newgate to be kept in safe Custody until he has paid his Fine, and
find good Security for his good Behavior, etc.

Wagstaffe.
The words which were put on his Head in the Pillory.

For Falsely Forging a Bill under the Hand of Mr. Richard Thompson to deceive
him 220 l.

AT the Goal Delivery of our Lord the King at Newgate held for the City of
London at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly London, Land. ss.
on Wednesday viz. 10th. of October, Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi nunc
Angliae etc. 29th

William Lewis Convicted of Felony, and demands the Benefit of his Clergy,
etc. and is Delivered if he could read, which he did; and was only Burnt in the
Hand, and so acquitted.

Villainy Displayed: OR, THE INFORMATION OF John Zeal, Gent.
ABout the time that Langhorn was executed, I came acquainted with one Hugh
Mason, a Victualler in Strand-lane near the May Pole, whose House I afterward
used; and one time telling him I was endeavored to be suborned to swear
High Treason against Sir Francis Radcliffe, to whom I formerly was Page; and
that Informations were sent in my name to the Secretary of State, (neither my
handwriting, or by my consent or knowledge) against the said Sir Francis
Radcliffe, neither did I ever swear any matter against him: Mason replied, Now
is the time to make your self, if you will accuse him, and I will draw up the
Information against him; And more over, I Will warrant you a good sum of money
for so doing. Further, said he, I will carry you to Sir William Waller, Dr.
Oats, and the Earl of Shaftsbury, who will all of them give you good
encouragement, etc. But finding me unwilling, Mason for some time desisted his
importunities, until (using his House) I became somewhat indebted unto him;
whereupon he told me, If I would not consent to draw up an Information, and
accuse the said Sir Francis Radcliffe of High Treason, that he would arrest me,
and throw me into Prison. Then I went to one Mr. Bennet a Sword-Cutler, (an
acquaintance of my Fathers) and desired him to go with me to the said Mason,
and engage for what I was (or should be) indebted, until my Father came to
Town, which Mr. Bennet did at my request. But before my acquaintance with
Mason, I had given Sir Francis Radcliffe an account by one Mr. Banks, how I was
persuaded, and endeavored to be suborned, and become an Evidence against the
said Sir Francis; Also I sent a Letter to his Honor by the said Mr. Banks,
which was sent me, directed (as I think) to my Lodging in Salisbury-Court, from
an unknown hand, having no name to it. To the best of my remembrance, the words
in the said Letter were to this effect; to desire me to accuse Sir Francis
Radcliffe of High Treason, with promises of a gratuity; which Letter, I
believe, remains still in the hands of Sir Francis. And having cleared his
Honor to Mr. Banks, I thought I might safely go on with the before named Mason,
to find out his villainous intentions. One day he desired me to go up stairs
with him, which I did, and there again he urged me to draw up the said
Information which he had endeavored to Suborn me to do; all which I consented
unto: Then he immediately took Pen, Ink, and Paper, and began to draw up a
Charge of High Treason against Sir Francis Radcliffe; which Paper was not that
day much proceeded upon, by reason of Company that came to his House, which
took him off his wicked design at that time: But some days after we proceeded
further upon the same business, so that at last we had finished about a a sheet
of Paper containing all Treasonable matter against Sir Srancis Radcliffe, all
the particulars I cannot well remember; but one particular was, That Sir
Francis Radcliffe should have declared, that he would raise Ten Thousand Men in
Arms in the North of England, whereby to establish the Popish Religion in this
Kingdom: And during the time of this transaction, he the said Mason did daily
report in his House, that we were upon discovering a great Plot, which would be
the making of Us that were concerned therein: And within a day or two after, he
desired me to go up Stairs with him again, And Dictate to him whilst he drew up
the said Treasonable Paper (which he had falsely contrived against Sir Francis
Radcliffe) in a more Legible Hand; which I did, and whilst we were about it,
the said Mason's Wife came up stairs to us, at which he was displeased, and bad
her go down; she replied, I believe I shall see you in Newgate for your
Plotting-contriving-tricks and Roguery; said he, Damn you for a Bitch, how dare
you talk so impudently to Doctor Oats and Captain Bedlow? (meaning himself and
me;) And after this Treasonable Paper of his contrivance was finished, Mason
would never let me rest till I went with him to Sir Francis Radcliffe's
Lodgings; I desired to know of him what we should do there? Damn you (said he)
we will show him the Paper, and if does not give us Moneys, you shall Swear
against him: Accordingly I did go with him into Holbourn, and there sent for
one Mr. Selby, Steward to Sir Francis, who immediately came to us; I called him
into the Backside, and told him, that I had the Copy of the Treason, which
Mason endeavored to Suborn me to Swear against his Master Sir Francis
Radcliffe; he desired to see it, but I am not certain whether I did let him see
it, or not; but Mason would not let me send it over to Sir Francis, but go with
it my self; at which Mr. Selby went over, telling me, he would send for me
immediately; and when he was gone, the said Mason Swore he would go over with
me; I asked him for what? Why (said he) to see Sir Francis, that I may know
him, for by God (said he) if he does not give you Money, we will both Swear
against him: But notwithstanding his readiness, I did not suffer him to go
over, but went my self, and sent the said Treasonable Paper up to Sir Francis
by one Mr. Radcliffe Sir Francis's Kinsman; I tarried there for some time, till
near night, there being in company one Mr. Nichols a Tailor to Sir Francis, who
came to take his leave of that Family, being with few days to go out of Town:
And drinking a Glass of Wine with them, I declared before the whole Company,
that I knew no ill of Sir Francis, but that it was a contrived and designed
thing by some ill person or persons to put me upon the Swearing the same: Upon
which, after some short stay, I took leave, and went to see for Mason at the
Alehouse where I left him; but he being gone from thence, I repaired to his
House; who said (as soon as he saw me) I am glad you are come Mr. Zeal, I had
thought they had Murdered you, because you tarryed so long; But that is not the
business, have you gotten any Money from Sir Francis? said he; I replied, I had
not, for his Honor was engaged with several Persons of Quality that came to
take their leaves of him before he went out of Town, which prevented me from
speaking with him at that time, but was ordered by Mr. Radcliffe his Kinsman to
come again before Sir Francis took his Journey into the North; said Mason,
That Is very well, we will be sure to mind him; and if he goes out of Town and
not give you a good Gratuity, we will fetch him back in the Devils name: Thus
it continued for some days, until Sir Francis was gone his Journey; and I
hearing of it, told Mason the same; who swore bitterly, That he would have him
back in few days, if I would be ruled by him, and go immediately to Sir William
Waller, and be sworn to the said Paper: But I put him off with some pretense or
other for that time; telling him, that it would look more like malice than
matter of Fact, to accuse Sir Francis so soon after his departure.

In a short time after my Father came to Town, which was about St. James's-
Tide in the same Summer, and paid the said Mason what I was Indebted unto him;
upon which, Mason desisted from urging me to Swear against Sir Francis
Radcliffe; until about Michaelmass following, I then became Indebted to him a
second time, my Father having left his House, finding him to be an
Ill-principl'd man; my Father telling me, that was the cause that he refrained
the said Mason's House; Mason perceiving the same, was much dissatisfied,
telling me, that now I must look to my self, For ( Damn me says he) I Will not
trust you for a Farthing more, besides I will Arrest you for what you owe me
already too: Upon which I asked him what he would have me to do? Why (says he)
go with me to Doctor Oats, and I will give him the Paper, and tell him that I
have one that will Swear to it; at which (said Mason) you will be called into
the Doctor, but do not be timorous (said Mason) and disgrace me, but stand to
it, and Swear it, and then it will be your making: And seeing him so forward, I
consented to go with him to Whitehall to Dr. Oates's Lodging, to whom Mason
gave the said Treasonable Paper that he contrived against Sir Francis
Radcliffe; which the Doctor had no sooner read, but asked if I was the person
that would Swear to it? to which Mason replied, I was, Then said the Doctor, go
with me to the Council Chamger, and I will show it to a Person of Quality: And
as soon as we came into the Lobby by the Council Chamger, the Doctor sent in,
and immediately the Earl of Shaftsbury came out, and the Doctor gave him the
Paper, which his Lordship read, and going toward his Coach at Whitehall-gate,
his Lordship asked where the person was that would Swear to it? to which the
Doctor replied, He Is here my Lord; and then the Doctor recommended me to his
Lordship, his Honor being pleased to desire me to come in the Afternoon to his
House in Aldersgate Street, where he would discourse me; upon which I promised
his Lordship I would, and so took leave, and the Doctor bad me not fail to go
according to his Lordships appointment, whatever I neglected else; further
telling me, I might be made by it: I promised I would certainly be there; (
Mason all this while standing at a distance) I went to him, who asked me how it
went? I told him the Earl of Shaftsbury desired me to come to his House in the
Afternoon, and there he would discourse me; upon which Mason was very well
satisfied, and Swore, Damn him, that if I did mind my business, I should be
made for ever: After which, we went to his House, where we had a Dinner, and
there he told his Wise (with great rejoicing) that we had done our business,
For (says he) We have been with the Earl of Shaftsbury and Doctor Oats, and
in the Afternoon Mr. Zeal must attend his Lordship at his House by his own
order: Toward the evening I went to his Lordship's House, but Mason could not
go with me, by reason of some extraordinary occasions of his own that hindered
him; and coming to his Lordships House, I had not been long there, but Doctor
Oats and Colonel Mansel came in; the Doctor seeing me, went in to his
Lordship as I imagine, and soon after came out to me, and told me his Lordship
was very busy, And therefore (said he) I would have you come again a day or
two hence, and then you will be sure to speak with my Lord; But (said Doctor
Oats) cannot you get one more that was of Sir Francis Radcliffe 's Family to
Swear to the said Paper? I told him, I thought I could, (though really I could
not;) He replied, If you could do that, it would be excellent Service; And so I
took leave of him, and repaired again to Mason's House, who was very earnest to
know how I had proceeded, I told him I could not speak with the Earl of
Shaftsbury, for Dr. Oats said to me, he had so much company with him, that it
was impossible to speak with his Lordship that evening, desiring me to come a
day or two hence; at which Mason swore Damn him, he believed I had received
Money of his Lordship, and would not tell him: Upon which, I protested to him I
had not, but must attend a day or two hence: He not believing it, said, I will
see the truth of this, for I will go with you my self: I replied, with all my
heart; and the Saturday following we both went into Aldersgate Street; and
coming to his Lordships House, he was not within; so we went to an Alehouse
hard by, and tarried till we understood his Lordship was come in, when going to
his House, I sent up my name, and was immediately conducted into his Lordships
presence up one pair of stairs, where he asked me several questions, (viz.)
What Religion I was of? I answered, a Protestant. He also asked me, What
Friends I had in Town? I told him, my Father; To which his Lordship replied,
bring him to me, and then I will discourse You further. After which I took my
leave, and was conducted down stairs by a Gentleman, ( Mason standing all the
while at the Chamber Door, and seeing me discourse with his Lordship.) When we
came out of the House, Mason asked me what News? I told him, his Lordship had
ordered me to bring my Father to him; He replied, I will persuade your Father
to go with you, and will tell him, that you will have twenty Guineys of the
Earl of Shaftsbury; and this (said he) will certainly induce him to go with
you. Being come to Mason's House, he there openly declared we had been at the
Earl of Shaftsbury's, and that I was lighted up stairs to his Lordship, as if I
had been a Person of Quality, and he would warrant I should have Money plenty
as soon as I was sworn; telling his Wife, that he would have his Room two pair
of stairs hanged for me, and that I should both Lodge and Diet in his House,
(or words to that effect.) This being Saturday-night, we desisted until Monday
following, when we both went over toward my Fathers Lodgings near St. George's
Fields; and as we went along, he told me, that after I had begun with Sir Sir
Francis Radcliffe, I should accuse the Duke of York, and the Lords in the
Tower; and (said he) let me alone to contrive and draw up such Informations
against them, as shall bring you into great favor with the next Parliament, or
words to that effect; So drawing near my Fathers Lodgings, Mason desired me to
walk in the Fields, whilst he went in and discoursed my Father; which I did,
(but whether I went in or not, I cannot well remember;) however, Mason tarried
a considerable time with him, as he informed me, though I judged he would have
but an indifferent answer to what he proposed. At length he came, and told me,
my Father had promised to be at his House that day, or speedily after; that
being all the discourse we had at that time, we parted, I going toward London,
and he toward his own House. Some days after I saw my Father, who asked me
what was the reason I sent that fellow to him (naming Mason) upon such accounts
as he offered? telling me moreover, that if I did not refrain Mason's company,
and evil practices, he would never look upon me. Mason, (said my Father,) was
so impudent, in the hearing of my Landlady, to desire me to persuade you to
swear against Sir Francis Radcliffe; telme you should have Twenty Guineys of
the Earl of Shaftsbury as soon as you are sworn. In answer to all which, I told
my Father, that I had left the said Mason's house, and also refrained his
company, which in truth I had done. And this (to the best of my knowledge) was
the sole contrivance of the said Mason.

All the beforementioned Information I had drawn up against the said Mason,
with an intent to have discovered it during the sitting of the last Parliament,
but was persuaded to the contrary by one Mr. William Lewis, and one Mr. John
Haytor, (then both Prisoners in the Marshalsea for Debt, as well as my self)
who both told me, though the thing was really true, and that Mason had
endeavored to suborn me, yet the Parliament would take no notice of it,
because it was in vindication of a Roman Catholic; whereupon I burnt the said
Information, and desisted until now; only I declared in general to Justice Rich
and Justice Reading above two years since, that Mason had endeavored to suborn
me, but did not declare to them in what nature or particular.

About Christmas following, my Father had a Warrant granted him to be Purser to
one of His Majesty's Ships at Chatham, to which Employment he repaired, and
took me down with him, where I continued for some months; but having no
likelihood of getting any Preferment there, and hearing of the Earl of Ossory's
going as General for Tangier, I got leave of my Father to go to London, and
make what interest I could to go with his Honor in that Expedition, and
thereby endeavor to raise my Fortune, there being no probability of Action
here: To which my Father consenting, I accordingly came to Town about the
latter-end of June, or beginning of July; but I had not been long here, ever the
ill News of the Earl of Ossory's death was generally confirmed, which put me to
as great a loss as ever; for having contracted some Debts, I was arrested for
the same, and thrown into the Marshalsea, where I became acquainted with the
beforementioned Mr. William Lewis, who understanding how I had been tampered
with to swear High Treason against Sir Francis Radcliffe, and had been with the
Earl of Shaftsbury concerning the same, he was very desirous to be my
Bedfellow, which in a night or two he accomplished, and continued in my Room
till his enlargement. In few nights after he came to be my Bedfellow, he began
to tamper with me concerning the Earl of Shaftsbury; telling me, if I would
accuse his Lordship, he would send to those that should soon procure my
liberty, and also supply me with Moneys; in which time I found him to be a
notorious Papist; yet, through his many persuasions, I did consent to the
drawing up of an Information against the Earl of Shaftsbury; whereupon one
morning the said Lewis came to my bedside, and brought me Pen, Ink and Paper,
desiring me to draw up an Information according to my own sense against the
said Earl; which I accordingly did, containing one side of a sheet; and when it
was done, he desired to see it; I gave it him; he read it, and told me it all
signified nothing; But (said he) I will go and draw it up in another kind of
method, and you shall copy it with your own hand; for (said Mr. Lewis) I have
sent for a Gentlewoman to come to me, and have assured her in my Letter, that
there is a Gentleman my (Bedfellow) that can discover strange things against
the Earl of Shaftsbury; and I am certain as soon as she receives my Letter, she
will come with all expedition to us: Therefore (said he) let us make what speed
we can to get it ready; which accordingly we did. Within a day or two after,
there came two women, and a Footboy with them, and enquired for him, (as he
told me.) When they were gone, I asked him who they were? he said, one of them
was Mrs. Cellier, and the other Madam Holeby; and not long after there came a
Gentlewoman, (which proved to be the said Madam Holeby) who desired to have it
attested under my hand, that the Paper that was given to them against the Earl
of Shaftsbury at their last being there, was true; desiring me also to give
under my hand that I would swear to it; all which Mr. Lewis persuaded me to do,
and I did give under my hand that I would swear it. Then Mr. Lewis told me we
should soon be released out of Prison; and not long after the said Paper came
with an addition to it, and written by another hand, being brought by one Mr.
Dalton. Mr. Lewis then desired me to draw it up with my own hand as fair as I
could: I replied, there was a great deal more stuff in that, than was in the
other which was sent them: Lewis answered, That Is no matter, as long as it is
for our enlargements; by which persuasions I at length consented. As soon as it
was done, Mr Dalton came for it, and took it away; but not long after he
brought it again, and told me I must set my hand to the bottom of every side,
which I did. Some weeks after, this contrived Paper was sent to the Secretary
of State, (as I afterward heard) without my knowledge or consent; whereupon
Mr. Fanshaw, one of the Masters of Requests, and another person with him, came
to the Marshalsea, and enquired for me; when I came to him, he desired me to go
up with him into a Room, and accordingly I went; (which Mr. Lewis perceiving,
and being jealous, (as he afterward told me) came under the window, and
listened to our discourse.) Mr. Fanshaw pulled the said Paper out of his
pocket, and desired to know of me if it was my hand, or whether I would own it;
I told him I would, and would also swear it when I should be thereunto
required; upon which he departed; and when they were gone, Mr. Lewis came to me
and told me in these words; Now Mr. Zeal I dare trust my life in your hands,
for I find you are true to your Trust; further telling me, that he heard every
word that passed between Mr. Fanshaw and my self; the next news I heard, came a
Messenger with an Order of Council for me to be brought up the Wednesday
following, which was accordingly done; but I was not called in at that time,
but ordered to be brought up the next Council day, and so I was carried up five
several times; And being brought back from the Council un-examined, Lewis urged
me to swear to the said Paper, taking a Glass of Beer and drinking to me,
wished eternal damnation both to Soul and Body, if he did believe the Duke of
York to be in the least concerned in any contrivance against the King or
Government, but that he did believe it to be a contrivance of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, Doctor Oats, and others, on purpose to bring His Royal Highness
into dislke with the People, etc. And the last time I was carried up, I writ in
to the Lord Precedent, declaring that it was the fifth time I had attended
there, but could not be examined, and therefore desired his Lordship that I
might be called in and examined, so that I might discharge my Conscience in
declaring the truth of what I then knew, and if I had been then admitted I had
declared Mr. Lewis's evil Practices in what I knew at that time; which Note I
Writ to his Lordship in the presence of Mr. Glover (now Marshal of the
King's Bench;) And about this said time there came a person to Mr. Thomas Warens
the Clerk of the Marshalsea, and sent for Mr. Lewis, who went out, and when he
returned, he told me it was Madam Holeby that sent for him, and that she had
given him five Shillings for us to drink; withal told me, I should not tarry a
day in Prison. The said Mr. Lewis would never leave me night nor day, but was
still urging me to stand to it, and not to be daunted, but aver it to be truth
when I came before the Council; he did also offer to instruct me against I came
to be examined, saying one night in the Bed to me, come Mr. Zeal, suppose I now
was Lord Chancellor, and you before the King and Council to be examined. What
do you know against the Earl of Shaftsbury? Upon which I pretended my self
sleepy, and would not answer him to any such impertinent questions; Then he
said I would not remember three words of the said Papers; (which I never
intended) but the first time that I should be examined, I resolved to declare
the Authors of the said Papers; and that it was all false and fictitious, which
I did declare upon Oath before the King and Council, the Lord Mayors day at
night, during the last Parliament at Westminster; but Mr. Lewis desired me not
to declare that he had any hand in contriving the said Papers against the Earl
of Shaftsbury, which at that time I omitted; But now declare that the said Mr.
Lewis was the first and chiefest contriver and actor in it, and the only man
that persuaded me continually to swear to it: And when the Parliament sat at
Westminster, he found that Mrs. Celiers and Mrs. Holeby did not supply him with
moneys as he expected, he resolved to lay the contrivance of the said Paper
wholly upon them, which he did, as appears in his Narrative, and at that time I
was much indisposed, and told one Sir Edward Butler (a fellow Prisoner for
Debt, and then in my Chamber,) that Mr. Lewis was an ill man, and endeavored
to Suborn me to swear false things, and if I knew how to send for a Magistrate
or two, I would declare the truth of what I knew: to which the said Sir Edward
told me, that he would set down the day of the month, and what I had told him
concerning Mr. Lewis, and that he would justify the same upon Oath if ever
required; And Sir Edward Butler also desired me to write to some Justices of
the Peace, to come thither, and take my Information, which I did; and soon
after came one or two Justices, but Mr. Lewis and Mr. Haytor being in
consultation in Haytors Chamber, and understanding what I had done, they came
down, and told the said Justices it would not be a proper business for them to
concern themselves in, there being some Members of Parliament appointed to come
and take my Examination; and Mr. Lewis and Mr. Haytor desired me not to declare
one word to the said Justices; upon which they took their leaves, and looked
upon it as an affront; (as I was informed;) and that night came other Justices
and examined Mr. Lewis and Mr. Haytor, who told me he was by: This said Haytor
was him that writ Mr. Lewis's Information and mine, that we gave in to the last
Parliament at Westminster; and the next day came Justice Rich and Justice
Reading, and took my Information also upon Oath; and after they were gone, Mr.
Lewis told me, that (now Mr. Zeal) we may expect to be called before the House
of Commons speedily; This continued for several days, insomuch that Mr. Lewis
began to doubt whether there would be any notice taken of his Information, or
not; And one Morning about three of the clock he waked me, and said Zeal, here
is no notice taken of us you see, but in every days Votes of Parliament there
is Addresses made for Dangerfield, and others, for their Pardons and
Allowances; Therefore I must discover something that is greater, or else we are
like here to continue; I asked how or what he would contrive? let me alone for
that, (said he) you shall go in the Morning betimes to Mr. Haytors Chamber, and
tell him that I did discover to you strange things about three of the clock,
insomuch that I would not let you rest until I had revealed it; But (said he)
take no notice that I know of your going to Haytor, but pretend you came
unknown to me, and then (said he) Haytor will certainly write to the Earl of
Shaftsbury immediately after you have told him what I can discover; Then I
asked him again what it should be? He replied, that one of the Lords in the
Tower would have hired him to have killed the King: I asked him what Lord it
should be? He replied, do not you tell Haytor his name, but it shall be the
Lord Arrundel of Warder, for he is the remarkable'st man of them all, he is
squint-eyed, and has a Wart on his Nose, and I have seen him several times at
the Tennis-Court, therefore he shall be the man that I pitch upon, and I Will
warrant you, this will fetch me up before either the House of Lords or Commons;
if Haytor should ask you why I had not discovered this before in my first
Information, tell him, (to sham him,) that I doubted my Pardon, and that was
the reason, which will satisfy him well enough to believe it is true; And in the
Morning I did rise, and go to Haytors Chamber, and told him as aforesaid, not
taking the least notice to him that the said discovery was false, and contrived
by the said Mr. Lewis; upon which the said Haytor replied, that he doubted the
truth of it, yet notwithstanding (said he) I will write to the Earl of
Shaftsbury of it, so it will be a good service to the Protestant Party; the
said Haytor did accordingly write to the Earl of Shaftsbury concerning the
same, and soon after there came an Order from the House of Lords for Mr. Lewis
to be brought up; which accordingly he was, whereas he told me he swore the
same; and withal at the same time swore, Damn him, what was an Oath? It was
only laying a man's Hand on a Book and kissing it; upon all which, I have taken
the blessed Sacrament according to the usage of the Church of England, the
fourth day of February last, as will appear by my Certifitate, that all this is
false and Fictitious, and contrived on purpose to get his enlargement. Some
time after he was called before the House of Commons, where he delivered his
Information in writing, and the 19th. of November I also delivered my
Information in writing; And within few days after he sold his Narrative to one
Mr. Combs a Coffee-man in the City for 50 l. which money, (or part of which)
procured his Liberty. I remaining still a Prisoner till near Christmas, and
upon the 5th. of November there came a Letter to the Marshalseas directed to
Mr. Loman the Keeper, which is here incerted verbatim.

Sir,
THere is this day an Order of the House of Lords, that Mr. Zeal attend the
Attorney General, so he desires that he may attend him in the Morning at the
House of Lords, or in the Afternoon before three, at his Chamber in Gray's Inn,
desiring you not to fail, herein I am

Gray's Inn the 25 of November. You Servant Charles Clare.

In Obedience to which Order I did appear at the Attorney-General's Chamber,
where he was pleased to ask me whether I knew Mrs. Celier? which I declared I
did not; he asked me if I thought I knew her if I saw her, from any other
Woman; I told him I could not say it for the World; and several other questions
he was pleased to ask me relating to the said matter, which I to the best of my
knowledge truly answered: He also asked if I ever were in Newgate? I replied I
was; he desired me to give him an account for what; I told him; I was
introduced by a Gentleman of my acquaintance, into the company and acquaintance
of Mr. Dangerfield, who told me he was an Officer lately come from Flanders;
and being one day in the company of Mr. Dangerfield at Hackney, where he
exchanged a false Guiney, and for which he was apprehended, and I (with the
said Gentleman) was also apprehended with him for being in his company at that
time; and being all carried before a Magistrate, all three were committed to
Newgate, where in few days it appeared, that the said Dangerfield made it his
general practice to utter false Coin for several years before, for which he had
been several times Imprisoned, and suffered the Law: and during my confinement
I writ to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, declaring my condition, (who was my very good
Friend, as I can very plainly prove,) he came to me in Prison, to whom I
declared my condition, upon which he was pleased to give me some Money, and
told me withal, that if I could procure Bail, he would send me my Discharge;
which I did do, and he accordingly sent it me by a Gentleman; (a Friend of
mine) and my Friends not being then in Town to supply me with Moneys, I was
forced to tarry till the Sessions, because I had not wherewithal to pay my
Fees; at the Sessions following I was Indicted for High Treason with Mr.
Dangerfield, of which I was acquitted; and at the same time was also Indicted
for a misdemeanour with Dangerfield, of which I was found, Guilty, and Fined
Twenty Pounds Sterling, and Dangerfield was Fined Fifty Pounds: After my Trial,
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was pleased to come to me to the Press-yard, and told
me, That he appeared upon the Bench in my behalf, and that he had spoke
favorably of me to the then Recorder Dalbin: Besides Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was also pleased to tell me, That he had saved my Friend Dangerfield from
standing in the Pillory for that Offense, in speaking well of me; And
afterward Captain Richardson the Keeper, having received a Letter from one
Mr. Penn, to desire him to be kind to me during my Confinement, I being of an
Honest good Family, etc. telling him also what kindness he showed to me, he
would take it as done to himself for my Families sake, or words to that effect:
Upon which, Captain Richardson was so kind as to get my Fine remitted in the
Kings most Gracious Pardon, and also took my own engagement for my Fees,
Lodging, and other Subsistence; at which the Attorney General was pleased to
tell me, that my Evidence was good by virtue of the Kings General Pardon if I
never had suffered for any other Crimes, which I declared I never had; then his
Honor asked Mr. Lewis whether he had ever stood on the Pillory, or not; Mr.
Lewis changing his Countenance, replied, he had; Mr. Attorney General also
asked him for what? He answered, that it was for a Forged Bill of Exchange;
some other such like questions were asked him, which I cannot well remember;
all this was in the hearing of one Mr. Beal a Messenger belonging to the
Marshalseas, who was at that that time my Keeper: From thence I returned back
to the said Prison, where I told the beforementioned Haytor what had passed
before Mr. Attorney General that Afternoon, and how Mr. Lewis had confessed
that he had stood on the Pillory: Then Haytor replied, that he took him to be a
very ill man ever since he writ his Informations, for which he promised him a
Beaver-Hat: But (said Haytor) He was so dirty as to go away and not perform his
Promise, nor so much as return me Thanks for the same; but (said he) I will do
him as good a kindness to the Earl of Shaftsbury, which shall be more than ten
such Hats out of his way: And on the other side, (if you will be ruled by me) I
will make your Interest great with his Lordship: I asked him how, or which way?
He told me, That he would make an Addition to my Narrative that it should far
exceed Mr. Lewis 's: And finding his Inclinations, I promised I would; then
Haytor desired me to insert in Informations, and Swear to it, That the King
would have seized the City-Treasury by force of Arms; and that the Earl of
Feversham was the Person designed to command the Guards to effect the same: He
also told me, That if I would publish the same, it would be the only means that
he knew to Incense the Parliament against the King, so that they should not
consent to give His Majesty any Moneys until he had signed the Bill of
Exclusion against the Duke of York: I replied, I had no Order for the Printing
my Informations: Oh, (said he) let me alone for that, I will engage the Earl of
Shaftsbury to get you an Order as soon as he understands by me what great
consequence you have to discover: He the said Haytor further declaring, That
his Lordship had a great influence upon the House of Commons, who were ruled
much by his persuasions, and that nothing of Moneys would ever be granted by
them to the King, until the Duke of York was totally excluded from ever
inheriting the Imperial Crown of England: He further adding, That his Lordship
was the greatest Opposer that his Highness had in Parliament, and that his
Lordship never took any thing in hand (though of the greatest moment) but he
went through with it: He also told me, That had it not been for the Bishops,
the Bill had past the House of Lords against the Duke the last Parliament at
Westminster, saying, That he hoped to see the time again, that there should be
no such persons as Bishops in England; And that himself did not doubt but to
have as good an Employ as ever he had in a short time by the Earl of Shaftsbury
's means: And about that same time he had drawn up Papers of his own
Contrivance, and went to one Mr. Combs the Coffee-man, and in my hearing
desired him to get them published; but he refused so to do; I cannot say,
whether it was inserted in his Papers, that which he put me upon Swearing or
not; but Lewis has several times told me, That he had urged him to Print the
same in his Narrative about seizing the City-Treasury: Mr. Haytor several times
told me, That he was Scout-Mr.-General in Cromwell 's Army; and how in those
days persons of good Quality came Cap in hand to him; He has sent several
Letters to the Earl of Shaftsbury from the Marshelseas by one Mr. Hind and one
Mr. Beale both Messengers to the said Prison; the import of the said Letters I
knew not, but the said Persons can give a more perfect account thereof, who
promised me the same upon the 17th. day of December 1681. if they should be
called thereunto by Authority: And this Information against Mr. Haytor I gave
into the hands of one Mr. J -- an Attorney of the King's Bench at his Chamber in
Cliffords-Inn about the time of the said date.

All this Villainous contrivance of Haytor's was about the time of the Lord
Stafford's Trial, at which time I being Sick, Mr. Lewis came to see me, and
sitting upon my Bedside, told me, That I must own I knew Celier, else the City
would not look upon me when I came abroad: For (said he) they are for hanging
her out of the way, for several of them have been with me to know if you have
Sworn positively against her: I asked Mr. Lewis what made him so Fine? He told
me, I might be as Fine if I would do as he had done? What Is that, (said I)
Accuse one of the Lords in the Tower as you have? Yes (by God) for nothing
takes with the Parliament but such things; I am now Treated, and admired by all
Companies that I come into, Congratulating me with Thanks for my Service done
to the Protestants: I told him, I was glad to hear that; and that I my self
wanted nothing by the Blessing of God, and Mr. Loman's assistance, and others
belonging to the Prison, who supplied me with what I desired, or Moneys could
procure, without Imbrewing my hands in Blood, which I never had, nor would do;
at which he went away in a Huff: And about a Week or a Fortnight before
Christmas 1680. Mr. John Cooms, who bought Lewis's, and several other such
like Narratives, came to the Marshalseas, and Mr. Lewis with him, where he the
said Mr. Coombes engaged to Mr. Loman the Keeper for what I owed him; upon
which I had my Liberty: After that time I took Lodging in the City, where I
became acquainted with several Citizens at Mr. Coombs's, and the Amsterdam
Coffee-Houses; both of them I daily frequented, and several Persons asked me
whether I had any Allowance from the King, according to the Address made by the
House of Commons to His Majesty on my behalf: I replied, I had not received
any: they answered, It was very hard measure; further adding, That if the King
took no care of the Evidence, they knew no reason to the contrary, but that
They might, and thought themselves bound to do it, for those who had preserved
their Lives and Liberties from the Blood-thirsty Papists. And this, or to the
like effect was their common Discourse in all public places where I was
amongst them, for four or five Months together: And about the Parliament at
Oxford, Mr. Lewis told me, That he had occasioned another great Discovery; I
asked him what it related to? he said, I should know as soon as he had fully
accomplished it; also telling me, He wanted but one Witness to effect it, and
then he could Print a Narrative that should far exceed his first, which would
be great satisfaction to the Parliament, and what they had long expected to be
discovered: He also said, That had he an Order for the same, he would have it
in Print with all Expedition; further declaring to me, That if he should Print
it without an Order, (the Press being free) any person may Reprint the same,
which would be a great loss to him: And about a day or two after, I met with
one Mr. Edward Ivy in Moor-fields, who asked me, Where I had been all that time
he had not seen me? I replied, It was not so long since I saw him: Oh (said he)
but you lie still, and let Mr. Lewis find out all the great Discoveries: I
desired to know of him what new things were on foot now? At which, he told me,
That Mr. Lewis had brought his Brother in to Swear that he went with great sums
of Money to Sir William Scroggs (late Lord Chief Justice) from the Portugal
Ambassador: I said that was great Service indeed, if it were true; and sometime
after there was a Common Counsel called in the City, at which time some of the
Evidence had prepared a Petition to be preferred to the said Common Counsel, to
make their Condition known to them of their great wants of Moneys, or to that
effect, as Mr. Lewis told me; I replied, Do you think that they will supply us
with Money? Yes (said he) those that have signed the Petition will be supplied:
I asked him, why I was not one that signed it? Because (said he) you have not
made a large Discovery of the Popish Plot: And the same day that the
Common Counsel sat, I had Moneys before any of them; for Mr. Kidd at the
Amsterdam Coffee-House in Bartholomew-lane, the same day in Guild Hall, did
slide a Crown into my hand; and also the same day in the said Hall I asked
College the Protestant-Joyner, how he thought things would go? He replied,
Very well he did not doubt; further saying, That he had made several of the
Common Counsel of the Witnesses side in order to their Supply with Moneys;
further adding, If that will not take, we will find out some other way to
Supply you: But (said he) why do you not Swear positively that you know Mrs.
Celier? that she might be brought to a Trial, and then you shall not want
Moneys: All which he bid me consider of, And I should find it would be for my
good: I promised him I would, and so we parted. Soon after I came acquainted
with one Mr. Rowse belonging to Sir Thomas Player, who told me, That he had
undertaken to raise Moneys for the Supply of the Evidence until a Parliament
should be called: And upon the Tuesday in Whitson-week 1681. I being in the
Amsterdam Coffee-House, Mr. Rowse came to me, and desired me to go and Drink
Glass of Wine with Mr. Kidd and himself; and, to the best of my knowledge,
there was a person or two with them, who were altogether strangers to me; we
went to the Crown Tavern behind the Royal Exchange; where, after a little time,
Mr. Rowse gave me a Guiney, telling me withal, That that was the first, but
should not be the last that I should have from him, if he lived and did well:
And then they asked me many questions, viz. Whether I had Printed any Narrative
or not? I replied, I had not: They asked me the reason why? I told them, it was
for want of Money to get out the Copies of my Papers, that then lay in the
hands of Mr. John Coombs the Coffee-man in Bartholomew-lane; at which Rowse and
Mr. Kidd both replied, You shall not want Moneys nor Friends to assist you in
this Affair: Mr. Rowse also told me, That my best way would be to go to the
Earl of Shaftsbury, and desire his Lordships advice: They also desired to know,
If I had Accused the Duke of York or not? I told them I had; (though really I
had not) at which, they replied, It was pity that such a Discovery as mine
should lie hid, and not published for the satisfaction of all True Protestants:
Then Mr. Rowse pulled out his Pocketbook, and declared that he had gotten
above 30 eminent Citizens to Subscribe their Names to his said Book for the
Supply of the Evidence; and that some of them had subscribed to give 20
Guineys, and some 30. He further declared, He did not doubt but to have as many
more Hands before the Saturday night following; He again advising me, to go to
the Earl of Shaftsbury concerning getting my Papers out of the hands of Mr.
Coombs; and so for that time we parted. And soon after I went to the said
Earl's, to know how I should get the Copy of my Informations out of his hands?
His Lordship sent me out word, That I should go to Sir Thomas Player in his
Honors Name, who would direct me what to do in that matter: Which accordingly
I did, and coming to Sir Thomas's House, I sent him word up that I came from
the Earl of Shaftsbury to him about earnest business; upon which he immediately
sent for me up into his Chamber, where I told him my business: He ordered me to
go in his Name to Sir Robert Clayton, and desire his Warrant against Mr. Coombs
for detaining my Papers: Upon which I took leave of Sir Thomas, and went to Mr.
Coombs's House, and demanded them: who replied, He had lost them at Oxford, or
coming from thence, at the time of the Parliament there; upon which I told him
I had Orders from the Earl of Shaftsbury and Sir Thomas Player to take out Sir
Robert Clayton's Warrant against him: He answered me, He could not help it if
his Life lay at stake; telling me, He had searched his House from top to
bottom, and could not find them: So I desisted from enquiring further after
them; and some occasions of my own caused me to go and Lodge at Westminster
about the latter end of May 1681. where I continued for some weeks, and in
Trinity-Term following, being in Westminster Hall, I met Mr. Rowse, who came to
me, and told me, He had much wondered what was become of me so long: I told him,
that my occasions would not permit me to stay in the City: He replied, I hope
you are of the same Principle as when I saw you last: I answered, I was, and
ever would be: Come then (said he) we will go to the Dog-Tavern in the
New-Palace-yard, and drink a Glass of Wine; which we did: And there he desired
me, Not to take it ill that he had questioned my Fidelity; for (said he) it is
not out of any distrust I have of you in the least, but it is because you are
so near the Court, a place that will Debauch all persons that come near it,
especially those that are Evidences against the Papists: At which I told him,
he had no cause to think the least ill of me in that or any other respect
whatsoever; telling him, I had not spoken with any person belonging to the
Court since I came last to lodge at that end of the Town; at which he seemed
very well satisfied; and taking Moneys out of his Pocket, gave me Ten
Shillings, telling me withal, That Moneys was short with him at that time, else
he would have supplied me with more; but within a few days I should see him
again; so we parted at that time: And the same day that Plunket was Tried, I
met him again in Westminster Hall, and we went to the same Tavern, where he
Treated the Witnesses against Pluncket after the Trial was past; and returned
them many Thanks for the great service they had done that day to the Protestant
Party: and whilst we tarryed there, he sent for Mr. Rob. Squibb belonging to
His Majesty's Exchequer, who accordingly came, and they went both into a Room
together, but upon what business I know not; so after plenty of Wine, Evening
drawing nigh, we all parted: And about three or four days after, he came to the
same Tavern, and sent for me; I went, where I found strange Company with him,
to whom he recommended me, telling them, That I was a Friend of Theirs, and all
True Protestants, assuring them, that I had discovered a considerable part of a
Plot contrived by the Duke of York, and other great Papists: Upon which they
Thanked him for bringing me into their Company, and withal called for Sack
plentifully: They being upon going, Mr. Rowse gave me other Ten Shillings; and
told me, He would be with me very speedily: And in a few days after he did come
to an Alehouse where I frequented, and going out of the House to him, he
desired me to go with him to the Fountain-Tavern in the Old-Palace-yard, where
he gave me Twenty Shillings, telling me, That as soon as they had chosen
Sheriffs in the City, and that they found they were for their turns, then they
would settle good Allowances upon all the Evidence that stood by them; and that
it should be paid weekly until a Parliament sat: He also desired me, To come
into the City again to abide with them: I replied, I could not, by reason of
some Debts that I had Contracted there: He answered, Is that all? I told him it
was: Then he said, I should not tarry long at that end of the Town: Then Mr.
Rowse took down in Writing what Sums, where, and to whom I was Indebted,
telling me, That he would certainly pay the same in few days: And then he began
to tell me in what a dangerous condition the Protestant Party would have been
in, if the Parliament and the Evidences had not stood by them: For (said he) it
is plain to be seen that the King is a Papist in his heart by his vindicating
that Traitor (York) his Brother, who would certainly (if it were in his power)
bring us all under the yoke of Popery and Slavery: He further declared, That he
hoped to see his Highness the next Parliament, excluded banished, or both;
saying also, That he deserved to lose his Head as much as ever Stafford did:
Therefore (said he) accuse him thoroughly, and I will engage you will be made
for ever by it: I or (said he) you see Mr. Dangerfield lives in great Splendour,
keeps his Man to wait upon him, his Gelding to ride where he pleases, and has
also 100 Guineys to command at any time; besides, he is respected by the
greatest in the City, and people strive to be in his Company: At which I
replied, Mr. Rowse, you see my Condition, and were I supplie'd and assisted as
Mr. Dangerfield is, it might be that I could do the Protestant Party more
service then ever he has done: How! (said he) Yes said I, for I was Bred about
the Court, and have used it above this dozen years; and you must needs think;
that in all this time I saw a great man. Intrigues: Nay (said he) if it be so,
I must allow you to be capable of doing us great Service; and as for your
Supplies take no care, for before I am many days older, you shall be
sufficiently gratified; and withal took me into his Arms, and said, Leave all
to me; and told me, That they had a Common Counsel held in the City, and that
they had made an Act how it should be Engraven round the Monument in great
Letters, that the Papists Fired this City in the year of our Lord, 1666. At
which I replied, it was a very good Act, but withal told him, will you not be
displeased at a Jest? He replied, He would not; then said I. It will be a long
time before the Common Counsel will make an Act, that it shall be Engraven in
great Letters upon some public place in the City, That the late King was
Murdered by the Factious Party: Fie, Fie, (said he) those things are buried in
Oblivion; let us think of things that are to come, and what will be most
serviceable for us to defend our selves from Popery and Arbitrary Government,
which is certainly designed to be brought in amongst us, else the King would
have taken care of the Evidence that discovered the Popish Plot; But since He
does not, We must, for our own Preservations: These to the best of my
remembrance were the very words of our Discourse at that time, or to this
effect: And it being toward five in the Afternoon, be told me, He was to meet
some Eminent Citizens at six a Clock at the Amsterdam Coffee-House, concerning
raising Money to supply the Evidence; upon which he took his leave of me,
telling me, That I should see or hear from him very speedily: And the next News
I heard, he was Committed to the Tower for High Treason.

And some days after, which was about the latter end of June 1681. Mr. Ivy came
to my Lodging in the Old-Palace-yard, and in discourse, began to tell me of
Loyalty, And what a good thing it was to be true to the King; saying, He
believed it lay in my Power to do His Majesty a great deal of good service, if
I would discover what I knew: To which I replied, It may be I could do the King
Service if I were encouraged in it; said he, I do believe in my Conscience that
you know a great many Villainies and evil practices of Mr. Lewis: I answered, I
did, Then (said he) if you will go and declare the same before the Secretary of
State, or Committee of Council, I dare say notice will be of it; for I have
already discovered several evil practices that were acted in the City, as
raising Moneys for the supply of the Evidence, and endeavoring to Suborn them,
and other Treasonable passages which I would no longer conceal: At that, I
promised I would go and declare what I knew, and draw it up in writing; for
that time we parted: And about a day or two after, Mr. Lewis came to my Chamber
very much dissatisfied, telling me, He heard that I had given in an Information
against him: I replied, I had not, (though really at that time I had finished
two Sheets of Paper in order to discover his evil practices;) but hearing some
person coming up Stairs whilst I was writing, I hid the Papers under the Bed;
when he saw the Pen and Ink upon the Table, his great Guilt (as I imagine)
caused him to have a jealousy of me, and looking in several places of the Room
for Papers, yet could not find any, (Mr. Turbervile, to the best of my
remembrance was with him.) To all Mr. Lewis's discourse I made him little or no
answer, so they both went their way; toward evening he came again, and
declared, If I discovered what I knew of him, I should certainly be De-Witted;
but on the other side, if I would stand by him, and not discover what I knew
against him, he would put me in a way to make my self, telling me, that he had
sent a Letter to the King of great Moment, and that His Majesty imparted it to
no person but the Bishop of Canterbury, who (as he told me) had a Copy of the
said Letter: And several other persuasions he used to draw me off from
discovering what I knew against him; he also desired me to go over the Water
with him to Colonel Rich, which I did, and being there, he went and discoursed
the Colonel at his Door for a considerable time, in the mean while I walked in
the yard; the Colonel called me to him, and desired me, To tell him whether I
knew any thing to the contrary of what Mr. Lewis had Sworn against the Lord
Arrundel of Wardor was true: I told him, I knew nothing to the contrary,
because I was very well satisfied that the Colonel was Lewis's great Friend,
therefore I did not think it convenient to declare the truth of that matter at
that time, although Lewis pressed to have me Sworn we it: I leave the World to
Judge why Mr. Lewis should persuade me to go over, and desire Colonel Rich to
ask me the aforementioned questions, if Lewis had not been satisfied in his
Conscience that I knew it was all false, and a contrivance: Then we took leave
of him, and came over the Water, where he gave me a Shilling, and told me, He
would provide me a Lodging in the City; likewise he said, He thought it was not
safe for me (or at least himself,) to be at that end of the Town:
Notwithstanding, on Saturday following I went before a Committee of Lords at
the Secretaries House, and there declared the evil practices of Mr. Lewis,
further giving their Lordships an account, that he told me I should be
De-Witted, if I discovered what I knew of him, all this Discourse was in the
hearing of Mr. Ivy: And finding there was little notice taken of it, by the
persuasions of Mr. Lewis, I went into the City to Lodge with his Brother in
Fetter-lane, where he came immediately to me, and put me upon accusing the
Witnesses that had Sworn against the Earl of Shaftsbury; this being three or
four days after his Lordship was last Committed to the Tower, desiring me to
draw up my Information with all expedition against Mr. Ivy; and about the same
time brought one Captain Clynton to my Chamber, who he reported to be a great
Friend of the Earl of Shaftsbury's, and neither of them would leave me, till I
had done the same, which was composed in two Sheets; the same Evening we took
Coach, and went to the Recorders Chamber, Sir Robert Clayton being present,
where I was Sworn, and several of the Whigs being by to see the same for their
own satisfaction; and from thence we went to the Kings-Arms-Tavern; where they
called for Wine, and laid down 6 s. more than the Reckoning for my Supply,
telling me, I should be better Rewarded; that Evening Mr. Lewis declared to me,
They were all persons well affected to the Cause: Then I repaired to my
Chamber, where I had not long been, but Captain Clynton came, and desired me to
go to the Flower-de-luce in Fetter-lane, which I did, where he told me, That
there would be a Person come speedily to us, with 20 s. (for me) And being
there for some time, Captain Clynton wondered at his long stay, and admired at
it, that they should be so Timorous, Since I had done them such good service
that day, saying, He would go himself and see for the said Money; which he did,
and in a little time he returned to me, (not finding the person) but desired me
to Dine with him the next day at the same House, which I did; there he declared
to me, That he should envy my Happiness when a Parliament sat; he likewise told
me, That he would provide a Being for me at a Relations of his, where I should
be private until that time; and that he had a very good Horse in Town, which,
with his Person should be at the Earl of Shaftsbury 's Service, whilst he had
breath in his Body to oppose those whom his Lordship did, saying, it was
plainly to be seen, that the King and Court designed to cast the Odium of the
Popish Plot upon the Presbyterians etc. From thence we went to the
Castle-Tavern at the Corner of Fetter-lane, where he desired me, To appear at
o^e Old Bailey when the Bill was preferred against College the Joyner, and
there pretend my self to be an Evidence for the King, by which means I should
be Sworn; and when I came to be examined before the Grand Jury, I should
declare, that all the rest of the Witnesses Suborned me to Swear the same as
they did; that it was all False and Fictitious, by which means (said he) the
Jury will bring it in Ignoramus (which it is well known they did without my
assistance;) further saying, They expected a Bill to be preferred against the
Earl of Shaftsbury the same day, but there was not; further telling me, That
Mr. Whitaker the Solicitor sent him to me, and desired him to advise me to what
is before mentioned: The same day coming from the Old Bailey, I met Mr.
Dangerfield going out of the Kings-Head-Tavern at Temple Bar, to whom I
declared that the Bill against College was found Ignoramus; to which he
answered, I am very glad of it, for his sake, and all persons that have and
will oppose the Duke of York as he has done: The next day Mr. Lewis came to my
Chamber, and desired me; To write a Letter to Mr. Wilmore, and acquaint him of
my want of Moneys, and direct it to him at the Amsterdam-Coffee-House, telling
me, That since Mr. Rowse was committed to the Tower, Mr. Willmore had
undertaken to raise Moneys for the supply of those Evidence that stood by the
City: I did write, and within a day or two after, Mr. Lewis came with 10 s. he
had of Mr. Willmore for me, which I received at several times of Lewis: And
about the same time I told Mr. Lewis, I was informed that Mrs. Fitz-Harys had a
great inclination to retract her Evidence against the Lord Howard of Escrik; at
which he said, It will be good service to the Whigs, if she could be brought
over to the City, that then he would make it his business to effect the same:
And about a day or two after, he came again to me, That he was desired by
several Eminent Whigs to urge me to draw up my Information at large against Mr.
Ivy, and give it in to Sir Patience Ward, who was then Lord Mayor; and by his
persuasions I did draw up the Information, and the next day he came to my
Chamber to see if it was finished, but it was not; then he told me, That he had
as good as brought over Mrs. Fitz Harys from the Court to the City, for which
he had 10 l. paid him that Morning for retracting her Evidence against the Lord
Howard; withal showed me Handsuls of Silver: I desired half the Money, being
the first that told him of any such thing: he answered, He was forced to give
his Bond for it, because it should not be thought he received it upon the
account of Subornation; telling me, That the Whigs told him, that he should
never be called upon for that Money, and should also be supplied with 10 l. a
Month as long as they found him True and Serviceable to them: And when my
Information was finished against Mr. Ivy, he desired me to go with him to meet
a Gentleman at the Gray-hound-Tavern near Arundel-buildings in the Strand;
which I did, where there came to us one Mr. John Harrington, who afterward
appeared to be related to me by Marriage; Mr. Harrington desired me to meet him
at the Crown-Tavern behind the Royal Exchange, accordingly we did, but I being
there before Mr. Harrington, Mr. Lewis called for Pen, Ink and Paper, and drew
up an Information against Mr. Ivy; Mr. Harrington came in, and desired us to go
before Sir Patience Ward, and be Sworn, but I am not positive whether it was
that day or not; but soon after Mr. Harrington and one Mr. Fuller went with us,
where we found Sheriff Bethel and Sheriff Cornish: And after I was Sworn,
Sheriff Bethel came to me, and gave me Thanks for the good service I had done
the Protestants at that time: Within a day or two after I met with Captain
Clynton in Fetter-lane, he desired me to go to the Golden-Lyon-Tavern; there he
told me, That should be the last time I should drink with him: I asked to know
the reason of it, he said, He must be forced to leave the Town, declaring, That
he feared Mr. Dugdale had, or would Swear against him: I desired his reason why
he thought so; says he, Because Mr. Dugdale kept correspondence with Justice
Warcup, who will encourage persons to Swear any thing against them that would
appear for the Protestants, and especially Me, for vindicating the Innocence of
the Earl of Shaftsbury, as I have, and will ever do with my Life and Fortune:
At the same time Captain Clynton drank the Earl's health to me in a Glass of
Wine, telling me, What a respect he had me, and what a happy man I should be
when the Parliament sat, until which time he hoped care would be taken for me;
and then we parted, and I never saw him before he was brought before the King
and Council, which was above a year afterward; where I appeared, and again
declared the Truth of what is above mentioned: And about this time Mr. Lewis
and Mr. Harrington were like to fall out which of them was the chiefest
Instrument in bringing over Mrs. Fitz-Harys to the City: In few days after I
met Mr. Harrington at the Amsterdam-Coffee-House, he asked me, If I never was
persuaded to Swear against the Earl of Shaftsbury? I replied, I was, and that
the Paper that was drawn up against his Lordship, was most damnable and
Seditious, besides False and Fictitious, and that the Original was in the
custody of the Clerk of the House of Commons; says he, It will be good service
to Print it at that time; further adding, It would Incense the People extremely
against the Court Proceedings: I told him, if I had Money I would go and drink
a Glass of Wine with Mr. Golds borough, and endeavor to get a Copy of that
Paper, for which and he gave me a Crown; I went to Mr. Goldsborough at the
Popes-Head-Tavern in Chancery Lane, there I desired the Copy; he told me, He
could not part with any without an Order from the King and Council, or words to
that effect; upon which I desisted. And sometime before I went to Oxford to
Colleges Trial, Mr. Everard came to me in the Amsterdam-Coffee House, and told
me, If I would give my Bond for Money, I should be supplied, but never called
upon to repay the same; saying, The Bond was only that the World should not
take notice, or think it Subornation: I said, I would give my Bond for Money,
declaring that I wanted Clothes; upon which, he said, He would engage to the
Tailor for a Suit for me, which he did; at the same time Mr. Everard desired me
to do Justice Warcup's business for him when an Indictment should be brought
against him, which he said would be next Sessions; I promised him I would; then
said he, You shall neither want Money nor Friends from the City, for the
business is left in part to my management, for the raising of Money for the
encouragement of the Evidence that stand with us: And upon the 4th. of. August
Mr. Harrinton met me in Fetter-lane, and delivered me this following Subpaena.

Mr. John Zeal,
YOu are by virtue of His Majesty's Writ of Subpaena, personally to appear
before His Majesty's Justices of Jail-delivery for the County of Oxford, at the
City of Oxford, upon Wednesday the 17th. day of August, about 8 of the Clock in
the Morning, to testify the Truth between our Sovereign Lord the King and
Stephen College, who is Indicted of certain High Treasons in the said County
of Oxford: Of this you are not to fail upon pain of 100 l.

Dated the 22d. of June 1681. On the part of Stephen College, by the Court.

Sir,
COme to the Cross-Keyes-Tavern in Holbourn on Monday next, by Eight of the
Clock in the Morning.

According to which I appeared, and found several persons Subpaena'd upon the
same account, and amongst the rest I met with Mr. Everad and Mr. Harrington, to
whom I declared, that notwithstanding I appeared, I would not go in the Garb I
was in; at which they replied, It would be much better for me to stay till I
came back, and then I should be furnished with all things, saying, That if I
should go to Oxford in New Clothes, it would be thought by the Kings Party, I
had them upon the account of Subornation from the City: Notwithstanding their
persuasions, I was fully resolved not to go without New Clothes; upon which Mr.
Everard seeing my resolution so fixed; Bid me go to the Tailor, and let him
bring them with all expedition imaginable to the said Tavern; which was done,
and Mr. Everard engaged to pay for them; the same time I told Mr. Lewis I
wanted Linen, upon which he went into another Room, and presently came out
again, and told me, He had got 30 s. of one Mr. Harris a Quaker; the same
Harris ( Lewis told me) supplied him with the 20 l. for bringing over Mrs.
Fitz-Harys in to the City: From thence we took Coach for Oxford, where being
come, Mr. Everard came to me the night before the Trial, and desired me to
Accuse all the Witnesses that appeared against College of Subornation; further
saying, That if we could clear him, our business would be as good as
accomplished against the Court Party; and when a Parliament sits, (said he) no
doubt but all of us shall have good Rewards: And that day at the Trial, I was
examined in the Court, to which I refer my self to Colleges Trial; and coming
out of the Court, in the Hall, Doctor Oats and Hethrington came to me, And
asked me how it went? I told them I thought it would go very hard with the
Prisoner if no body confronted Mr. Turbervile's Evidence; at which they asked,
Why I had not done it? I replied, would you have me Accuse a Person who I know
no ill of? Yes (said Doctor Oats) where a man's Life is concerned: I replied,
if it be your principle, it is not mine; Therefore you may do it when you are
called in; he told me so he would to some purpose, without my advise; and after
we came to London, I met Mr. Everard at John's Coffee house in Bartholomew lane,
where he told me, that Provision was making for Diet and Lodging for those
Witnesses that stood by the City; further telling me, that he would take
particular care for my accommodation; But said he, you must be sure to accuse
Justice Warcup of Subbornation of Perjury, and the rest of the Witnesses that
appeared on behalf of the King against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and those of the
City, when they shall be Indicted, which (as he said) would be the next
Sessions; And then you shall have Money to pay all your Debts: I asked Mr.
Everard, who was at the Charge of the seven or eight Coaches full of Witnesses,
besides Horsemen that went to Oxford in behalf of College? He answered, those
that were at the charge would not see me want, if I would accuse the
Court-Party. But about the time of Colleges, Trial, Mr. Lewis's Brother
Lodging with me, Ms. Lewis came one morning about four a clock, and called his
Brother out; upon which I mistrusted there was some new Intreigue on foot,
neither could I be satisfied till I knew something of it; within a night or two
after I came in late, finding Lewis's Brother in Bed, and in Drink, being fast
a sleep, I trespassed so far, as to search his Pockets, where I found a Paper
written by William Lewis's own hand, (as I do verily believe) which was a
Recantation of his Brother Daniel Lewis for his swearing against Sir William
Scroggs, which was to this effect as near as I can remember, viz That the said
Daniel Lewis never knew directly, or indirectly, of any Sum, or Sums of Money
that was ever carried from the Portugal Ambassador, to Sir William Scroggs, or
of any thing in that nature, but that it was all false and fictitious, and that
his Brother and College the Joynor forced him to swear the same before the
Recorder, they snatching the Paper out of his hands, and would not let him see
what he swore to: The said Daniel Lewis has several times Cursed his Brother
both in Bed with me, and elsewhere; telling me, his Brother had brought him out
of a good Service, to Swear, and now will not allow him Money to spend,
declaring to me, that he had a great mind to discover all that he knew against
his Brother, saying that Sir John Moreton (whom his Brother Served) had
endeavored to take away his Brothers life for Robbing him to a considerable
value; further adding, that the said Sir John did Imprison his Brother, and had
him from London into the Country, but could not prove it against him, because
he had Robbed him so dexterously. About a fortnight after I came from Oxford, I
went to Mr. Harrington's Chamber in Blackfriars, where he desired me to draw
up an Information to this effect: That Mr. Fitzgerald some months since would
have persuaded me to endeavor to bring over Mr. Smith, Mr. Dangerfield, Mr.
Dugdale, Mr. Haynes, etc. from the City to the Court, and by that (says he) it
will be all proved fictitious, and a Court countenance; I promised I would draw
it up; which accordingly I did, and within a day or two I went to his Chamber,
and showed him the said Paper, (there being a Barber, or some such like person
in the Room) he read it privately to himself once or twice over, and (smilling)
told me he liked it very well, and said that it would do the business when a
Parliament sat; he desired me to be Sworn privately to the same; And the
Sessions following Mr. Harrington sent me a Note, desiring me to appear at
Hicks's-Hall against the Witnesses for the King, who would all be Indicted upon
Subbornation of Perjury, as he informed me; accordingly I appeared, and that
day Mr. Baldron was taken by a Constable, and carried into Court, from thence
committed to New-Prison, Baldron desired me to go to the Earl of Shaftsbury,
and acquaint them how it was with him, and desired them to procure him Bail for
his Enlargement; I accordingly at his request went, where I found Mr. Everard,
Mr. Harrington, and several others at Dinner in Mr. Stringers Chamber: I
acquainted them of the matter, which struck them into a great dump;
notwithstanding, they told me, that Bail should be had immediately after
Dinner; so I took my leave, and going down Stairs, Mr. Harrington came after
me, and desired me not to declare to any person living where I had been, or who
I saw together; and the next day (according to appointment) we all met at the
Castle-Tavern without Newgate, and being at Dinner, News was brought us that
Mr. Baldrone was carried before the King and Council, and had discovered the
Intregues in the City; at which they were all at a stand; so Mr. Everard
desired us to go to the Old Bailey, and swear to the Indictments which were
drawn up against Justice Warcup, and several of the Witnesses for the King;
which accordingly we did, Sherift Bethel conducting us into Court, where one
Mr. Whitton Councellor Smiths Clerk preferred the Indictments, desiring the
Witnesses might be Sworn, but the Court rejected it; upon which the said Mr.
Witton, and one Mr. Sangar, who belonged to the Earl of Shaftsbury, desired us
all to go out of the Court; upon which we did, and went to the Dog-Tavern
within Sudgate, where I asked Mr. Witton why he desired us to come away so
suddenly? he replied, he saw some of the Kings Messengers in Court, and he
feared that there might be Warrants against some of us; further declaring, that
if we should desert them, their business would be at a great loss, desiring us
that appeared for Witnesses, to take other Sodgings that night for fear of
being surprised; so then Mr. Langar gave us Crowns a piece to lodge where we
would, and also gave us Notes to meet at the Queens-Arms Tavern in Newgate
street the next morning; which accordingly we did, there the said Mr. Whitton
desired me to accuse Justice Warcup of Subornation of Perjury, so that a Bill
might be preferred against him at the Old Baily; but that was not effected that
day; Mr. Everard told me that evening, that money would be very sppeedily
produced for my supply, therefore desired me not to be dismayed, but have a
little Patience; and within a day or two after, I met Sheriff Bethel coming out
of the Amsterdam Coffee-house, who asked me, what News there was stirring? I
told him all that I knew, was, that all those that stood by the City, were so
much slighted, that they had not wherewithal to subsist; he replied, that it
should be otherwise very speedily, saying, that if I would print my Information
given into the Lord Mayor, and other Papers that I could produce, I should not
want Money: Besides (says he) it will be good service to the Cause now in
hand: I answered him, Sir, I know not who will stand by me; he said, We will
all stand by you, and I my self will assist you to the utmost of my Power and
Ability, telling me, That he himself was in danger of being Sworn against; He
also desired me, To Accuse the Lords of the Council that I was examined before:
I asked him what I should Accuse them of? he said, Of suborning you to Swear
against the Protestants? I told him, that I had cleared their Honors in my
Information against Mr. Ivy; he said, that was no matter, further saying, That
the Information lay in their own hands, and that they would insert what was
most to their own advantage, if I would consent thereto; he like wise said,
That there was no worse men in the Nation to the Protestants, then most of His
Majesty's Privy-Councel; further adding, That they were very odious in the eyes
of a Parliament, and when one met; they would find it so: I told him, that I
had revealed my self to a Member of Parliament a week before the Earl of
Shaftsbury was Committed to the Tower: Sheriff Bethel desired of me to know who
it was? I told him, that it was Justice Rich; How (said he) you could not have
revealed your self to a worse man; I desired to know the reason; he replied,
That he was a great enemy to all persons that opposed the Duke of York's
Interest: I told him, I was very sorry for that; he replied, It was very true;
Therefore (said he) I must desire you and Mr. Lewis to appear against him at
the next Election of Southwark; and incense the People against him, so that he
may no more be chosen to serve in Parliament, and I will stand by you upon all
occasions: About the same time I met with Mr. Dangerfield at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-House, who told me, That it was now come to pass, what he
himself was put upon; I desired to know what it was? He told me, That the King
Himself offered him almost two years before what Money or Preferment he would
desire, if he would Swear to a Presbyterian Plot, and stand by it; I replied,
is it not enough for you to Accuse the Duke, but you must Accuse the King
likewise; at which he answered (Damn me) I have my Pardon, and I will declare
nothing but what a Parliament shall like, for it is them that will stand by the
Evidence, and not the Court; you may plainly see it: And in Bartholomew-fair
time, one Mr. Shown, Mr. Lewis, and my self went to the Castle-Tavern in
Fleet Street, where Shown treated us, and there declared, That he had been a
considerable time in private with a Secretary of State; we asked upon what
account he was there; he said, For nothing as he knew, but that Sheriff Bethel
had often desired him to swear that a Secretary of State would have persuaded
him to Swear against the Protestants in the City; and about the same time one
Mr. Lune told me, That he was hired by Mr. Hoskins, that belonged to the Earl
of Shaftsbury to go down to Oxford, to make provision for the Witnesses that
appeared for the City: And Mr. Lune has also supplied me with Money; and
several other such like practices were continually used in the City during my
correspondency with them, in so much, that I was resolved not to conceal those
evil practices any longer, but discover them in the Right of the King: And one
day in my Chamber, being then drawing up an Information of what I knew, Mr.
Lewis came in, and desired to know what I was writing; I told him, nothing but
the Intrigue of the City; Why (said he) do you intend to discover them? I told
him yes, (if I lived;) he replied, If you be so resolved that you will do it,
make an end of them, and let me carry them to Colonel Rich: I told him I
intended he should be the person I would be Sworn before; but through Mr.
Lewis's great persuasions, I did entrust him with my Papers, with this
reservation, that he should not impart them to any of the City; upon which he
wished eternal damnation both to his Body and Soul if he did so; he went away,
and in a short time after he came again to me with my Papers; he said, he had
showed them to Colonel Rich, who asked him if I would Swear to them; I
replied, I could; and upon that we went over the Water to a Coffee-house near
St. Mary-overs-Church, where I writ a letter to Justice Reading; declaring to
him, that I had matter of moment to discover in the behalf of the King; to
which he sent me word by Mr. Lewis, If I had any such thing to discover, I
might come to him at the Bear-Tavern at the Bridge-foot, where he then was; I
went and delivered him my Information, and after he had perused them, he asked,
If I could make Oath of it all? I said, I could; then he administered the Oath
before Colonel Rich and Justice Daniel; after I had Sworn, I took leave, this
was about Michaelmas 1681. from thence I went into the City, and being at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-house, I met an Ancient Citizen, whose Name I knew not, he
gave me half a Crown, and told me, That had not the Witnesses deserted the
City; and gone to the Court, and discovered against them, there had been at
least 10000 l. collected for the Supply of the Evidence until a Parliamen sit;
But now (said he) we cannot find out a safe way to supply you that are true to
us: And about that time, I being late in Fleet Street drinking in a House near
Temple Bar, we heard Murder cried out; upon which I went out, endeavoring to
keep the Peace, the Watch and Constable coming in, the Constable being
perverse, sent me to the Compter for one of the Rioters; the next Morning
Sherift Bethel came, and sent for me down into the Lodge; where, (after some
Discourse,) he ordered the Keeper that I should be carried before the Lord
Mayor, telling them, That his Lordship knew me very well, and would Discharge
me; The Constable came, and we went before Sir John Fredrick, who took my own
Recognizance for my Appearance; after that I went to the
Amsterdam-Coffee-House, and desired Mr. Kidd to pay the Fees of the Compter,
which he did; and from that time I very little used the City: About Christmas
following Mr. Lewis desired me to report, That I had been with the King
privately in his Closet, the Earls of Arlington and Ailsbury being present: I
asked him why he would have me report so false a thing? Pish, (said he) you
have not a grain of Sense, for when a Parliament sits, you will have a good
occasion to Swear that the King and these Lords would have Suborned you to have
Sworn against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and several others in the City: He
further desired me, To declare the same to none but Whigs, and they would come
in and corroborate my Evidence. And about May 1682. I was in Mr. Swith's
Company, who asked me, When I saw Mr. Lewis? I told him, not of several days,
saying, that he was a man that busied himself in State Affairs; at which Mr.
John Smith replied, He believed more then was just: I answered, he would have
just cause to think so, if he knew as much as I; at which he told me, He
believed it lay in my power to do the King a great deal of service, to discover
his Villainies: I said, I had offered the same almost a year since, but little
notice was taken of it; but notwithstanding that, I would do it at any time:
Lewis has often told me, That the Queen allowed David Firz-Gerald forty
Shillings a week; further saying, That her Majesty would allow any person else
as much, as would come in and Accuse the Earl of Shaftsbury, and those in the
City: And about the same time Lewis desired me to report, That I had Kissed the
Duke of York's Hand when he came from Scotland, and when a Parliament sits,
(said he) you shall swear that his Highness offered you Money to Accuse the
Earl of Shaftsbury and the City; telling me, That the Duke was the only man
that they aimed at, and that I should be made by Accusing him. And about
Whitsontide last, I had a Letter came from Lewis, to desire me to come to him;
which I did, and found him Sick in Bed; he desired me, To go over to Colonel
Rich, and tell him his Condition, and that he wanted Money: On Whitsunday I
dined with Colonel Rich, and acquainted him with what Mr. Lewis had desired
me; the Colonel told me, He was very sorry to hear he was ill, desired to be
remembered to him, and so took leave: I went to Mr. Lewis, and told him what
Colonel Rich said; Is that all, (said Lewis) I replied, it was that-signified
any thing; says he, Is his great kindness come to this? Notwithstanding he told
me at his own House in these words, viz. Mr. Lewis you and I will stand and
fall by one another; but indeed ( said Mr. Lewis) I must confess, that Mr.
Turbervile told me before his death, that Sheriff Rich declared to him, he
liked me very well, but for one thing, which was, I was too Mercinary: At which
I then replied, You know that is true enough, you will sell the dearest Friend
you have for Money: He answered, (Damn me) how can a man live without it? I
urther (says he) Sheriff Rich was like the World, when his own turn was
served, he that had done him a kindness might hang himself: Says Mr. Lewis:
It Is pity that by my means that the Colonel was so much in favor at Court:
And sometimes after I met Mr. Lewis, who told me, He had sent a Porter with a
Note to Colonel Rich for five Pounds, and that he could have at any time
Forty or Fifty; which 5 l. he immediately sent him: And in July 1682. I was
taken Sick at my Lodgings in Salisbury-street in the Straind, where Mr. Lewis
often came to me, and desired to know of me, If Mr. John Smith had not been
Tampering with me to Accuse him; I asked him, if he thought all the World was
like himself, or what reason he had to suspect any such thing? He told me the
reason he had to believe it, was, Because of our Intimacy, and being often
together; Therefore I am sure he has been at you, which if you will draw up an
Information against him, I will get you Money from the Secretary of State: I
asked him what I should draw up? He told me, That I should Accuse Mr. Smith for
endeavoring to stifle the Popish-Plot; and desiring me to Swear against him; I
promised I would, not valuing what I drew up at his request, acknowing him to
be so notorious a Swearer and Suborner; I drew up the said Paper which he was
very well pleased at, only the words ( detect the Popish Plot;) but he would
have had me insert, That Mr. Smith endeavored to Nullify the Popish Plot; but
I did not after the words: Then he desired me to write a Letter to Mr.
Otterbury one of the Kings Messengers, and acquaint him with my Condition how I
wanted Money, and desired him to make it known to the Secretary of State; Then
(said Mr. Lewis) I Will warrant you Money; (at that same time he often brought
with him to my Chamber Mr. Perrea: I sent the said Letter according to his
ordering, but never received any answer or supply, neither did Mr. Smith ever
in the least propound any immodest thing, but always desired me to declare
nothing but what was true of any side: I could never be quiet at any Lodging,
for Mr. Lewis still haunted me, being jealous of me, as I imagine: About this
same time Mr. Lewis desired me, When I received my Allowence from Whitehall, to
pray Mr. Squibb to give me a Bill to receive it of Mr. Duncomb Goldsmith in
Lumber-street: I asked him why he proposed that? He told me, If I would consent
to it, he would carry the Bill over to the Kings Bench to one Mr. Granger, who
was the Ingeniousest man in England, and he shall Counterfeit Mr. Squibb's hand
for 500 l. to be received of Mr. Duncomb, and we should share it amongst us; he
said, that it should be done so cleavor that it should never be found out by
whom it was; and that I might receive my own Money at the same time, and not
take the least notice of it: About that time I did receive a Bill from Mr.
Squibb of 10 l. upon Mr. Duncomb, which Money I received unknown to Mr. Lewis,
for I would not have been concerned with him in such a thing for the World:
Soon after our Allowances were stopped, at which Mr. Lewis grumbled, and said,
That the King made use of the Witnesses as a man does of a House of Ease, just
for his Convenience: Further (says he) they thought their business done at
Court, but they are mistaken; for I will be a greater plague to them then ever
my Countryman Bedloe was, when a Parliament sits; but I will have my Pardon
in my hands first, and will procure one for you too: I asked him in what, he
answered me, That We Witnesses that had not Sworn against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, should Accuse all them that had, (...) ^^ornation of Perjury when a
Parliament sits; and (...) we shall confound their whole project; for Dugdale
has (...) us; and we will also make out, that the pretended Association that
was found in the Earl of Shaftsbury's Closet, was contrived by the King and
Court, and conveyed into the Earl's Closet by one or other of the Clerks of the
Council, by the King and Courts order. That Lewis used to make his Brags to me,
That all he had discovered against the City party to Sheriff Rich and others;
was only under his hand, and not Sworn to, saying, That when a Parliament sat
he would discover it all, and charge it upon the Court party. I asked him how
we should go about to make it out? he replied, Let me alone for that. I Will
contrive it to the purpose: Soon after I took Lodgings in the White-Friers,
where Mr. Lewis came to me, and Mr. Ferrea with him, where he told me, He was
to receive 50 l. and out of that he would supply me with 5 or 10 l. of it: And
within few days after he came, and told me. That our Allowances from the King
were quite taken off; and he Swore, That now it is apparent the King is a
Papist in his heart, and end avoured to stifle the Popish Plot, by discharging
the Witnesses; and that the King endeavored to take the Odium from the
Papists, and cast it upon the Presbyterians: He also declared, That the King
daily endeavored to enslave the Nation with Popery and Arbitrary Government,
and put Sheriffs and other Officers upon the City of London, contrary to Law,
to serve his turn, and accomplish his designs against the Presbyterians. At
which I replied, you take large measures of talking Treason; said he, We that
are Evidences have advantages above all other People, for we may speak Treason,
and not fear being called to question by the Court for it; for if they should
take any of our Lives away, the Parliament would censure, that they did it on
purpose to stifle our Evidence concerning the Popish Plot: But (said he) I am
sorry for Sheriff Rich, that he should be made use of as a Tool to accomplish
their ends: Further saying, That Sheriff Rich had been a good Benefactor to
him; but he feared he would be swing'd when a Parliament sat: For in a former
Kings reign there were several Judges Executed, and he hoped to live to see as
many Nobility and Judges go to Pot when ever a Parliament sat; and, That his
helping hand should not be wanting therein. Such like Treasonable words were
the general discourse he used in my Company, but I cannot say that ever any
other person heard him talk so largely; neither do I know directly or
indirectly what any other persons have Sworn against him. About the latter end
of September he told me in Salisbury-Court, That Ludlow would vindicate their
Charter as London did, notwithstanding the Marquess of Worcester had so great
an Interest in that Town, yet he could not prevail with them to surrender their
Charter to His Majesty. Also Lewis told me, That not one in an hundred had
signed the Addresses that were presented to the King from most parts of the
Kingdom; further saying, That the King could stand it but one Parliament more,
and had it not been for the few Guards he had about him, he had been pulled out
of Whitehall long since; saying, That the late King was Dethroned by the Sword,
and This is in a fair way of being Sworn out his Throne: Therefore if you will
Print your Information that is in the hands of Sir Patience Ward, and that
which is in the hands of Mr. Kelley, I will engage to get you the Copies, and
also Guineys for the Printing them, for they will incense the People extremely
against the Court; Therefore we will get them ready and published before Queen
Elizabeth's Birthday, at which time the Pope is to be burnt, and there will be
at least 40000 People together that night, and I will incense them what I can
to breed a Mutiny; for he that is not blind may plainly see that the King is a
Papist, or else he would not stand so for the Duke of York aas he has done, who
is notoriously known to the Nation to be a grand Papist; And if the people did
but rise in the City, the Country would soon come in for their assistance.
Further saying, Damn me, I am but one; get the better who can, we shall get
employs by it. Mr. Lewis was very importunate with me to go into the West of
England, (where I was born and brought up) on purpose to incense the factious
sort of people against the King's proceedings, and stir them up to a Rebellion;
telling me, That he would go into Wales, and do the like there, and also supply
me with moneys for my journey, in order to the same; But I refused to meddle in
any such matter. Moreover, Mr. Lewis has diverse times told me, That if ever
the Court should take away his life by Law, he would kill more at his death
than ever he could living: I asked him why he should fear his life being taken
away, unless he had deserved it? Oh (said he) there is stout swearing on all
sides: I replied, You know that by experience; at which he said, It was as
impossible for a man to swear any thing that did not please the Parliament, as
it was to row a Boat through London Bridge against Tide, though a man discovered
nothing but the real Truth; and again, on the other side, if the greatest Rogue
in England should come in, and discover any thing against the Papists, though
it be never so false, he shall be believed, and accounted an honest man: You
may see it by Mr. Turbervile; when he accused the Lord Stafford, he was
accounted a Demy-God in the City, but when he came to accuse the Earl of
Shaftsbury, they bespattered him in a most odious manner. He has also told me,
That if his Perjury should be found out, he knew the worst of it, which was but
suffering what he had done before, (viz.) stand in the Pillory. Many other
Treasonable Practices I have known by Lewis, but they are too long here to
insert.

About the beginning of October last, I was sent for to the Greyhound-Tavern in
Fleet Street, where a Constable told me, He had a Warrant against me, which I
willingly obeyed, (there being Mr. Smith, and several in the Company, that said
Mr. Lewis was at the same time committed close Prisoner in the Gate House;) I
declared it was nothing but what he deserved; And that I my self deserved
Imprisonment for concealing his Treasonable Practices; yet notwithstanding, I
told them, that if they had but sent a Porter or Note, I would have come and
declared what I knew against him: That night I was committed to
Wood-street-Compter, where I told the Keepers, that I was committed for
concealing the Villainies of an ill man, and desired them, if Sheriff Rich came
there in the morning, that they would call me down to him; and he accordingly
coming, sent for me into the Lodge, asking me what I was committed for? I told
him for no offense of my own that I knew of, but for concealing Mr. Lewis's
evil Practices, which I will now no longer do. The Sheriff asked me if he were
an evil man, or no; and whether that which he swore against the Lord Arrundel
of Warder was true, or false? I told him it was all false, and that I would
make it out so plain, that the whole World should be satisfied; Upon which,
Sheriff Rich departed, and presently after I was carried before Sir William
Turner, who ordered me to be carried before Major Parry at Hicks's-Hall, which
was done, where the Major desired me, that if I knew any ill of Mr. Lewis, I
would discover it, or give it him in writing; which accordingly I did;
Notwithstanding which, I was committed by the said Major Parry to New-Prison,
where I remained almost ten weeks, and at last was discharged by Law. During my
Confinement there, Mr. Lewis's Welsh Wife came to me, and told me that her
Husband was informed I had sworn against him; I declared I had not: Then she
replied, He did not fear what any person could do unto him, provided I stood
his Friend; telling me, that he owned to her that his life lay in my hands; and
if I could get my self bailed out, he would raise money for me to pay my Fees,
and carry me over to Holland to the Club, (whither he advised me to go;) she
also declared, that he would get me Letters of Recommendation to some persons
in Holland, by whom I should be very well received; and that he also hoped he
should be with me in a short time. She also said, that she had several times
told him as she met him in the streets, that his Plotting and Contriving would
bring him to the Gallows. Two or three times she came, and finding nothing
would work upon me, left off coming. During my Confinement, Balron's Wife (in
the hearing of one Mrs. Thomas) came to me, and told me, Mr. Zeal, you need
not tarry here a day longer; if you will but draw up an Information against the
Earl of Shaftsbury, you will be soon fetched out in a Coach, and be supplied
with moneys. And Balron himself told me, That he would prove when a Parliament
sat, that the Lords in the Tower sent Instructions and Dictates, how and what
the Witnesses should swear against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and others in the
City. All which Balron said he would swear, and also produce a Letter
from-under one of the Lords hands to that effect: I asked him why he would
swear it? he answered, it would be a means for him to gain the favor of a
Parliament, since he was dismissed at Court. This he told me a little before I
was committed to New-Prison.

After my enlargement I met with Major Parrey's Clark, (the day before
Christmas Day last) who told me, that his Master desired me to go to Sheriff
Rich, and give him a true account of Lewis's Villainies; and that his Master
had received a Letter from the said Sheriff in behalf of Lewis. The same day I
went; but not finding the Sheriff at his House, I was directed to
Fishmongers-hall, where I found him; He very courteously received me, (being
glad to see me at liberty) and desired me to stay and dine with him, which I
did; and at the Table I told him I came by the request of Major Parrey, to give
him an account of the ill practices and contrivances of Mr. Lewis, (there being
one Mr, Styles (as I think) at Table, who replied, he always took him to be a
very ill man.) After some other discourse about him, I took leave. But I had
almost forgot one passage, that Sheriff Rich asked me if Mr. Lewis had served
Sir John Moreton faithfully? I told him I was informed by his Brother, that he
had Robbed Sir John of a considerable value, for which he endeavored to hang
him; at which Sheriff Rich said, That he did ask Sir John Moreton how Lewis
behaved himself in his Service? (this was asked in the House of Commons the
same day Mr. Lewis gave in his Information;) to which Sir John replied (as the
Sheriff told me) That he served him Faithfully: At which I replied, Mr. Lewis
had declared as much to me, that he saw Sir John in the House, and that he
heard him not speak one word of him: For (said he) Sir John is a great
Shaftsburian, and if I discovered any thing that had been contrary to his
Opinion, he would have bespattered me in a most odious manner: And at several
times I have been treated at Sheriff Rich's House, and have had Moneys from him
but not upon any unjust account, neither do I know the least ill by him, and he
has always advised me to have a care of Suborners.

And some time after, I understood that Mr. Lewis would be Indicted the Term
following; upon which I made the best preparation I could, in order to receive
the Blessed Sacrament, as may appear by my Certificate as follows, viz.

WE the Minister and Church wardens of the Parish and Parish Church of St.
Margarets in Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, do hereby Certify, that
John Zeal concerned in several weighty Affairs relating to His Majesty, upon
the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, the 14th. day of February, immediately
after Divine Service and Sermon, did, in the Parish Church aforesaid, receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper according to the usage of the Church of
England. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Hands the 4th. day
of February, in the year of our Lord, 1682/3.

Bartholomew Wormell Minister of the Parish and Parish Church aforesaid. Giles
Burrows Churchwarden of the said Parish and Parish Church.


ALexander Harris Gent. and John Harris Victualler, both of Westminster, do
severally make Oath, that they do know John Zeal in the above-written
Certificate named, and who now present has delivered the same into this Court;
and do further severally make Oath, that they did see the said John Zeal
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the Parish Church of St. Margaret
Westminster aforesaid, in the Certificate mentioned, and upon the day, and at
the time in the said Certificate in that behalf certified and expressed: And
that they did see the Certificate above-written Subscribed by the said Minister
and Churchwardens.

Alexander Harris. John Harris.


And upon the same day I received a Subpaena to appear the day following, which
is as follows, viz.

Mr. John Zeal,
BY virtue of His Majesty's Writ of Subpaena to you directed, you are to appear
before our Sovereign Lord the King at Westminster on Monday next after the
eight days of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, to testify the
Truth, and give Evidence against William Lewis, for certain Trespasses,
Contempts and Misdemeanors: And this you must not omit under the Penalty of 100
l. to be levied on your Goods and Chattels, if you make default.

Dated at Westminster the 4th. day of February 1682/3.
According to which I did appear, and being Sworn in Court, I gave in my
Evidence to the Grand Jury, where the Bill was found, and soon after I received
another Subpaena, which is as follows, viz.

THese are in His Majesty's Name to command you personally to appear before Sir
Edmund Saunders Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, on Tuesday the 13th. of this instant February, at 8
of the Clock in the Forenoon, at Westminster Hall, to testify the Truth on the
behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, against William Lewis, for certain great
misdemeanors whereof he stands Indicted; and hereof you are not to fail, on the
Penalty of 100 l.

Dated the 8th. day of February, in the 35th. of the King, etc. Astrey:

I also appeared to this, but Mr. Lewis deferred his his Trial till next term
following; and upon the 6th of March 1682/3. I was at the Naked-Boy in the
Old-Pallace-yard Westminster, in Company with Mr. Ambrose Kelley, one of the
Clerks of the House of Commons, who told me, That Mr. Lewis was with him, to
desire the Copy of a Paper that was in his Custody, which said Paper was that
which Mr. Lewis chiefly contrived himself, and would have had me to have Sworn
to it against the Earl of Shaftsbury; and it was also the same Paper that was
contrived by him in the Marshalseas; Mr. Kelley further says, that Mr. Lewis
told him, That he came from me, and also offered him a good Gratuity for the
said Copy; further telling the said Mr. Kelly, That it would be a means for him
to Ingratiate himself into the favor of a Whiggish Parliament. But for all his
offers and persuasions, Mr. Kelley refused to give him the Copy; This Mr. Kelly
Confessed before one Mr. Alexander Harris, and several others.

And in May last I received another Subpaena, to which I also Appeared.

Mr. John Zeal,
THese are in His Majesty's Name to command you personally to appear before Sir
Edmund Saunders Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, on Wednesday the ninth of this Instant May at one
of the Clock in the Afternoon at Westminster Hall, to testify the Truth on the
behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, against William Lewis, for certain great
misdemeanors whereof he stands Indicted; and hereof you are not to fail, on the
Penalty of 100 l. to be levied on your Goods and Cahttels.

Dated the 2d. day of May in the 35th. of the King, Astrey.

And being Sworn in Court I gave in my Evidence, and upon a full hearing on
both sides, Mr. Lewis was brought in guilty of these words following, which
were in his Indictment, viz.

TThat the King is a Papist, and endeavors to stifle the Plot, by Dicharging
of the Witnesses. And that the King endeavored to take the Odium from the
Papists, and cast it upon the Presbyterians, and the Lord Shaftsbury. And that
the King and Court put the Paper of Association, which was found in the said
Earl's Closet, upon the said Earl. And that the Paper was conveyed into the
said Earl's Closet by Mr. Gywn by the Order of the King and Court. And that the
King did daily endeavor to enslave the Nation with Popery. And put Sheriffs
and other Officers upon the City of London to serve Turns, and to accomplish
his Designs against the Presbyterians.

I cannot omit one remarkable Passage of Mr. Lewis, which was about the time of
the Earl of Shaftsbury's Commitment last to the Tower, Mr. Lewis told me, That
whenever a Parliament sat, that he would discover such things as should make
all Europe stand amazed, but he would have his Pardon first in his hands: I
desired to know why he declared himself in that manner; he replied, That he had
been at Hampton Court with the King, Mr. Turbervile being then with him, who
made some Discovery; why said I, did you hear any of what was said; no said he,
But I saw those that shall come in for a snak the next Parliament.

He the said Lewis has several times told me, That if the King would give such
encouragements, as Pardons and Allowances, that His Majesty should not want New
Evidence, and Fresh Discoveries, as long as he lived; further saying, That the
Goals in and about Town, were the Nurseries for such Supplies.

And the same day I was Sworn in the Speakers Chamber by order of the House of
Commons on the 19th. day of November 1680. as it will appear by the Votes of
that day: There came up several persons, and desired of me, If I could not call
to mind the Duke's coming to the Crown suddenly: Which in my apprehension was
putting men in mind what they would have them to Swear: But I do declare, that
I never spoke one word to his Royal Highness in my life, notwithstanding I have
been put upon so often to Accuse him.

And before the last Dutch-War I was preferred to Sir George Downing as one of
his Pages, who then went Ambassador to Holland; for which I had his
Certificate, which is as follows (viz.)

March the 3d. 1672/3
THese are to Certify whom it may concern, that Mr. John Zeal served me
Faithfully as a Page, during my late Embassage in Holland.

George Downing.

The Testimonies of several Credible Persons, in the Confirmation of many
Remarkable Occurrences mentioned in this Narrative.
The Confirmation of Mr. William Banks.
MR. Zeal came one day to my House and told me, That there were some person or
persons that were Tampering with him to give Evidence against Sir Francis
Radcliffe of High Treason; and that he was to have a sum of Money for the same:
Besides he desired me, To inform Sir Francis of the same, which I did. This is
the whole Truth, and nothing but Truth, as witness my Hand, and that it was
about the time Sir Francis was last in Town.

William Banks.

The Confirmation of Mr. John Smith.
AT the Request of Mr. John Zeal, I do herein declare, that the said Zeal
about two years ago told me, That one William Lewis, who was a Prisoner in the
Marshalsea, and at Newgate; Pillored and Burned in the Hand, for his Generous
Exploits, was the worst of men to his knowledge; which he in time would
convince the World of his Wicked and Treacherous Practices: adding, That he
verily believed, the said Lewis exceeded all mankind in Villainy and wicked
Contrivances against the King's Interest. The said Zeal also told me; in the
presence of Justice Warcup, Mr. John Macknamarra, and Mr. Stephen Dugdale, That
the said William Lewis, when he was a Prisoner in the Marshalsea, (taking upon
him the Title of Lord Chancellor) there contrived and framed a most horrid
Design against the Lord Arundel of Warder, viz. How the said Lord would Suborn
him to Swear many things against the Kings Interest; and also, Engage him to
Murder the King, for which he was to have 1500 l. from the said Lord Arundel.
The said Zeal also told me, How the aforesaid Lewis prevailed with his
Brother, who was a Footman to the Portugal Ambassador, to Swear against the
Lord Chief Justice Screggs, that he received several Thousands of Guineys from
the aforesaid Ambassador to save Sir George Wakeman's Life; and that to his
knowledge the said Lewis had a Pension from the City, for giving them
Intelligence of what he could learn at Court, though at the same time he
pretended to Inform the Court of what passed in the City. All this Mr. Zeal
told me in presence of many.

John Smith.

The Confirmation of Mr. Robert Elmes.
I Robert Elmes does declare, That upon the third day of February last past,
being at the Bufflers-head-Tavern near the Gate House Westminster, John
Hankyson one of the Turn-Keys of the said Prison, brought one Mr. Lewis to me,
who desired me, To go and Arrest a person, who was then at the St.
Johns-head-Tavern, commonly called Heaven in the Old-Pallace-yard: I demanded
of the said Lewis, if he had any Writ or Warrant against him, whether it was
his own Debt, or not, he answered, No, telling me, Any piece of Paper will
afright him, and if I would undertake it, he would give me a good Gratuity: The
said Turn-key also persuaded me to undertake it, telling me, That he was a
Friend of his, and would not put any thing upon me, but what he would bear him
out in, or to that effect: I asked the Persons Name whom they would have
Arrested; they told me, One Mr. John Zeal, (a person who I never saw in my
life to my knowledge till that time:) I told them I would not undertake it,
assuring them that I never did any thing in that nature without a Lawful
Warrant, neither would I then begin: And finding nothing would prevail upon me,
they departed; I perceived it was a piece of Malice and Roguery, I sent my Man
to the said St. Johns-head Tavern, to acquaint the abovementioned Mr. Zeal of
the design there was against him, least any other Officer should undertake it.

Robert Elmes.

The Confirmation of Mr. John Harris.
ON the 23d. day of March 1682/3 Mr. John Zeal being very sick, and not
expecting to live, he sent for me, and told me, He did not know whether he
should live or die, and desired me, if it should please God to take him out of
the World, that the Papers which he did intend to publish, was all true, as he
might answer before the great God. He also desired me to get them printed, to
satisfy the World what Roguery there has been acted I told him, That it was a
Justice of Peace's business; and if he thought convenient, I would go to one,
and get him to come and give him his Oath; but he recovered of that Sickness,
which prevented my bringing a Justice of the Peace to him. All which I am ready
to make Oath, if it shall be required.

John Harris.

FINIS.

