Pritchard Mayor.
Martis vi. die Februarii, 1682. Annoque Regis. Caroli Secund. Angl. etc. xxxvi.

THis Court does desire Mr. Young to Print his Sermon, Preached before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, at the Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday Morning last.

Wagstaffe.
A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN.

AT Guild Hall Chapel, February 4. 1682.

By Edward Young, Fellow of the College near Winchester.

LONDON: Printed by I. Wallis, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR, ON S. Matthew, Chap. v. verse. 3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.


THE Christian State (that is, a Holy Life) is frequently expressed in the
Scriptures by the Metaphor of a Building; and the Metaphor may suggest thus
much unto us, That there is a certain Order to be observed in raising the Moral
Structure as well as the Mechanical: There are some Virtues proper for the
Foundation, upon which all the rest must be built, and without which they
cannot stand; such are all those that tend to the humbling of our minds, as a
true knowledge of our selves, and a conviction of our unworthiness, and a just
abhorrency of our natural corrupt desires: There are others proper for the
superstructure and finishing of the work; such are all those that tend to the
raising of our Affections, as Love, Joy, Hope and Confidence in God. Now
whosoever in his Building shall neglect this Order, and intend the raising of
his Affections, before the humbling of his Mind; he that shall affect the Love
of God before the Mortification of Nature, a Zeal for Religion before the
condescentions of Charity, a sort of spiritual Saintship before a moral Change;
such a one is like that foolish builder mentioned by our Savior in the close
of this his Sermon on the Mount; he may make a fair show of a house, but he
bottoms it upon the sand; and when wind and storm and flood, that is, when any
searching temptation shall come and assault it, it will certainly fall. It was
not therefore casually, or without a particular design that our Savior began
his holy institution with this Duty of the Text, and recommended Poverty of
Spirit to his Disciples before all other; The very Order it bears imports no
less than this, That Poverty of Spirit is a Duty that requires the beginning of
our care, and the first of our applications; because that so long as we are
without it, it is impossible for us to make any holding progress into the state
of Christianity. Which truth will farther appear from the explication of the
words: In order to which I shall determine these two Questions; First, Who are
meant by the poor in Spirit? Secondly, What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven,
to which the poor in Spirit are here entitled. As to the First, I take these
words, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, to bear a parallel sense to those we
meet with Psalm. 15. where the Psalmist having put the question, Lord, who shall
dwell in thy Tabernacle, and who shall rest upon thy holy Hill? He answers ver.
4. He that is lowly in his own eyes: In which expression we know that by Eyes,
is meant the inward sight of Imagination, that faculty of the Soul, wherein we
form our Images and conceptions of Things, and value them accordingly; So that
by Lowly in his own Eyes, is meant, a Man little in his own Conceit and esteem:
Now the word Spirit (as it relates to Man) is taken indifferently to signify
either the whole Soul or any of its faculties; and I presume that in the Text
it is taken to signify this particular faculty of Imagination; and so Poor in
Spirit and Lowly in his own Eyes, appear to be expressions of the same
importance, they carry in them the same notion and thought, and denote a person
that is Little in his own conceit or esteem, that is, (in a word) an Humble
Man. I confess that the word Spirit is most frequently used to signify the
Irascible or passionate part of the Soul; and so Poor in Spirit might naturally
be interpreted of such a one as is little in Passion, calm in Resenting, slow
to Anger: but then this Beatitude would fall to be the same with that at the
5th. v. (viz.) Blessed are the Meek; which as we cannot easily guess to have
been intended, so we must reasonably conclude that by Poor in Spirit in the
Text, is meant no other than the Humble Man. I come to the second Question,
viz. What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven, to which the poor in Spirit are
entitled?

It is evident from many passages in Scripture that this Phrase The Kingdom of
Heaven, does signify not only the Future blessed State where the Faithful are
said to reign with Christ in a full participation of Immortality and Glory, but
it likewise signifies the present Christian state, where Christ is said to
reign over the Faithful by the influences of his Grace and the discipline of
his Gospel: Thus the holy Spirit has thought fit to signify Man's Happiness
and his Duty by the very same expression; Whether First, To suggest one
principal point of Wisdom, that is, That we should never think of our
Happiness, but we should at the same time think of our Duty too, and the
necessary dependence that the one has upon the other: Or Secondly, To intimate
that the Kingdom of Heaven both here and hereafter, that is, the two states of
a Christian in this Life and in the next, though they differ in Circumstances,
yet in the main Essential they are but one and the same: For Example; It is but
an accidental Circumstance to a Christian that he be either a Traveller or a
Citizen, that he be either Militant or Triumphant; but it is an everlasting
Essential to him that he be Holy; and in this both states must agree. As
therefore the Kingdom of Heaven may justly ravish our thoughts with the notion
it bears of the Beatifick presence of God, of the Company of Angels, of Glory,
Pleafures and Joys that are unmixt and eternal; so it may as justly serve to
awaken our Care and diligence and strict Inspection of our selves, to consider
that this very Kingdom must be begun within us; we must Here lead the Heavenly
Life, we must Here conform in Saintship to the Blessed that are above; and all
the Graces that they have in Perfection, we must here have in Degrees, and all
aspiring toward perfection: It Is the Kingdom so begun that shall have its
consummation in bliss: But if the Spirit of this Kingdom do not work in us and
change us Here; if our corrupt inclinations do not dye before us, but we
continue Filthy; the Future State can never change us; By subduction of the
Means, by incapacity of the Subject, by irreversible Doom, we must be Filthy
still.

The Kingdom of Heaven bearing these two different significations of Grace and
Glory, the Question still remains which of them is meant in the Text; and I
conclude that in the Text is meant the Kingdom of Grace for these following
Reasons: First, because Grace must necessarily be first in Order; and
accordingly the Apostle is express St. James 4. 6. God gives Grace to the
Humble: Secondly, Because the single virtue of Humility cannot by it self be
entitled to Glory, but only in conjunction with those other virtues that must
be built upon it: And Thirdly, Because of other parallel Texts which may serve
to guide us in the interpretation of This; particularly that in St. Luke 18.
17. where our Savior says that Except a man receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a
little Child, he shall in no wise enter therein; In which words, as the
Resemblance of a little Child, does expressly signify the Duty of my Text, so
by the Kingdom of Heaven that must be Received, that must be taken into us,
cannot possibly be meant any thing but the Discipline of Grace in our hearts:
For these Reasons I conclude that by the Kingdom of Heaven in the Text, is
meant the State of Grace, or the present Christian State: And so the meaning of
the whole Verse will appear to be this (viz.) That the Humble Man is blessed,
because he is properly disposed and qualified to become a true Disciple, a good
Christian. This being the meaning of the words, I shall form my Discourse upon
them in this Method; 1. I shall show the nature and reasonableness of the Duty
of Humility. 2. I shall show its influence, usefulness and necessity in order
to attaining the true Christian state.


First, Humility is a quality that relates not to Men's Fortunes but their
Minds; It calls no man from his Rank, nor divests him of his Titles; Poverty of
Spirit is well consistent with height of Place; and the Overtures of Grace are
as free to the Great and Noble, as to the Mean and Poor of the World. I confess
it is too commonly seen that Men do yield up their Minds to their Fortunes, and
lose the measure of themselves in the Bulk of that which hangs about them; And
this indeed is the reason why the Apostle has said, Not many Mighty, not many
Noble: But though this be common in Effect, it is no way necessary in its Cause.
David, though the Head of a splendid Court, could give this Testimony of
himself, Lord, I am not high-minded, I have no proud look; and I hope that this
Honorable Assembly can produce many instances of such as are Great in
Character and as Great in Condescentions. We need not therefore Debase our
selves to be Humble; and much less need we Calumniate our selves; We need not
make our selves worse than we are, and charge our selves with Hyperbole's of
Faults and Infirmities to become Vile in our own Eyes: No, Humility is always
the greatest piece of Justice in the world; For be our Condition what it will,
let us but know it as really it is, and we need no other argument to make us
humble. Pride is of that kind of Admiration which always proceeds from
Ignorance and Mistake; There is no room for it when we know our selves as we
are, but only when we feign our selves such as we would be; when we suffer none
but Affection to be our Painter; when we are so pleased with the account that
Self-love brings in of us, that we thereupon stifle all farther search: When we
have admitted this Imposture to pass upon our understanding, it is then only we
admit of an Opinion of our selves: And this intimates the Reason why the
Softest Heads are always puffed up the soonest. Humility therefore, though it be
commonly esteemed the greatest piece of Self-denial in the world, yet in sober
reality it is far from it; It is no other than the bare Owning of our selves.
Whereof I proceed to give you proof.

It Is a strong Sarcasm upon humane Pride that we meet with Eccl. x. 18. where
it is said, Pride was not made for Man: For fancy Pride where you will, it is no
where so improper, no where so unbecoming as in Man: Not because his Make is
only of the common Clay; neither tempered nor figured, nor tinged more
elegantly than that of other Creatures, as infirm and putrid and contemptible
as any of theirs; This is but the least part of his abasement: It Is a smaller
disgrace to his Pedigree that Corruption is his Father, and the Worm his Mother
and Sister, than that Sin is his Offspring. His Make is but Common, but his
Depravation is wholly Singular; he being the only Evil, disorderly and
ungovernable Creature in the world. Let the Sea then be proud whose Waves know
their bounds; Let the Beasts be proud who live agreeable to the Laws of their
Nature; The Locusts and Catterpillars who are God's armies; The Wind and Storm
that fulfill his word; But let not Man, the only Rebel in Nature, that stands
distinguished from the rest of the Creation, not so much by his Reason as by
his Guilt, the only Heir of Wrath, and Shame and Misery, let not him be Proud;
Pride was not made for Him. I confess this Prospect that I have now given of
Man, shows him at the Least; but let us turn the Glass then, and look on him in
his fairest and best Estate, let us look upon his Nature as ennobled with all
the Perfections that it is capable of. And are not the Accomplishments of Art,
and Aides of Fortune, and Endowments of Wisdom and Virtue Valuable things, and
matters of esteem? and may not the itch of our Imagination please it self with
these? I confess that all these are indeed Valuable things; but I assert
farther, That Man ought not to value himself for them; For, here lies the
Point, They are not His: They are God's, only entrusted to him; they are so
many Sums received, for which he stands accountable; they are Treasures and
Talents committed to the Earthen Vessel, but yet the Vessel it self is no more
than Earthen still. And therefore though the Evil we are obnoxious to, be the
most proper matter of our Humility, yet we may find that there is Argument for
Humility to be drawn from every thing that is Good in us: I call it Good in us,
because the calling of Good Ours has been the Cause of too much mischief; It
being the sole Hinge that Humane Pride turns it self upon. It Is from the
prejudice of a Vulgar mistake that we call any advantages supervenient to our
nature by the name of Acquisitions, as if the getting of them might be
attributed to the glory of our own Counsels and endeavors: The notion is
absolutely false in Divinity, where we are taught that they are all Gifts and
Receptions: What have thou (says St. Paul, directing his question to the
Boaster) What have thou, that thou have not received? It Is God that, to the
attainment of all Outward good things, gives both the Means and the use and the
Issue; that to the attainment of all Inward accomplishments, gives both the
Capacity and the Application and the Success; That to the attainment of all
Moral Perfections, gives both the Power and the Will, and the Deed: It Is He
that first established the Relation that all Causes bear to their Effects, and
in his particular Providence does either continue, or enlarge, or control, or
suspend their influence, according to his pleasure. So that Nature is no other
than God's Ordinary method of acting, as Miracle is his Extraordinary, and
Fortune his Secret method: And therefore those Effects which proceed from the
working of Natural Causes, and the deliberate use of Means, those Effects which
we pretend to as Ours, are as much from God, as those whose productions are
either Supernatural or Fortuitous, to which we do not pretend. (For Instance)
In the Widow of Sa^epta's Oil, that part which grew on her Tree was as much
from God, as that which grew in her Cruise: In Solomon's wisdom, that Measure
that directed his Choice in the Temple, was as much from God, as that which was
superadded by reason of his Choice: In Isreal's Victories, their beating the
Amalekites by dint of Sword, was as much from God, as their demolishing the
Walls of Jericho with the blast of a Ram's-horn. No Man's Riches or Grandeur
can be more his Own than Nebuchadnezzar's was his; and yet for but assuming
thus much unto himself, for this reason expressly, he was debased, and unmanned
and thrown out among the Beasts: No Man's Wit or Eloquence can be more his own
than Herod's was his, and yet for assuming this glory to himself, he was given
up to be devoured by Worms. And if these Talents are still God's in Property,
though they are Ours in Possession (as it appears by these Instances they are)
much more are all Moral Perfections so, toward the attainment of which our
faculties and dispositions are much weaker. The holy Scriptures teach us
nothing more frequently, nothing more instantly than this, That Every good and
every perfect gift comes from above; That Of our selves we can do nothing;
That, All our sufficiency is from God: Passages to this purpose are very
numerous, as if the holy Spirit were more than ordinarily Jealous of our
Incredulity in this Point: And why now is all this? Why does God rather
dispense good things to us, than suffer us to acquire them to our selves? Why
are all our Perfections Gifts? And why does God so frequently and so instantly
put us in mind that they are so? We may learn the reason of all from the
forementioned place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. iv. 7. where he adds, Why then do
thou glory as if thou had not received? We receive for this very purpose that
we should be Humble: For to Receive and to glory, to be obliged and yet to be
proud, is pure absurdity; as absurd as it were for a man to think himself rich,
only because he has borrowed a Sum. So long therefore as we keep our minds
possessed of this Truth, That all the good that belongs unto us is of God's Free
Grace and arbitrary disposal; so long as we thereby retain the just measure of
our own littleness, and worthlesness, and want; so long we are properly
disposed to give God the glory due unto his Name, that is, the acknowledgment
and praise, and retribution of that which he has given us: But as for Pride
(whatsoever stock it grows upon) it is an Imagination that exalts it self
against the Interest of God; It is express Sacrilege, for it always robs God of
so much honor as it places upon our selves.

And hence I pass to my second Head, which is, To show the influence and
usefulness, and necessity of being Humble in order to the attainment of the
Christian State. Which State the Apostle has expressed very fully and
distinctly in these three words, Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification or
Holiness, 1 Cor. i. 30. these are the three Integral parts of Christianity, and
for Methods sake, I shall show how Humility is subservient to each of these.
And first, to Wisdom.

Wisdom is that perfection that is necessary to the Christians understanding,
and it consists in the Knowledge and approbation of Divine Truths: Now there is
no access unto Truth in divine things, but only through Faith; Faith is all the
security we have against deception: And what is Faith but the Humbling of
Reason, the beating down of Imagination, the bringing of thoughts into
Captivity; A professed Enemy to the Opinionative and the Disputer, and utterly
inconsistent with the Pride of Understanding? So that we cannot so much as
approach unto Truth but under the conduct of Humility. But this is not all; For
such is the nature of Truth, that after we have embraced it, we can never give
it a fixed entertainment, nor ever be secure of not starting from it again,
unless we continue under the same influence of Humility. For Truth, though it
want not beauty, yet it is plain and simple, uniform and always alike: Its
first and strictest obligation to all its Followers, is that Advice of the
Apostle, To be of the same mind, To walk by the same Rule, to speak the same
thing. So that he that will fix upon Truth, must necessarily be humble in this
respect, that is, He must content himself to think as others do, to agree with
the vulgar notion, and to go in the common track: Truth cannot put on those
various Modes and shapes that please the levity of humane affections: Truth
cannot start any thing novel and strange, to take the multitude which admires
nothing so much as Monsters: Truth can make no room for the pleasure of
singularity, none for the itch of contradicting, none for the Glory of Heading,
or the Interest of siding with a Sect: All these are the Rights and Privileges
of Error; insomuch that it is impossible for a man, unless he be absolutely
humble, to resist the temptation of catching at Error, though he has Truth
already in his hand. And to this purpose it might easily appear from the
particular History of all Errors and Heresies that ever sprung up to the
disturbance of the Church and the World, that not one of a hundred of them did
ever spring from Invincible Ignorance and want of Light, but from Affected
mistake and want of Humility: Either Ambition of Greatness, or the Thirst of
Glory, or Impatience of a Defeat, or some other designing Intrigue of humane
Pride, will appear to have been at the bottom of every Dissension. So that, All
the different Opinions which obtain in the World, and the various mists that
are cast upon the face of Truth, and the clamorous Pretenses that are laid to
Her by several sides, which ('it is certain) can never be but on One; All these
(I say) do no way argue either the failure or Limitation of God's promise to
his Church, That he would send his Holy Spirit to guide her into all Truth;
They only argue this, That Men are Arrogant and Opinionative, and therefore
will not stick upon every small occasion to run away from their Guide.

This therefore is the first advantage that Humility brings in toward Wisdom
(viz.) it disposes Man to give a fixed entertainment to Truth. But secondly, In
case of Error (which no doubt the Humble man may sometimes be drawn into
either by reason of Imposition or Surprise, but in this Case) Humility brings
in another advantage of no less importance than the former; and that is, It
always disposes a man to a ready Conviction and a quick Repentance; Which
indeed is a greater instance of Wisdom than never to have erred; Because
Repentance is always a Virtue, whereas not to have Erred may often be no other
than Luck. The Humble man therefore though he may Err, yet he will never be a
Heretic (as the Father distinguishes upon his own case;) He will never add
Malice to his Infirmity, nor Contumacy to his Mistake; He is ever disposed to
own that there is more Religion in Confessing Truth, than in Consulting Credit;
and therefore he will much rather confess himself to have been a Fool once,
than continue to be one always in point of Honor. But where Pride once twists
it self with Error, there a Man's case looks as one sinking with a Weight at
his Heels, which will be sure never to let him rise again. For Pride (that most
mischievous of all Counselors) will always be whispering this advice into the
Ear. If thou have erred, persist and justify it with argument and passion, for
it is possible that so thou may get the Victory, and Victory is oftentimes of
greater moment than Truth; For perhaps thou art a leading Man, and the esteem
of thy wisdom is influential to the Conduct of others, and if so, why then one
base Retraction may pull down all that thou have built; be sure therefore that
it is honest, it is for edification, it is for the glory of God that thou be
Obstinate. What Counsels of this nature Pride is always ready to suggest, and
how fatally her Counsels do obstruct the Repentance of Mankind, whether in
reference to Errors or to Crimes, might largely appear from the Jesuits
Doctrine of Reputation, as I may call those Instances, where they teach how a
man may dissemble, prevaricate and falsify in case of preserving the
reputation either of himself or of his Cause: And it was too grossly exemplifi'd
in those Measures of the Roman Court (by which the Council of Trent was
overborn) where when it came to be debated whether or no they should comply
with the public Vote of Christendom and proceed to a Reformation, though all
agreed that it was needful to Reform, yet Pride carried it in the Negative by
suggesting, That it would give advantage to the Heretics; Meaning thereby,
that the acknowledgment of any present errors or abuses in the Church, must
necessarily expose their great Diana Infallibility, and make her lose more of
her Worship. See the Advices of the Cardinals to Pope Adrian, in Father Paul's
History.


Thus Humility is assisting to Wisdom, the first perfection of the Christian
state. The second is Righteousness; which Word (if taken in its proper
latitude, only distinguished from, that which follows, Holiness) signifies the
universal practice of Moral Virtue; I come to show how subservient Humility is
to this.

Moral Virtue consists in the Government of our Appetites and Passions, and
nothing can have a more happy influence upon this Government than Humility,
because that according as a man esteems of himself, so always he Covets, and so
he Resents. It Is the Proud man that thinks himself worthy of all Honors, and
fit for all Employments, and competent for all Charges; and this makes him
aspire and graspe at all; this makes him mount till he become giddy with the
height, till he forget How, and by Whom, and to what purpose he ascended, and
hence necessarily he becomes Vain and Rash, and Mischeivous, and Ungrateful in
his Station: Whereas he that is little in his own eyes, is consequently little
too in Desires, and moderate in Use, and faithful in Trust, and careful in
Business, and always more awed in his thoughts with the future account and
charge of high Fortunes, than he is transported by their present Splendor and
Advantages. It Is the proud Man who as he thinks he merits all he gets, so he
repines at all he misses, and this makes him discontented and envious, and so
highly injust as to think his private disappointments a sufficient title for
him to quarrel and move and overturn the World: But the Humble Man is he that
possesses his Soul, that is master of himself, and keeps his temper under all
the issues of Fortune; He knows that the Sun does his duty, though he does not
ripen his Vine; he knows the Wind is not in his debt, though it does not fill
his Sails; he never persuades himself that the World was made for him, and
therefore how little soever be the share he has in it, he finds sufficient
argument of Content in considering how little it is that a Compound of Sin and
Ignorance and Frailty can deserve. It Is the Proud Man that is censorious and
calumniating and undutiful in all relations; And the reason hereof is this,
Because the progress is natural from an Opinion of our selves, to the Despising
of others; as natural, as it is for a Bladder to mount above the Water when
once it is filled with Wind: And therefore St. Luke links them together (as
genuine Cause and Effect) in that Character he has given of the Pharisees,
Chap. xviii. 9. where he says, They were such as trusted in themselves (or
rather) Such as were well persuaded of themselves, and despised others; Now be
sure so far as we despise, so far we have cancelled all the obligations of
Manners and of Duty. Whereas Humility is the constant Spring of candor in
Judgment, and sweetness in Conversation, of Love and Courtesy, and Service,
and all the respective offices that are due unto Mankind. But that which
renders the humble Man the best member of Society is this, That he is a fixed
Friend to Peace: For forasmuch as all Quarrels are founded (in pretense at
least) upon Injury, it is the humble man that never offers an Injury, nor ever
presumes one offered where it is not, nor ever aggravates one where it is. We
know that, in the judgment of the Law, every injury varies its measures
according to the quality of the Persons against whom it is committed; So that
the same Act when done against a Prince, may be judged a Capital Offense, which
if done against an Inferior Person, would only be judged an Indecency: Now
look what Variety of measures an Injury admits of, in the Judgment of the Law,
from the Difference of Persons, the same Variety it admits of, in our own
Judgment, from the different Opinion that we have of our selves; So that the
Spirit of a Man, when Proud, shall look upon the same Act as an unpardonable
affront; which, when truly Humble, he shall only look upon as a pitiable
weakness in him that did it. Thus the Humble Man is always guarded against the
Surprise of his Passion. And though Religion be the fairest Pretense, and that
which does most Speciously engage Men in (what is most contrary to Religion)
public disturbance; yet the Humble Man is always aware of the Cheat; For he
knows how to distinguish between the movements of his Passion and of his
Conscience; The one only make a Man Firm, the other make him Violent, which the
Humble Man never is: He knows it is his duty to contend earnestly for the
Faith, but never Mutinously: He knows it may be his Duty to Dye for Religion,
but never to Quarrel for Religion; for that is as absurd a Pretense, as if a
Man should draw his Sword to maintain the Unlawfulness of Duels.

And this brings me to the last and finishing perfection of the Christian
state, that is, Holiness: Which is the Christians Conversation with God, his
Spiritual Life, consisting in the exercise of those Offices that are purely
Religious: I come to show the Influence of Humility upon These.

The Apostle that sometimes compares our Body to a House because of its natural
Inhabitant the Soul, does likewise sometimes compare it to a Temple, by reason
of its Divine Guest of the Holy Spirit of God: And if ever we will be Temples
indeed it is Humility must make the Consecration; it is Humility that first
distinguishes us from an Unhallowed Pile, that conciliates the Presence of God,
and determines his Abode with us; For the High and Holy One that inhabiteth
Eternity, decleares that he has but two Residences, I dwell (says he) in the
high and holy Place, with him also that is of an Humble and Contrite spirit.
Whereof if we enquire the reason, we shall find it to be this; Because Humility
is the sole Foundation of Commerce betwixt God and the Soul. For, first, As
Humility implies in its notion a due sense of our want and insufficiency, so it
carries in it the whole Reason of Prayer and Application and Dependence upon
God: It Is the thirsty panting Heart that flies to the water brooks, It Is the
empty voided Soul that flames out into desire; and therefore God is said to
Give grace unto the Humble, because of the necessary Tie that is betwixt
Humility and Devotion. Whereas any greater thought of Worth and Sufficiency in
our selves must necessarily, in proportion, supersede our addresses to God; and
reduce our Devotion first to Formality, and then to Neglect. Secondly, As
Humility implies in its notion a just sense of the Divine bounty from whence
come all our supplies, so it carries in it the whole Reason of Praise and
Thanksgiving, the which is the Christian Sacrifice; Whereas the Proud Man who
naturally imputes the Success of things either to Fortune, that so he may seem
obliged to none, or else to Skill, that so he may seem obliged to himself; in
the first case he offers no Sacrifice at all; and in the second, all that he
offers is to his own Dragge. In a word, as Humility implies in its notion a
sense of our Own Unworthiness, so it is the same in effect with the Fear of
God; as it implies a due sense of our Distance, so it is the same in effect
with the Honor of God; as it implies a due sense of our Obligation, so it is
the same in effect with the love of God: Of such extent is the influence and
power of Humility, that let a man but take care not to check the conduct of
this single Virtue, and it shall naturally and easily lead him through all the
Offices of a Religious life. But on the contrary, what mischiefs Pride will
bring upon Religion, we need not go far to inform our selves: For as the Son of
Sirach Eccl. vii. 3. tells us of Pride, in reference to particular practice,
That it makes a Man Eat up his Leaves, and lose his Fruit, and leave himself as
a dry Tree; so we may say of it in reference to the public profession of
Religion, That it eats up its Order, and loses its Substance, and leaves
Christianity an empty Name. It Is owing to the influence of this Vice, that
instead of one Faith and one Consent in Religion, we see so many different
Religions set on foot, and the greatest part of Professors overlook the main
Offices of Self-denial, and whatsoever is burdensome in the Cross of Christ, and
take up with a Religion that consists only in a notional zeal, and presumptuous
Claims to God Almighty: it is owing to the influence of this Vice that we see
many Zealots advanced above the use of Ordinances and Sacraments, into a
pretense of Illuminations and Transports, and more intimate Communions with the
Deity. Give me leave to make one more particular instance of the mischief of
Pride in reference to the Office of Prayer. Pride in Prayer sounds indeed like
a mighty solecism; for what possible consistency can we imagine between two
such opposite dispositions of the mind? Prayer, the display of our wants, the
imploring of succor, the humbling of our Selves as Dust and Ashes before the
Lord our Maker and our Judge, What Agreement, what Room for Pride in this Holy
Office? And yet even here Pride has iufinuated its Poison, and made that Office
which ought to be the Bond of Unity, the Badge of Dissension. For Example,

Few of us can be ignorant of the expedience of public Liturgyes, or of the
constant Usage of them in all Ages of the Church, or of the particular
Excellency of ours of the Church of England, than which what Prayers can be
more Piously conceived, or more sensibly expressed, or more wisely accommodated
to all humane exigencies? And yet, this notwithstanding, we see it come to pass
that the joining in these Prayers is not only neglected by multitudes of
people, but it is counted a sort of abomination, and made a matter of Schism:
And now whence comes all this mischief but only from the Pride of those Men,
who were resolved to withdraw all respect from the public Prayers, that they
might transfer it upon their own Gifts? Those who imagined that there were more
Charms in their own Conceptions than the Public, and that the use of such a
borrowed Form would bring a Scandal upon their own Affluence; as Naaman the
Le^per thought that his washing in Jordan would be an affront to Abana and
Pharpar: All which is no other than a mere frenzy of Pride. But what? Are we
still of the Lamian Fashion? have we never our Eyes open at home? Can we not
see our own faults? or have we not sufficiently heard of the Pride of the
Church of England? We have heard of it; and we have likewise heard of an old
Rancounter betwixt two Philosophers, not a little resembling the Case: The
Cynick Diogenes meeting one day with the Excellent Plato, habited (as he
usually was) in the decent Garb of the Court, snatches his Mantoe from his
shoulders, and treads it into the dirt, and cries out, Thus I trample upon
Plato's Pride; Plato gently takes up his Garment again, making only this Reply,
It Is true, Diogenes, thou have trampled upon my Pride, but surely with a
greater Pride of thine own: I shall not run the Parallel so far as the Instance
would bear, I shall only say this by way of Reflection upon it, That, if
Decency be a Crime (as we see that it has sometimes been accounted one) Our
Church is not ashamed of the Guilt; and if Cynical and Malicious treatment be
Humility, her Adversaries want not their share. To disown the Pride of Men, of
whatsoever Constitution, were Pride it self, as much as it were to disown their
Peccability; But I hope it will appear to the Indifferent, that the Church of
England has not so much Pride as her Accusers; nor did ever show either so much
Insolence in Authority, or so much stomach against Authority as they have done.
However, I have but one Wish for all, and that is this; That whatsoever
measures of Humility are wanting in any of us, may by God's Grace and our own
application timely be supplied; Humility being the only Expedient to Christian
Union; as it is the only Moral Disposition to the Kingdom of Heaven, and as it
is the most certain Indication of real worth, wherever we find it. For Opinion
of our selves is like the Casting of a Shadow, which is always longest when the
Sun is at the greatest distance; but by the degrees that the Sun approaches,
the the Shadow still shortens, and under the direct Meridian Light it becomes
none at all: It Is so with our Opinion of our selves; while the good influences
of God are at the greatest distance from us, it is then always that we Conceive
best of our selves; but still as God approaches, the Conceit lessens; till such
time as we receive the fuller measures of his Graces, and then we become
absolutely voided, pure Nothing in our own Conceit, and God appears to be (as
really he is) All in all.

To whom, etc.

FINIS.

