THE FOXONIAN Quakers, DUNCES LIARS and SLANDERERS, Proved out of GEORGE FOX's
Journal, And other Scriblers; Particularly B. C. his Quakers no Apostates, or
the Hammerer Defeated: Amanuensis, as is said, to G. C. (as he sometime wrote
himself) Gulielmus Calamus, alias, William Penn.

Also a Reply to W. C. (a Churchman, the Quakers Advocate) his Trepidantium
Malleus Intrepidanter Malleatus, etc.

TITUS I.XII. (...)

By Trepidantium Malleus.

LONDON: Printed for W. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street, and J.
Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street, near Cornhil, 1697

TO HIS Unholiness WILLIAM PENN, THE ENGLISH POPE.
IT is notoriously known, when the Old Papists, the Fathers of the Quakers,
could neither by Scripture or Reason, confute the Doctrine of Luther and
Calvin, they invented and published Libels instead of answers against the Men
and their Morals: Luther was a Drunkard and had his Familiar: Calvin was an
Intemperate Man, and would often call for Wine, and they had sound the mystery
in his name; he was also a second Lucian, and by an Anagram, they had found
this in his name also.

That their Children, the Quakers, have taken the like method with the best
Ministers and People in the World, is so notorious, that it needs no proof;
that they have done the like also with some, that, for their Blasphemies and
other wicked procedures, have deserted them, is too well known; Mr. Bugg, Mr.
Pennyman, Mr. Keith, Mr. Crisp, are Madmen, etc. I therefore can expect no
better Treatment.

I am charged, by B. C. the Quaker, and by W. C. the Churchman, their Advocate.

1. With Love-Melancholly, and what Confessions I made on that Subject.

2. With being clapped up in a Madhouse (BOX)

3. With high demands for Preaching, and what befell me for it nigh Bristol.

To all which, I Answer.

1. That they are stories all False; and I declare, I never beard any such
things charged on me by my greatest Enemies, till I read them in their Libels.

2. That I will give to any man Five Pound, that shall prove, that ever I was
in Box, or any such place, One Hour.

3. That I never got much by Preaching, but at Brislington, named, I offered to
give all their dues to a Minister, 10 year Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge, but then
Poor, if they would employ him, and I freely gave him his Table also.

Who shall regard a Quaker, who tells a story, That I or my Brother (for he
cannot tell which) were found in bed with I know who, by an Officer. Not I, f^r
I never heard the story till now; and to be plain, I believe he neither: That
al o aff rms, That Bristol Friends, Steel, etc. never left the Place of their
Public Worship, unless when sick, etc. When I appeal to the whole City
(particularly the disappointed Informers) whether, for several years before
King James's Indulgence came out, they could find Men or Women there. That also
denies, That the Quakers Bow to any Man, except a few, Corrupted by us, and
Reproved by them: When it is so notorious to all the World. You (their
Infallible head) are a great Bower, and so a common Idolater; that B. C.
imitates you his Master, and continues the Custom, since his denial of this,
to his and the Quakers perpetual shame, as some of them confess.

Who shall regard what this Church man says after him, that talks of the Fable
of the Mad-house, etc. and in such a style, as if he were hastening thither, or
lately came from thence; Cur, Ye^^ing Cur, Mr. Woodcock, Goodman Goose, etc.
this is no banter but amongst Children Young and Old: Whether, You Sir, were
the A^thor ^f the Quakers no Apostates, or helper to the materials (or rather
immaterials) of that Boo^, or only the Licenser, or Approver, m^n think as they
see cause; no Book must now go without consent; thus the Lords M^ssage is
stopped, curtailed or changed, since it pleased you to set up Ecclesiastical
Courts, and make Canons to try the Light by.

What if I should have affirmed stories, perhaps too true, of friend Green of
Colchester, that Cleveland speaks ^f, that bugger'd a Mare; I had been guilty
of too great rashness.

Help, Woodcock, Fox and Naylor,
For our Friend Green's a Stallion;
Alas what hope of converting the Pope,
When the Quaker turns Italian.
And that in good time of Christmas,
Which though our Friends have damned all
Yet when did we hear, of a cursed Cavileer,
Ever played such a Christmas gambal?
But thus our matters teach us,
The intent being well directed,
Though the Devil trapan, the Adamical Man,
The Saint stands uninfected, etc.
Had your Friends and Advocates these stories of me by Revelation? as the two
friends that came to Henry Windor had of the murder of his Child, and that the
Spirit should appear in the Court before the Judge, which proving false, were
imprisoned, etc. Is it true, that in Pensilvania some have been put to death on
friends Spirit of Discerning? When Christ was Crucified, had you been there,
had you not told five false stories to their one? B. C. talks of my Learning,
and that I am now the Champion of the Cause; that my Book was handed up and
down the City as an unanswerable Book: I doubt not but you thought it
unanswerable from the time you saw it; and I thank your scribe (as is said) for
contributing his best help to prove it to be so, though you were pleased
(unaskt) lately to send me word, You had no hand in the Book; yet your
sophistry is so great and abominable, I cannot understand you. Such a man was
Drunk, said a friend, when found to be false, yea with passion, has been the
answer, etc. such Tricks are often among the ^erfect ones.

Y u have lately, to serve a turn, declared, That you believed Imputed
Righteousness in the sense we plead for; the Body of Christ that was crucified,
Rose again, and is circumscribed in Heaven; That there shall be a Resurrection
of the same Body laid in the Grave; that you believe 1 Cor. 15.20, 21. in a
literal sense, without an Allegory, when it was proved upon you, you had
Printed the contrary, You made answer That was against Men's Relying on this
etc. as I had it from that good Minister^ to whom, with others, you said all
this.

Oh! How deceitful are Sinless Men? Goldney (that Creature in the shape of a
man) lately denied he said this and that of such a place; when proved on him at
my Lodgings, said, I did not name the place, though I pointed to it and spoke
of it; like him that said, George Fox never said, He was the Son of God; which
when proved, said, No, his words were, I am the Son of God. But there is no end
of this Villainy.

No Papist shall Lie or Equivocate more for the Church, than the gre^test
Quakers for the Light; You having refused the proposals for a meeting, to
consider my Questions, and not owning the late Reply, I purpose to trouble you
no more.

Pardon me that I begin with George Fox's Journal, a new Folio, Printed lately,
since his death, and your large Preface; if I prove him a Liar, etc. your Cause
falls to the ground, for he was your first Apostle, or rather Deceiver: I doubt
as you do not, so you cannot believe the Fables you relate of him.

Some think, You Sir, in another disguise, to be the Author of the book W. C.
William Calamus; I fear it is so, I hope it is not; if not, I question not but
you know him, I appeal also to you, whether the dasign of my Reprimand were to
answer both Papers, as he said, when I never saw the first, till I finished my
Reprimand, and then put in a few lines about Cato, etc. or not.

1. To prove G. Keith no Apostate, though very Erroneous, and proved the contrary
from his charge of Election, etc. Then.

1. The Arminians in their Church are Apostates too, which must not be granted.

2. Then t^^ New Church of England is an Apostate Church from her Doctrine,
Discipline and Manners; which I have done at large, The Union with Rome, etc.

Is this an answer to say I am no Arminian? What then? Are such as be,
Apostates? You are an Ungrateful Wretch thus to reflect on the Church of
England* What if I were? my Argument leads me to it; I am provoak'd to it; yet
the N^^ Church I reflected on; my work lay not so much with them that own her
Doctrine (...) Old Discipline, that keep from the Lord Table, Men Ignorant,
Scandalous, Contentious, that use not the new uninjoyn'd Ceremonies, lowing to
the High Alt^ etc. What is he, that writing of Reprobation, could not
distinguish between a N^^ possibile, and a Non futurum? Who says, God makes any
man's Salvation impossible? others, besides G. Keith, have denied it: God has
made my being unable to flee, a non possibile (naturally) but never ordained my
being born in Constantinople so; he made it a non futurum: so of Christ's Legs
not broken, he made it not an impossible thing, but a thing not future.

2. My design was to reprove him, for favoring the Foxonian Quakers, whom I
proved to be Blasphemers, Imposters, etc. by proofs not commonly known,
therefore I entitled my Book a Reprimand, not a Vindication; I dare appeal to
you whether things are not so, and therefore such is he; as if unparaled Lying,
Rudeness and Impertenencies had contended, which should make his Reply most
Infamous.

To all this account of the Foxonian Quakers, he replies, without attempting to
vindicate them, We are Fools. -- and he has found me, I thank him; very good
Company; worthy good men of his own communion, and zealous for it too, as Mr.
Bugg and Mr. Snake, for so I used to call him, seeing he puts not his name to
his book as I do not to mine, yet all know the Authors. Mr. Keith's being my
Tutor, I laugh at it; I speak it without vanity, and I suppose he knows it, he
need be no more my Tutor, than I his; nothing is more evident to me, that W. C.
wants not only a Tutor but Schoolmaster, to teach him to make True Latin and
Verse, as the after account will prove; I take him to be a man of no True
Learning, though a man of some wit, only childish terms and nauseous phrases
sometimes spoils that too; the broken Latin Sir, looks like yours, who have
little knowledge of that Tongue, less of the Gree^, though you once would
venture upon a criticism, forsooth, with Mr. Faldo, (...), which occasions a
little merriment, there are that know your Excellency lies not that way, but in
some other parts of Learning, Politics, History and Theology.

Thine in the Light, without the Outward Name.

THE FOXONIAN Quakers, DUNCES, LIARS and SLANDERERS; Proved out of George Fox's
Journal, etc.
PREPARE thy Ears, Reader, to hear Legions instead of History, and Fables, as
prodigious as those in Father Cressy's Church History, both fit to be looked
into these Winter Evenings, when Stories are most acceptable for Merriments
sake: Mahomet was but little skilled in this trick when on the back of his
Elbo^^ he rode up to Heaven, received the Law, and came back again: By the way,
I have it from good hands, that Dr. Pocock averred, That the story of the Dove
in his Ear, was a Fable; that he found the Turks knew nothing of it and that
Grotius confessed to hi^, he to^^ up the story only on common fame.

Cressey makes no bones of Miracles by a Parenthesis (Who was raised from the
Dead) Jacob Beoman and Muggleton, had their Lying Wonders, and all to prove
their contrary Messages from God, foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. But the greatest
wonder was, That these Impostors were regarded; a Distempered Body and Mind,
may make Men imagine strange things A late Author of more wit than Honesty, in
his Interest of Reason in matters of Religion; seems much to doubt, Whether Man
met knew himself to be an Impostor, in having the Falling Sickness, did think
the Angel Gabriel did appear to him, etc. What shall we then think of the story
of Sergius the Monk, and his Indoctrinating his Young Pupil, who never knew
Letters? For Popish Miracles, I believe the Rosary, scattered up and down at
Hounslow-Heath (where only King James appeared as a Man of Valor) did more
good against Popery, than all the Learned Tracts of Bishop Tillotson, and
Bishop Stillingfleet, though all were as gravely told as Fox's Journal, full of
Heresies, Lying Wonders done in a Corner, Revilings; what passages were for
Oliver and against the Stuarts, are left out; so those words, G. F. the Son of
God: Did not the Prophets words continue the same in all Changes? yet this was
the man who was called, as Simon Magus, The Mighty Power of God; but his
Wickedness was so great in pretending to bring contrary Messages from the Lord,
that Thousands of Quakers abhorred and disowned him as a Deceiver, etc.

Mr. Penn, in his large Preface, says, The Quakers declared, a Perfection from
Sin, but held not a Perfection in Wisdom and Glory in this Life: Well, Friends
had once no Sin, whatever they have of late; the Ranters, from whom they came
and derived some pure Principles, thought Drunkenness no sin, not Uncleanness,
for there could be no Adultery among those old Friends, for Adulterium quasi ad
alterum; and that was impracticable among them, for they were Corpus Vnum.

But Oh! the Wonderful Humility and Modesty of Mr. Penn, that Confesses, They
be not so Wise and Glorious as they in Heaven: No truly, not many of them so
wise as those accounted here on Earth; not Wise, but Otherwise.

Mr. Penn tells us, G. Fox on a high Mountain in Yorkshire, had a Vision, He
saw People as thick as motes in the Sun, that should in time he brought home to
the Lord: Many, says he, had Convincements, who are now at Rest, Thomas
Salthouse, James Naylor, etc. Well, whoever had Convincements, it is doubted,
by Thousands of Quakers and others, whether William Penn had ever any
Convincements, except of the Folly of this People, and how soon he might take
the Chair, when George was gone, and play King or Pope with this Ignorant
Tribe: What is James Naylor honored by him; that unheard of piece of
Blasphemy, whom many Quakers cannot endure to hear of? I knew a Man born in the
same Town with him, who told me, How all began with Spiritual Pride; after he
was a great Repeater of Sermons, he would hear no more, he knew enough, etc.
What if Friends should come to Mr. Penn, or Benjamin Cool, or others, in the
name of the Lord, to lay aside their Perriwigs; would they obey? No, no, but
laugh at it: How can they then expect that others should on these pretenses,
throw away the Ordinances of Christ? Richard Richardson, a great Quaker, has
written a Book against Perriwigs, how Condemned they are by Sober Heathens,
Ancient Christians, etc. at last he tells us, How John Mulliner, (a Friend)
about Northampton, was made to leave that Trade, and to burn one of his
Perriwigs before his Servants; that John Hall, a great Man sitting in a
Meeting, was shaken by the Lords Power, and so pulled off his Perriwig, and
threw it away: Now were not these Inspired? What means the New College to
teach Inspired Persons to Preach, etc. Did not our Preface-Maker threaten
Friends, If such orders of his were not observed, to break their Meetings,
though he seems to write so zealously for the sufficiency of the Light in Man,
etc.

A Collection out of G. Fox's Journal.
WE have here the account that Margaret Fell, the wife of G. Fox (once of Judge
Fell) gives of her Husband, it is laden with Impertinencies, and little
circumstances of his Life. -- At last she tells us, How when he came into the
Steeple-House, she hearing him, cried out, We are all Thieves, we are all
Thieves, we have taken the Scriptures in words, and have known nothing of them
in our selves: That Thomas Salthouse followed him: I knew him, he was an Idle
Vagrant; never did work, that they were at last weary of him, and would have
him work; once I met him, and he urged that of Paul against us, these hands
have ministered to my Necessities: so would Fox say, yet neither of them would
work: Who would regard such shameless Beasts?

G. Fox's Journal. I had a Gravity and Studiousness of mind, when young, above
others. -- I took ^are not to eat or drink much. -- I kept to ^ea and Nay; my
Relations were about ^o make a Priest of me, but they made a ^hoomaker of me;
when I was with my Master, he was Blessed, when I left him ^e broke. -- People
generally loved me for my Innocence and Honesty. -- I saw ma^y possessed not
what they professed. -- I ^as a long time almost in despair; and I ^alked many
Nights by my self: Priest ^tephen wondered at my Answer, why christ said, My
God, My God, why ^ast thou Forsaken me: I said, He dyed (...) the Sins of Men,
and dyed not as God: ^or Priest said, it was a good full answer, ^^th as he had
not heard; afterward he ^ould highly applaud me, and what I said (...) him on
the week days, he would Preach (...) First Days, for which I did not like ^^m.
-- I was so dried with Sorrow, that ^hey could not get one drop of Blood from
^y Arm or Head. -- I would not go to ^arriages, but Visit after, and if they
^^re poor, I would give them some Mo^y, etc.

They that set up for Great Persons, often tell us of the Convictions of the^
Childhood, though nothing to wha^ others have known that keep silence I suppose
his Dullness made his Parents make a Shoemaker of him, when they saw he was not
fit to be a Priest; like him that said to the maker of an Image of Christ, of a
knotty piece of Wood that would not do, If you cannot make a God of him, make a
Devil of him. Well, But why followed he not his Trade? I believe, if the Truth
were known, he was such a Blockhead he could never make one pair of Shoos well,
and if his Shoos were no better than his Teachments, he could not live by that
Trade, and so tried another; I believe not a word of the story of Mr. Stephens,
a Child of 10 year old might answer as well.

Well, George was a Madman too was in Despair; he was then temp^ed to commit
sin; he tells not what; was here not Love Melancholy? No doub^ this poor
Shoemaker was Ambitious (...) the honor and wealth he got by Marryage and
Speaking. I doubt, Read^^ whether thou art able to believe, a Minister should
Preach on the Lords Day, what he got from a Quaker week days, especially such a
Notorious Dunce as this, who was not able to express himself, but others must
word his thoughts for him, and so is this Book no doubt changed to purpose.

Now for his Revelations.

Nigh a Gate, a Consideration arose in me, all Christians are Believers, both
Protestants and Papists; and the Lord opened to me, that if all were Believers,
then all were born of God. Make Sense of this, or Truth, Reader, if thou can.

At another time in the field, the Lord opened to me, That being bred at Oxford
and Cambridge, was not enough to fit a Man to be a Minister of Christ; and I
stranged at it: I would take my Bible and go into the Fields and Woods, and
told my Friends, It is said you need not that any Man teach you, but as the
Anointing teaches them, and the Lord would teach them himself.

Then I met with a sort of People that said, Women had no Souls; but I told
them, Mary said, My Soul does magnify the Lord. Choice Observations, Rea^^ and
no doubt we have here the choi^^ flowers of what he laid up, gathere^ by
Friends.

When I had these openings, many tr^^bles and temptations came upon me; in^^
Morning I wished for Evening, and the Evening for Morning; the Openi^^ answered
one another; many Opening^ had of Scripture and the Revelation^ Wonderful Ones
no doubt: I set (...) hollow Trees by day, and walked mour^ fully by night; Yet
none of us reporte^ he was in a Mad-house at Box, (...) Then, even then, I
heard a voice, saying There is o^e Jesus Christ, who can ans^^^ to thy
condition. If this were examined perhaps we should be told, this w^^ not
vocally but mentally, an inwar^ voice (that is motion) might ser^^ the turn.
One Brown had Prophesies (...) Sights of me on his death bed; and be sp^^
openly of me, and what the Lord w^^ bring forth by me: I prayed, when (...)
house seemed to shake, and they said, (...) now as was in the Apostles days.
Perhap^ two or three giddy Women might thus prate; and that is enough for a
Quakers Miracle.

I was come up in Spirit through the Flaming Sword, into the Paradise of God. I
knew nothing but Pureness, Innocence and Righteousness; so that I was come up
to the State of Adam before he fell: the Creation was opened to me; I was at a
stand, whether I should practice Physic for the good of Mankind, seeing the
natures and virtues of the Creatures were so opened to me. Wonderful Depths
were opened to me, beyond what words can declare, p. 20. All I meet with cannot
bear man's coming to Adam's state before he fell: Reader, Tremble at the next
Blasphemy. How then can they bear to hear of man's coming to the measure of the
fullness of Christ? which he before said he did.

Observe, Reader, what Nonsense and impertinencies are in these Openings; I
doubt not, Drunkenness and Swearing are no sins, in comparison of such belying
of God. Whoever said, It was enough to go Oxford to be made a Minister. No,
many there, and that come from thence, are too Ignorant to be such; I knew one
there, a good Scholar that Preached, that could not tell me whose Wife Sarah
was, how many Tribes there were. -- I knew another, who when he preached on 1
Eccles. 2 began thus, Vanity at the first was but a little imp, but now it is
grown to such an exuberant Whale, that it can swallow thr^^ Jonas 's at a
morsal, etc. I have heard of one in Exon College, coming down late to dine in
the Hall, was asked the reason, Oh, said he, I was rending the pleasantest
story that ever I read in my Life, if it be true; What story, said they, then
he began to tell the story of Joseph and his Brethren.

Now Friend George, it is opened to me, that it is not enough for a man to be
brought up in a Shoomakers-shop to be made a Minister. The Lord would teach
them, etc. Some kept to this, and cared not for any man's teaching; but after
all, George sets up for a Teacher himself, contrary to his first sayings when
You need not that any man tea^ you. -- Is none of the Heretics he had,
Detected; for John at that time taught them by his Epistle. Ge^^^ was Adam's
equal for Perfection, and what Christ's too? yet the aforenamed Goldney (a
famous or rather infamous Quaker) among other notorious untruths by him and
Wyat, denied, That any Quakers held Perfection; no not George Fox himself; for
I knew him, said he; then run on; Thou art a Liar, Report, and we will Report;
Report, and we will Report. Had George been a Physician, none had Cured half so
many as he had killed; why had he not acquainted Physicians of those Virtues
and Operations of the Creatures Opened to him for the good of Mankind? No, no,
the Cheat had then soon been discovered: How did Mr. Penn, and other Friends,
like the Pudding that George put Herbs into, etc. when they were almost choakt
with eating it? Truly I believe they had rather have been at a Friends
Spiritual Supper at Bristol, who invited several, all sat an hour, or more, at
the Table, none were helped, nor did Eat, the meat carried away, Friends, I
invited you to a Spiritual Supper; which made some Quakers joque, when one
said, Truly he found great refreshment there: I could prove all, if they dared
to face me,

On goes George.

The Lord said to me, go to such a Steeple-house, and testify against that Id^^
and the Worshippers there. -- I cured (...) distracted Woman. -- Many were
cured of Infirmities; and Devils were cast out. One hearing a Priest in a
Steeple-house, the word of the Lord came to him, do thou not know my Servant
is in Prison, so he came to me. -- One said of me, there was never such a Plant
bred in England O Pharisaical Vain-glorying! I was moved of the Lord to put of
my Shoos, and to go through the City of Litchfield, (...) cry, Woe to the bloody
City of Litchfield* I saw in the street, a pool of blood, and my f^et were
warm; I knew not what it was; but I was told, in Dioclesian 's time, Thousands
of Christians were there Martyred; so I was to go without any shoos in their
blood. -- Who can believe this Fable? One said to a Justice of Peace, a^ Angel
came in at Beverly Church. -- It was^, said George. Observe the trick* he soon
got in and went out.

It was strange to see a man come in without a B^nd. Bands and Hathands were
once condemned by the Infallible Spirit, as well as Lace and Ribonds. -- I
cried, preach freely. (Did George do so?) People were moved by my Groans. Did
he not groan on purpose? I saw a Profession without a possession. See how proud
the Fool was of a common Gingle going up and down among Illetirate Country
People. When they saw the man with leathern Breaches come in, the Priests would
be gone; Terror surprised the Hippocrites. Some of them would say, The Hireling
flees, but forgot it was when the Wolf comes, the Quaker. I had a Vision of a
Bear and two Mastiffs that should pass by me and do me no harm. -- which was
the Constable. So may we call every idle dream a Vision from the Lord.

Meat was set before me, as I was about to Eat, the word of the Lord came to me
saying, Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye. (that is, a thought or
motion arose) Immediately I arose from the Table, and eat nothing, etc.

Every Whim was at first a word from the Lord, till they mistook Places,
Persons and Things, and their Folly manifest to all men. His Miracles were no
more real than Popish ones of the Rood of Grace, Christ's Blood, the blood of a
Du^^ in a vial, etc. when he tells of Outward Ordinances, know Reader, the
design of this Book, is a Lie in this thing; We affirm, That as Food or Physic
looked on, handled, tasted, neither kill hunger nor cure pains; so the bare
talking or knowing of Scripture, will not do without a deep impression on the
heart; yet the work of God lies with the head for knowl^dge, as well as with
the Heart for Grace. Must Men Experience Scripture, and know it after? They
were of old commanded to teach their Children the Law: Christ said, How readess
thou? None said, Thieves, Thieves.

I thought to have gone on to George's Epistles, full of Blasphemy and Falsehood
but I grow weary of such stuff; and I suppose so does the Reader too.

After this Impostor and False Prophet, condemned teaching by Man, but by the
Light; he becomes a Teacher himself; after he disowned all Courts himself, The
Light was Suffieient, He pretends a word from the Lord to set up such
Assemblies, by them was the Light tried; thousands of Quakers seeing this
bare-sac'd Iniquity, hated him for his Hypocrisy. The Author of the Spirit of
the Hat, cries out, O Popery! O Prelacy! O Presbytery! This was the thing we
condemned in them. -- Mr. Rogers wrote smartly against them, and tells you what
a bag of Iniquity Friend George was: Whereas George called Ministers False
Prophets; they were, strictly, neither false Prophets nor true ones; they were
True Teachers, but pretended not to Prophecy, George Fox, in another book I
have seen, calls the Scripture, and names Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, Dust,
etc. Papers sent forth for detecting Error, p. ^6.

In Epistles I lately saw, George Bishop wrote to the King and Parliament, That
the Quakers were Innocent; in no Rebellion not Dissaffected to him. Yet he, and
Fox, and others, cursed the Presbyterians for attempting to bring in the King;
and when he came in, they wrote to him of their Love to him and Faithfulness.
George Fox would call his Writings, The word o^ the Lord, the word of God;
though this was too high for Scripture, only for Christ and their words. Mr.
Cris^^ a Reformed Quaker, in his Babel builders unmasking themselves, has made
a Collection of their Abominable Errors and Blasphemous Assertions, taken out
of Bu^roughs's Works.

That the Sufferings of the Qu^kers were Greater, and more Unjust, than those
of Christ and the Apostles; for t^ose, said he, suffered by Law, and in some
respect, by a due Execution of Law. p. 279.

In another Book he tells the story of Solomon Ec^les, a great Prophet, a
Famous Man, who burnt on Tower Hill his musical Instrum^nts worth about tw^
hundred pounds, as C^ueso says. He was a great Foxonian; and after John Story,
a Quaker, had condemned the Courts Fox set up, Solloman Eccles came to him (as
I have had it also from a Quaker then present) desiring to speak with John
Story, who craved excuse, being very Sick and in constant expectation of Death:
Tell him, said one of Eccle^ his Companions, Solloman Eccles has a message to
him from the Lord; when they were admitted he thus said, O John Story thou have
condemned the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, Women's preachings and Women's
meetings, the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and thou art bound
in Heaven. -- Be reconciled to George Fox, who is Gods Friend, and the great
Apostle of Jesus Christ, this is the word of the Lord to thee, This year shall
thou dye, because thou have taught Rebellion against the Living God: He
replied, as the Quaker present told me, I expect to dye in a few hours; yet I
know the Lord sent you not: But see the Goodness of God to detect such Villainy;
the Man Recovered, and Lived four or five year after; now if he had dyed, what
a famous Prophet had Sollomon Eccles been? Pray prophecy next, Thus says the
Lord, This winter! O this Winter! thereshall be Snow and Ice; yea, I say, Ice
and Snow; yet the next Summer, many Flowers shall be seen in your Gardens; yea,
much Corn in your fields, and not only so, but much fruit upon your Trees, for
so it is revealed unto me, and by this you shall know that I am a True Prophet:
But suppose none of this should be, why then all was understood, not Carnally,
for that is nothing, but Spiritually: This Reformed Quaker professed to me, No
man can understand them by their words.

I mention not George Fox in his Journal, comparing the best of Men with the
worst of Men, the Holy Laborious Ministers of Christ, to Baal's Priests,
Sorcerers, Judas, the Devil himself, etc. this is so common: Vast is the
difference between Preaching for hire, and taking hire for Preaching: The
Priests under the Law, lived by the Altar, and a good Livelihood they had; can
words be plainer than those of St. Paul, As they that waited on the Altar lived
by the Altar, so has the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.6.7. Now, how is a Man said to live on any
Employment; but to have a Competency (at least) for himself and his, and to lay
up for wife and Children, and himself too, against Sickness and old Age: The
Discipl^ 10 Mat. 10. As Laborers were so worthy of their Hire, that they were
to be provided for by their Hearers; they were forbid to carry Money of their
own; the thing is quite contrary to what our Perfectionists would drive at;
Christ worked then Miraculously, and they were commanded to Trust Providence.

Paul took Wages of some Churches, and Robbed them, as we say, I shall Rob you,
if we take freely; he told the Corinthians, He had power to forbear working,
which was enough, as well as Barnabas and other Apostles: If he wrought, he
complained of it to them, and lays the fault on them: Must we be reviled too,
or stoned, because he was? But I pray when did Fox work? If any say, he had
much other work; Paul had more, The care of all the Churches lay on him: Paul
bid Timothy give himself wholly to those things, Meditation, (or Studying) and
Reading. 1 Timothy 4.^3. How many pair of Shoos, I pray, did friend George make,
after he got so well by Speaking? He grew Rich, he eat the fat and drank the
sweet, and so the poor Shoemaker preaches up (...) Mortification. You shall
find how much George was concerned at what others said of him; I have heard of
one much concerned this way, and asked one, What do men say of me? He replied,
Fools say you are a Wise Man, all Wise Men say you are a Fool; and I pray which
thin you?

This Journal of G. Fox is now taught in their Public Schools, and read
instead of Scripture in their Fa^^^ from day to day; This, in a word, (...)
become the Quakers Bible: they (...) have written against our Bible, I (...)
have written against theirs: Jam ^^mus ergo Pares. Not only do the follo^ers of
George Keith condemn this (...) as a Notorious Deceiver and Impost^^ but the
Harp-Lane Quakers disown (...) Discipline, as the Women's Meet^^^ etc. though
they are corrupt, as to (...) Doctrine about Christ. -- with (...)
Grace Church Street Quakers, who (...) both Doctrine and Discipline. W^^ G.
Fox's Wife, once Margaret Fell; (...) past Childbearing, was to have an (...)
the Midwife was sent for, but nothing comes, yet this was the Marryage that was
a type of Christ and the Church.

I commend George among all the lies he tells, he added not this, That they who
went to Convert the Pope, according to their expectation, could by Inspiration
speak to him in his own Language: I have not so much Charity to believe that
Conscience or Modesty kept him from this, but an open Notorious Confutation;
Friends how^^^ made bold to whisper this among themselves, and have been so
impudent to tell me so. That his followers differ a^^^t their sentiments,
concerning the Trinity and Scripture, yet they care not for that, whilst they
all keep to the fundamentals of their Religion, that Men put not of their Hats,
nor the Women Kirsey, but both say Thee and Thou. There are about One Hundred
Thousand that have followed him, as has been computed; these make Heathens
Christians, and Christians Heathens. It is expected when Muggleton is ^ead, his
Journal will be Printed also, and his prophesies, as some of his Disciples tell
us; though Fox and he damned one another as False Prophets times without number.

He that would know more of George Fox's Ignorance, Lies, etc. Read his great
mystery and battledore a large Folio also. They, the Quakers, can tell who ^^e
are Saints, who are Devils, who Apostates, without speaking a word. He denies,
p. 99. That Christ has a Humane Body o^ Humane Soul. Asserts plainly, T^^ the
Soul of man is a part of God, ^e it came from him and goes to him^^^ p. 272.
and p. 99. That Christ is not distinguished from the Father, if ^^ Penn pleads,
he meant Separate; (...) George, though Inspired, was ignorant of words, and in
the name of the Lord condemned them that rightly use^ them. You are, says he p.
114. conce^^ed in sin; David did not say, Y^^ ar^ but I was, -- Profoundly
answered His answer to Dr. Owen's Chatechis^ is fit only for Laughter.

He answers John Gilpin's Book, (a book worth reading) of Qua ers be^^^^ That
he was Drunk after he left the Quakers, and a Warrant was out for him; the
usual Answer. Page 244. The In^^^al Seed are the Saints, and then they are not
Dust and Ashes; Abraham was so: In his Battle-door we have a large book about
Thou and You; what it is in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Syriack, Samaritan, Dutch,
German, French, all Languages to me, says he, is dust, who was before all
Languages were. O Blasphemy! the whole of this Book is a Cheat: this Fool
understood not English, much less what he wrote of, which was another words.
He could write Hebrew Letters, and many were hung up in Friends Houses to make
them believe he did all by Revelation; an Ungodly Cheat.

I shall only propose to the Quakers a few Questions.

1. Seeing the Papists pretend to Infallibility, Miracles and Prophesies, and
the Muggletonians too, why should you be credited more than they? Had any one
man of you the gift of Tongues? George Fox himself, when he was sent abroad,
when in America he sent for one Emperor and two Kings to Preach to them, they
understood not his English, he was a barbarian to those barbarians: if you say
the Testimony was inward. -- of pray be sure keep it there, trouble not us with
it.

2. Can any Atheist or Papist speak worse of the Holy Scriptures than you? It
is well known, Sam. Fisher said, They were not capable of being but a Lesbian
Rule, a nose of wax; and asked this question, How could any one be Infallible,
that they were not a cunning devised fable? I have not seen his works in Folio
(...) many years; but I remember (...) playing on this subject (and that
inverse too) as is not fit to be named (...)

3. How abominable is it in Disputations and Discourse, to use words, Janus
like, with two faces or a double sense, one to quiet an Objecter, another to
satisfy Friends privately? You are good at Hocus Pocus (the old phrase from
the Papists, Hoc est Corpus, turning a Wafer into a Body) yet you will call a
man Liar if he repeat your sense, if not exact words; should you say a
Shilling, and I repeat it 12 pence, if to serve a turn, you would say you never
said so: How often do Friends answer to what is not asked, and evade what is?
You sometime ask us, What Scripture for Absolute and Relative? yet use such
words your selves.

4. How much are you unlike the People you were? Muggleton long since cursed
you, That your Visions and Revelations should fail: Blessed, said you of old
for your Quakings, are they that tremble at my Word; yet some said, The Devil
trembled in them: What is he blessed then? Now you tell us, That as when a man
takes Physic, he is much disordered in his Body till his distemper be gone;
so you, till sin was purged out: What have none that turn Quakers, for almost
forty year past, any sin in them to be purged out, as well as the first
Quakers? Nothing was more common at first then this Scripture, They shall not
teach every man his Neighbor, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know
me from the greatest to the least. yet G. Fox taught them every where; and it
has been often said in Meetings, Friends, you are to take notice, William Penn
will be here next First Day. But how could they tell, on their Principle,
whether he should be moved to speak to them?

I close this part of my Work, with the words of Mr. Rogers, a Bristol Quaker,
he wrote a Poem, called A Scourge for George Whitehead an Apostate Quaker, in
the close of which, he has these words. Let George Fox, and they that uphold
him, Remember 'twas Jereboam that caused Israel to sin, and as his name was
branded to Posterity so shall theirs (...) We cannot own them to be Head and
Lawgivers; their Church, Government, Orders, Canons Ecclesiastical, are
becomes Reproach, Taunt, Byword in the Nation, as a just recompense of their
Pride Apostasy and deep Hypocrisy.

The QUAKERS No Apostates, Or the Hammerer Defeated, etc. Examined.
MY Learning is talked of by this Man, to make Trophies for his Victory, yet it
seems my Arguments are light; If by light, said one in the like case, you mean
clear, I wonder you cannot see them; if by light you mean trivial, I wonder you
cannot answer them. I thought I had in my first Book so smitten the Quakers,
that I need not to have smitten them a second time.

Because Repetitions are tedious, especially of Impertinencies, I shall not
trouble you with many of his words; neither shall I actum agere of what is my
own.

I see I have so broken their Teeth that they cannot bite, though they c^^ bark.

This Man of impotent malice, ha^ing lost his reason, falls a Raving and Lying
prodigiously beyond all Men, as shall be proved: I had taken no not (...) of
him, nor W. C. the Churchman, had it not been for my foregoing work being the
feeblest Adversaries I ever had. Reader, know for the veneration this man and
some few more seem to pretend to for the Scripture, it is nothing; they deny it
to be the word of God any more than their own Boo^ which are Writings of Truth.

Are they good subjects that de^^ King William to be Lawful King of England,
beeause they grant him lawful Prince of Orange? As vast a difference is there
between the light of Na^^^^ and that of Scripture, as between the light of a
Glowworm, and the light of the Moon in the Night time

I brought, a writ of Error against the Quakers, and see how frantic (...)
grow; their Errors are so many, th^^ if one should ask a Quaker, What is (...)
Name? instead of the blaspheme^s answer of one, my name is, I am; he might
reply in the words of the Demonaick in the Gospel, to Jesus, Legion, for we are
many; ask their Principles, one tells you one thing, and another, another, and
all from the same Infallible Spirit; nay, the same man shall transform himself
into several shapes; they cannot stand before Scripture or Reason; when the Sun
appears, the night of Bats and Owls is come.

I profess my self to be ashamed to meddle with this Accuser, who is so
Infamous for Lying, that all the world can confute him: The Papists in their
Casuistical Writing, have asserted, It was lawful for a Priest, if suspected
and ^^^en, to say or swear it before a Justice of Peace or a Judge.

Quest. Are you a Priest?

Answ. No, that is of Bacchus or any P^gan God.

Quest. Did you ever read Mass?

Answ. No, that is not with a design (...) you of it. etc

They can deny at the place of Exe^^tion any Treason or Murder, and say they
are as innocent as the Child to Night born: Why? because forfooth, they have
been since absolved: nay if occasion be, that they dye Protestants too; that
is, they protest against the H^resies of the times.

It was well said of Mr. Mead ((...) true Englishman, in the late Reign (...)
his Immortal Honor) when Sir D.C. told him of the Quakers Knavery about five
years since in Bristol, in cheat^^^ the King (a piece of Roguery too long to
relate) the men chosen, as the best of them, by his Majesty's order, to decide
the matter, were so vile, th^^ he said, thou have them upon the hip, sp^^^ not
a man of them. -- B. C. i^ a Fo^onian Quaker, I deal with him as such; not a
separate Quaker, these roundly answered to Dr. Lancasters Questions (Bp. of
Londons Chaplain) abo^^ Christ, etc. when the Foxonians did it sophistically;
the Separate ones answered well to all the questions from Philadelphia in
Pensilvania, when the Foxonian ones there refused to do it; (...) swallow all
that Fox once said, and now Penn, without chewing: To Re^^^^ and Curie is
Common; Oh! what putrid stinking words come from the mouths of the pretenders
to Pure Breathings?

No doubt when some of the Quakers, Fellow-Heathen in America, hear their hard
character of the best Ministers with us, they think we are like Canabals, or
like Infernal Fiends.

Some when they drank of the old doctrine of Christianity, desired not their
new. 5 Luke 39. but said as he of the wine, The Old is better.

Deism is now a thriving weed in England, and Quakerism is of kin to it. The
Deist (observe) and Quakers are very friendly one to another: how writes Mr.
Norris of Love to God as Creator, Benefact^r; Why not Redeemer? I have been
asked the question, Is he a Deist? I do not say he is; this is he that has
written so favorably of the Quakers to his perpetual shame.

I am informed, the Quakers Preach more a crucified Christ within a year or
two, then ever they have done this thirty year. Well, G. Keith, and other
Reformed Quakers, have taught them to speak well, but have they yet taught them
to think or believe well? They say no, All but mere Tricks: Ignor^^^ Whitehead
now Preaches, Christ's (...) is in Heaven that was once in the Gr^^ Well, if
you be Inspired Persons not you were Impostors once.

Now for some of B. C's Asserti^^ the naming of which is enough, or m^^ than
enough for any that have read^^ Quakers Impostors or Apoststes, p^^^ from their
Avowed Principles and cont^^ry Practices. he says, That he found (...) Truth
or Sense till he came to p^^^^ that Book. That the Bristol Quakers ^^ver left
their meeting in the last Persec^^on unless when Sick, etc. not Lawre^^^ Steel,
or others. That the Quakers ge^^rally bow not to men, etc. That George
Whitehead and William Penn did (...) bear their open Testimoney, that in (...)
boo I grant the Quakers are more just (...) others, and careful not to tell a
Lie. The I plead for Lying as a Lawful thing.

That I bring 2 Timothy 15. When I c^^^ to mind the unfeigned faith that dwelt
(...) thy Grandmother Lois, etc. as a place (...) scripture for playing at
Bowls and N^^^ pins: These and many more things, I dare be bold to say, He
knows all to be false. He must have a face of brass that asserts this. No
wonder Quakers cry shame, and Mr Penn sent me so civil a Message to disown his
being concerned since the Cry about it. This man has cut the throat of their
cause. If I prove they ^^w, I prove them Apostates, on this man's Confession;
then Penn is an Apostate; and the Quakers so, and B. C. himself so, and that
since he wrote this Book, as well as before, as Quakers themselves confess.

Other things I shall Reply to; That I had a fit of Love Mellancholy, made ^y
Confessions, and put up in a Mad^^ise BOX. Hence I am called what he pleased
times without number; as he had this from the Devil, so I suppose W. C. from
his Book: if this be false, if I never was one hour in any such place, What
Defamers are these? Who shall believe any thing on their Evidence? as all my
Friends and Enemies too, acquainted with me, know these stories to be some of
the most Impudent Falsehoods that ever were written, as I declare they are, and
I never heard the stories till now; so I say, as in the Epistle, I will give
Five Pounds to any man that shall prove it. I hope no Ministers, for my sake,
will regard what these Monsters, not Men, say of them, and People not Regard.

That R. V. denies, That he confessed to me, their Minds were changed, ab^^
leaving the place of Public Worship a time of Persecution. That Monsieur
Whitehead, denies he expounded Solomon's Fool for a Holy Man. Whosoever is Simple,
Prove. 9.4. Give me any form of Words as an Oath or Protestation before God; I
will use them, That I heard both these two things with my (...) Ears; the
Cretians are always Liars, and so are the Quakers. Should I say, I th^^ day saw
a Quaker carried along Drunk by six Men, holding his Hands, Legs Body, that I
never saw none so carried but he, I care not for their denying when so many
Spectators know it True. That he knows not the story of the 40 days Fast, etc.
Never heard you of Mrs. C. of Plymouth? If b^ husband A. be alive, let him that
you, not me, you force me to it; I care not to mention names, for reasons
mentioned in that Book.

That W. P. denies the story of Mr. Nicholet whom he caused to be turned out of
his place for Licensing a Book against Popery, in the Reign of K. James the 2d.
Why had not Mr. Penn gotten this under Mr. Nicholet's, own Hand? Let him yet do
it, it much concerns him; No, no, his guilty Conscience keeps him from desiring
it, and Mr. Nicholets honesty and credit from doing it. That I say, I have no
men or books to help me, yet I write what I have read and heard. Every Child,
B. C. excepted, would know the sense of this; Did any one think, tho I am far
from my Study and friends, I must forget all that ever I read and heard too?

That I said, I would not propose a Question to William Pne^, and yet did,
about not serving Protestant but Popish Ki^gs in Wars, when the sense is plain,
I proposed it not for an Answer to me, he being suspected to be no small
Jacobite. And now the Guns roar, Oh impudence and Falsehood: The Lake for the
Liar, and the Liar for the Lake, etc. But what is for thee B.C. thou impudent
Publisher of so many notorious Untruths? nay, no end of them: as that I wrong
the Quakers, to charge them with denying Scripture to be a Rule: Judge all men,
Quakers themselves; That to pray in Families and alone, is the known practice
of Quakers, etc. must be a notorious Untruth or Equivocation: What is it the
Old shift, mental Prayer? no friend C. that is almost gone too. Seeing you so
provoke me about Barclay, others remember the Words as well as I; and I
declare, He was once a Papist and served the Priest at the High Altar: I am
ready to prove his Confession of this, where, and to whom, had my challenge
been accepted of: I am a Hundred Miles from my Study, I think it not worth
while to go to Cullington to carry your Answer, who have out done all men in
Lying, by telling me in Print, that Quakers generally bow not to men; What will
you say as one, We bow not, but give a civil Nod? Well, the Civil Nod was once
called Bowing and condemned to man, as due only to God, and all in the name of
the Lord.

I am not bound to follow thee B. C. in thy large discourse to make up something
about Baptism and the Lords Supper; only was not 1 Cor. 1.14 etc. a notable
place to prove it is out of door to Baptize, when Paul names whom he Baptized,
did he go beyond his Commission? or acted he not according to Mat. 28.19, 20.
He gives the reason why he was glad he Baptized no more, lest any should say I
Baptized in my own name: for some said, I am of Paul: Christ sent him not to
Baptize, as his principal Work, for that was to preach the Gospel; Like that,
Labor not for the meat that perishes (not so much, or not in comparison) but
for that which endures to Eternal Life, Laboring for food that perishes, is
so far from being a sin, it is a great Duty in all, and the neglect ^ great sin
against the Law of God and Nature. Mat. 28.19 must be of water baptism, for man
cannot baptize with the Spirit.

For the Syllogism B. C. lays down (once condemned by the Infallible Spirit as
a Heathenish Custom, hateful to a Christian) how knows he the Apostles
Baptized not acording to the Form, Mat 28.19. because we read not so; besides,

What if Christ's Words be not a necessary form to be then Used; they that
preach in the name of God and Chirst, may do it without naming this in so many
words, I determine not now but confute his Argument; the Lords Supper they Say,
they need not; the Substance is come to them; you wicked and Ungodly Wretches
was not the Substance come to Paul, and other Saints at that time: what
Substance is come to you, you Prayerless Worldly Creatures?

Now how can this Man call his Idle Tale an Answer? might I not have expected
my Questions to W. Pe^n to be considered in Order?

Q. 1. About Perfection. What I say of Job, Asa, Paul, None of my reasons here
are considered; if the Doctrine of Perfection be not True, they were Imposters,
if True, Apostates, for they now Confess, They are not Perfect; then say I of
the Devil, for so they once said to us.

Q. 2. Of G. Bishop's Lookings Glass, if the way of the Quakers was not like
the Old Christtans, He was an Impostor; if the Old way was good, they be
Apostates

Q. 3. For Meetings, They left in Bristol their Public Place, were taken in a
Private One: Would in a good Humor tell some of ours, how they stole a meeting
such a Week d^y, carefully going in and coming out for fear of Informers; Were
they Apostates that did t^is? They that came out of Prison went no more Openly;
O shameless Creatures to deny this, and call me Liar.

Whitehead, when blamed for not appearing in London as before, said, He could
be of as good Use in such a Private Place; Was never in Prison in all the last
Persecution, as I am credibly Informed; yet some wished Acts 9.24. that had not
been in Scripture Paul's being let down in a Basket, etc. Deny, and Deny as you
will, I know you so well I will as soon take the word of a Seminary Priest or
Jesuit about his Church, as yours about your Light, etc.

Mr. Vickris at his own House told me, There was a Dark Day came on us cannot
be denied. -- Some were in Debt, Prudence was to be used. When I answered him,
The Practice was Justifiable in it self, not in them. He was not in Debt, When
I put him to it, he said, I believe their Minds were changed, else it must be
bad as thou say. Then said I, Repent of bringing a false Message from the
Lord, and do it no more. so we sat down good Friends, and talked of other
things The Story of Elizabeth Serring and Dorcas Dole, is Notorious; did I name
the Habitation of either of them, that you thus B.C. quarrel? Pray Look again.

Quest. 4. The Question is, About leaving Ministers for Humane Learning and
following Penn for his. The answer is about Spiritual Learning. Was not Penn
followed for his Parts? Had he more of the Spirit than the rest? No, say some
Quakers, much less; others say he had none at all: Was not Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew condemned, etc. Must I name things again and again, and still
unanswered? My charge against Penn's being no Scholar seems to be granted.

Qust 7. About Bowing to men. Thou tellest the Greatest Lie that ever was told
the world, You bow not; you Quakers, Men, Women and Children, speak out; Is not
B. C. an Impudent, Infamous, Ungodly Liar?

Quest 5. For saying one thing to Cromwell in the name of the Lord, and the
quite contrary to King Charles; I am put off, The Snake in the Grass will be
answered. It will be a pure dish; it has been long looked for; the answer you
give me and others may serve a Mentiris: For my Questions they should have been
considered, which I answered of the Reader.

What is W. Penn? what are the Quakers?

I am told, How many of us promised lives and fortunes to K James; I answer,
Too many, yet not so many as you imagine; They that did, did not pretend to
Infallibility, Inspiration, and I know not what: The Bristol Address was from
them called Presbyterians; There were five ^f us in or nigh the City; this was
the act only of one Man; all the rest of us (Ministers) protested against it;
nay, One (now Dead) Said, He could be content, they and their Posterity, should
lose the Benefit of Law, who s^ shamefully betrayed it. I, and one Minister
more, were in danger of being had at Council Board for opposing the Court
design: What a horrid Infamous piece of Flattery was it, to tell that King That
they nothing doubted the Security of their Religion and Property, knowing al^
pr^ceeded from Mature Judgment and P^ed Principles etc.

Yet 1. They kept Fast Days for fear of Popery and Slavery.

2. Then could K. James be no Papist, if he believed it Unl^wful to Persecute
Men for Conscience, in the common Acceptance of the Words; then had the Pope
Erred, and a Council, and that in no small matter; but alas K. James knew
Prose^ution of men for Heresy was no Persecution for Conscience, besides, an
Erroneous Conscience, was no Conscience Qui^ non est scientia etc.

3 The Addressers would say privately; All was but a Trick of K. James; No
wonder he Laughed at them when they were gone, and PVAW'd etc.

I have been every where, of late years, Plagued about those Scandalous
Addresses. Some would call a Second Judas, a Second Cyrus, and the Destroyer of
their Country, the Repairer of their Breaches. Well done B. C. to call them
that did it to Repentance, I have called on them: all little enough.

Now Friend C. let me ask thee a few Questions.

Was it not shameful to censure me and another man, for not putting our names
to our Books, and thou never put thy name to thine? I gave it out to all I was
the Author.

May I not debate the matter with Jews Mahometans and others, and yet be
conclusive in the Doctrine of Christianity? Why Child, what ails thy Noddle?

Is it proper to censure me for being Comical, after I gave my reasons, and
they not considered? p. 6.

Is it true W. Penn Expounded on Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, a sense denied in
one place, confirmed in another; to serve a Turn (I see there was a little
Mistake in putting the names of the Book) could not so great a Liar as thou,
that talks of my being once in a mad-house; that deniest Quakers Bow; Could
not thou have said, Son^ Enemy, or the Printer, or others, put in those Words,
or that some Letters accidentally jumpt together and make these unhappy
Sentences: Where is Inspiration now* when he was lately told some Quakers deny
any Body of Christ in heaven, etc. He said, they were Ignorant tho Sincere:
What friend William, is the Light and Infallible Spirit come to this?

Did I say in my Book, The Quakers were more humble than others? etc. Away thou
shameless Man; What will thou say next? Or that, The Quakers were more Just
than others? No, I did not so wrong them? Did I not give a true account of
Barclay about the Light? p. 79. Look once again.

May not Perfectionists, long continuing so, at last reform, and so God (...)
merciful to them in their Conversion, (...) a proper Petition: I am not used to
deal with such silly Arguers.

Suppose I should plead the cause of him that wrote the story of Henry Windor;
let it not displease, seeing he was joined with me; who he is I know not.

He is said to be worse then Mad, worse then the Hammerer: why? the two Quakers
that came to Henry Windor and his Wife from the Lord, that they had Murdered a
Child and must dye, and the Spirit would appear in the Court: They were
Melancholy or Mad, says B.C.

1. They were owned by the Quakers before, in and after, to their Death.

2. This Madness was not discerned by the Justice or Judge, or Quakers or
others, but the Quakers closed in with them.

3. If any thing falls out as they say, They be the Lords Prophets; if not,
they were then mad. Was Sollomon Eccles Mad when he Prophesied falsely to John
Story; not when he prophesied of the burning of London, of which Friends took
no more notice then the Men of the World, and so never moved their Goods,
saying, It was a Delusion? Was W. Penn Mad, when he prophesied against Thomas
Hicks? For the story in Bristol of a Quaker that said, Thus says the Lord,
give the man his Rope again; it is denied; so is every thing else; but I pray,
Why not as well as when G. F^x was about to Eat, The word of the Lord came unto
him, saying, Eat not. -- as before.

Now B. C. to humble thee, if it may be, for thy Folly and Falsehood; I will
suppose, I should apply my self to thee in the same Language thou have done to
me, and with the like Falsehood, What would thou say of me? what many now do,
and many more will of thee: Suppose I should besprinkle thee with some of thy
Oratory to me and another; Thou Impostor, in thy Colors, fit for Box or
Bedlam: in thy Youth thou were burnt in the hand at Bristol for a Highway-man;
yea, thou were Pillored, and thy Ears were cropped off for Sedition: Thou
refusest to Preach to the Quakers ^n^er Five Hundred a Year. None of my Friends
in Bristol ever deserted St. James's Back, etc. in the last Persecution; and I
will prove it, for it is well known John Weeks was committed to Prison;
therefore neither he, George Founs, Samuel Winney nor I, did ever refuse to
walk up and down the City on week days, or to Preach in our Public Places to a
thousand at a time, Lords Days. O thou Impudent Man, Madman, etc. Thou did
prove the Unlawfulness of Bowls and Nine-pins from Mat. 1.2. And Abraham begat
Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his Brethren. He must
set up for the trade of Lying, that does it more than thou; every leaf is full
of Nonsense: None have so much the command of the Peoples Purses as the She
Speakers; yet to avoid Reflections as much as may be, I have thus spoken to
thee, etc. But there is no end of this; should I thus do, might I not fear as
Cain; you had as good cut off a man's arm or leg as thus defame him: Well, one
consideration is comfortable, a Quakers word is no Slander.

You have been known to be Notorious Liars in your highest Pretenses, your
greatest Speakers.

I had almost forgotten to tell the Reader, that B. C. in the name of Friends,
says, As Scripture contain the Word and Command of God to us, so they are the
word of God, etc. No more need to be said; your cause is gone: I therefore
declare my work lies with Mr. Penn, to him were my Questions sent, and seeing
he cannot answer, and therefore wisely attempts it not, I intend no more to
answer such scriblers as B. C.

I leave you with St. Paul's words, Gal. 1.6, 8, 9. I marvel you are so soon
removed to another Gospel; but though we or an Angel from Heaven Preach any
other Gospel unto you, then which we have Preached unto you, let him be
Accursed; as we said before, so say I now again, if any man Preach any other
Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be Accursed. Which words
have been wisely and seriously used by some Ministers, when Quakers have come
from far to them to deliver a Message, forsooth, from the Lord, against the
Outward Word, and Outward Christ, and Outward Baptism, and Outward Supper.

Now for the Man of Wit, Civility and Learning; the Author of, Trepidantium
Malleus, Intrepidanter Malleatus:
Or, the West-Countrey Wise-A-ker, Crackbrain'd Reprimand, to a late Book
called, Mr. Keith no Presbyterian, nor Quaker, but George the Apostate.
Hammered about his own Numscul, being a Joco Satyrrical Return to a late Tale
of a Tub, emitted by a Reverend Non-Con, at present residing not far from
Bedlam, By W.C.
NOw Monsieur, I hope I have pleased you to the heart, and no more will you
send a Hue and Cry after me for taring away a Rag of the Title of your Book.

What a Blustering Title is here? I must not examine its Grammar or Oratory,
because the Writer is a great stranger to both, as will be soon enough
discovered: In the mean while, I remember I have heard that when K. James I.
was about to Knight one Williams of Essex, he asked him, what his Christen Name
was? He answered, penny ruden huden hudibras penny knip knap clip clap clun
clap, I think, said the King, the Old Nick was thy Gadfer that gave thee such a
name; Sir Ruden, I cannot tell what, Williams, arise, said he: whoever gave him
his name, let the world judge who made your Title for you, who is the Father of
Lie, the Slanderer of the Brethren: Well, Mr. Trepidantium Malleus,
Intrepidantur Malleatus, I cannot tell what; let me parley with you; Empty Casks
make great Sounds: Your Title, that Blazing Comet, does it presage any
mischief? certainly its own disappearing. You tell the World strange news of
me, that I assure you I never heard till now. Had you it from the Infallible
Spirit and Writings of Friend B. C. of my Love Melancholy, and being at Box,
mentioned and hinted 10 times in your little Pamphlet? Always on the same Tune
you know what Creature is so: When was this? when was I at Box, or any such
place? Oh I have hit it, it was when the Presbyterian said, If ever Jesus
Christ was D -- it was when be made the Lords Prayer; which W. C. makes no
bones of to write plainly, though a Turk would hardly write so of his Mahomet:
-- What will not Church and Quakerish Jacobites say: W. C. a Churchman, he
says, and perhaps the first letter may stand for Wicked. Well, Mr. W. C. you
Wicked Churchman, I promise any of your Brethren, Five Pound, if they can
before me, prove your Charge: You say, You are afraid, lest by answering me,
you should be forced to go to Bedlam too, etc. Sure here are bad simptomes of
hastening there, but alone for me; and in the close of all, you anticipate an
objection to your Readers.

What think you Sirs, am not I almost as mad as my Antagonist to answer his
rambling stuff? How does W. C. answer, by granting the thing, but p^^mising
Reformation; Excuse it this (...) I will trouble you no more: Well t^^ You have
been once mad; if this be gr^^ted, your Readers are mad too, if t^^ regard such
a man's promise out of (...) fit, much more if in it.

I never heard what the fate was the befell me for my High Demands (...)
Preaching; Had you it from B. C. you are grown a great Church-Frie^ to Friends;
you write of Mr. Pen^ Mr. Whitehead and other Quakers, wi^ great veneration and
devoir, and h^ many a good word for them; T^ Allegorize not away the Literal
Sens^ Scripture; though it is so notori^ they have done it often; though (...)
serve a turn, they shall call for t^ Literal Sense, Take it up, look on (...)
l^y it aside again: but Mr. Keith and are both fit for Bedlam; it is pity
(...) Hospital in Moor-fields should part (...) etc.: Nay, which is more
strang^ Mr. Bugg, a Reformed Quaker, a^ now a Zealous Pious Churchman, ca^ not
escape the Lash: He, Mr. Penn^ man and Mr. Crisp left the Quakers (...)
disgusts, and particular Pecques; why had you not told what they were? for fear
of a Confutation: All know they left them only for their Blasphemies, Heresies
and Abominable Practices.

But that which is almost unpardonable, is, your Vilifying the Man whom all the
World Admires, an high Episcopal Man too, the Author of the Snake in the Grass:
All that wrote against the Quakers before, played with them, till he wrote that
unanswerable piece. p. 17. That his writings are collections of those
Gentleman's before ^amed; which is, say you, as if we should take an account of
the Presbyterians from Bishop Laud or Heylen; or of our Church from Bellarmine
and Harding: Well macht Mr. Churchman, say I, but the mischief is, his
Collections are not in their Books; in good truth Sir, you might well ask your
Reader, Whether he did not think you mad? Mr. Sna^e consulted the Authors he
cites, and it would have been a most Injurious Charge to so great a Man to be
so unworthily Reflected on, had it not been by such a D -- as all must see that
are Scholars, and read your Book.

He, Mr. Keith and I, in our Three New Ways of Dealing with the Quakers, help
not one another to Materials: after you censure us all, as if Fools or Madmen;
you tell us, Su^^ Fools as you think to ma^e Fools of them (Quakers)

You ask us, How does it appear Mr. Keith is Reformed? He desires you to
appear, so do I; there is no end of Printing in your way, Cite at l^rge and
then dispute what is the sense (...) this word and that word; but neith^^ you,
nor William Penn, will meet Mr. Keith, or me; Come forth you Co^ardly Defamers,
show your Faces (...) you dare.

Because Mr. Keith changed not (...) any one Article of Faith, may he (...)
therefore be changed in other things You say, You see as a looker on, That
(...) Joy of all Ministers about G. K. (...) groundless, and they be all
mistak^^ What is the Bishop, Lord Mayor, a^ Clergy mad too, as well as G. K. a^
Trepidanti^m Malleus? Conformist^ know not who you are: You seem to own your
self to be a Jacobite, though not a Socinian, and that I have hit the mark
about your being paid by the Qua^ers for the Service y^u do them, and ask me,

Why may not I as well as Dr. Stubbe? It is an old question, Why may not one
man play the Knave as well as another? Perhaps you are of the opinion of H. P.
^n the time of the War, when one called him Knave, said, If thou were not ^
Fool thou would be one too now: Yet ^ou tell me, I would uns^y all I have
^^itten against the Quakers, for Money: Well Brother, I am then no fool, though
^o often called so: You ask me, Whether ^^en I had a Privilege Place, I ever
put ^my Surplice? No Sir, when I was at ^he worst, I was never so Mad yet, as
^o put my Shirt on all my Clothes; I ^ill not only as soon, but sooner take
(...) Moulins Fools Coat, which though (...) would wear, all would not; Would
(...) a Fools Coat well become a Mi^ister of the Gospel? when I was a ^reacher
at Brislington and Ch^^^eton, ^ad Presbyterian Ordination; I baptized ^cording
to the Directory; I Catechized in the Church, in, What is the chief end of Man?
etc.

Mr. W. Churchman tells me, H^ could prove G. Keith 's Questions to be
Propositions, if need were. -- He can s^^ more of the Aberdeen business then I
(...) know, or are like to know for him; (...) a fine way of answering: I ask
yo^ one question, Whatever place Mr. Keith Allegorized in Scripture, D^ he once
disown the Literal Sense? this his Adversaries, you plead for have done; though
sometimes they would own it Politickly; Show one pl^^^ where he is guilty here?

For your Citations, It is no more (...) Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones whe^^
Rises; then say I, Not the same N^merical Body: He ever owned it the same for
Substance, though not Qua^^ties: What think you of the stubstan^^ of the Egg,
and Chick coming of (...) Of Rain, when Ice or Snow? So (...) other, is not
that Flesh that shall (...) raised; the Apostle says not, The Body, etc. 1
Cor. 15.27, 53. Yet t^^ Mortal shall put on Immortallity: Ho^ shall it arise?
Various opinions ar^ about it, among them that are found in the Doctrine of the
Resurrection.

For your great Contradiction, p. 13. about Faith in the Man Christ, as
universally necessary to Salvation, and yet True Christianity may subsist
without the ^nowledge of Christ in the Letter; he says, Many know little of the
History of Christ, ^is Birth, manner of Life and Death, that must know him to
be a Mediator and Sa^iour; and how far God may even to Heathens, discover a
Mediator, before they ^ye who knows? You have many in your Church, and too many
in ours, that ^ssert more than this, That Heathen Turks, etc. that never disown
their Ma^omet, may Love God and be Saved: ^re these Apostates too? For that is
^y Question; not whether G. Keith ^rote Unsoundly at one time, or con^adicted
himself at another: For that ^istaken passage in his Exact Narra^ve, He had not
changed in one Principle (...) Religion, for Thirty Year or more: He ^d not
mean by Principle, Opinion, as (...) seem to understand him, but Arti^ of
Faith: Sure he confessed before, ^s Change in Opinion about many things, as
Matthew 28.19. but he was Baptized himself in Infancy, which he owns, etc.

You tell us not what bitter Expressions he once dropped against Presbyterians
and others, but in the general, Hard ones; only that he called your Prel^^y
Limbs of Antichrist, your Ministry, Ambitious, Lordly, without Zeal for God,
and you bid me look in his Books. -- Why Sir, I thought you had known that not
only G. Keith, but the Scots Presbyterians, Rutherford, Gelaspec, and many
others, called them so too: and at home the Anabaptists, and some Independents
and Presbyterians themselves have done the like: Does this prove them
Apostates? No, no more, nor so much as the names you give our Ministers and
Meetings, too gross to foul my Paper with, prove you to be so: For Election, I
take him to be more sound than you, your Citations of him and your joques
compare together.

If you prove him a Corrupt Man, a Man that had forgotten himself, and dropped an
Unadvised word at Turners. Hall, I had not been his Voucher; but an Apostate he
was not by any Arguments of yours, and therefore you a Libeller; what your
design was in that abusive Pamphlet, he that runs may read: I know he has
corrupt notions many and great, and yours of the New Church of England
(Remember there I keep, not the Old one) not few or small; how I have proved
that, I need not tell you; so well, you thought it not safe to Reply, but only
rage, You Ungrateful Wretch, etc. I profess, when I look upon my Reprimand, I
wonder how you could call your Return an Answer; Was it Ignorance or Malice?
perhaps both; but no wonder when you tell the Quakers, that I have written
nothing to purpose against them; I suppose you do not, cannot think so: Why
answer you not my Questions to Mr Penn, he could not, B. C. attempted it, but
has ruined their cause, and advanced mine, by making Lies his Refuge, which I
suppose makes Mr. Penn disown any ha^ in it.

I say it again, My work was not fully to justify G. Keith, nor whether he hat^
contradicted himself, but to detect W. Churchman 's design, which was to
strengthen the hands of Penn and the Foxonian Quakers, to wound the Separate
Ones; this is obvious to any Sober Reader to be his Design: Did G. K. ever
reject the Literal Sense, as they often did of Scripture? If he said Christ
within was the Object of Faith; did he say only as within; denying Christ
without to be so, which all know the rest did times without number: I am glad
we have him so far, I wish more, I doubt not he is Culpable yet not so vile as
W. C. makes him; he will shortly answer for himself.

Further, W. C. proves him an Apostate by denying Election, etc. I replied,
Then are the Arminians Apostates, which is to be abhorred by Sober Men: He says
I am no Arminian, No, and yet ^oques after B. C. and sports himself with you of
the Election of Grace; the Reprobate World; you babes of Grace; which Pious
Sober Arminians do not: Well, if he be not so, are such Arminians as appear in
a great Figure, and who are numerous in the Church of England, Apostates? I
proved at large, the New Church of England is an Apostate Church on his
Principles, not mine: I am answered, Y^u are an Ungrateful Wretch to reflect
on that Church that gives you your Liberty: We humbly and heartily Thank His
Majesty and the Parliament, for continuing the Liberty we had before, but will
you not thank us for helping you to secure your Liberty, by joining with you to
effect the late happy Revolution: How odious would it have been, after all, to
have made our Circumstan^es worse than King James did; yet to be plain, Had not
he given a Toleration, we might have been to seek f^r it for some of you:
Suppose a Man on the Highway is full of Rage, Boats me, takes away my Money,
and was about to cut my Throat; there comes a Highway-man to destroy both, he
calls for my help, we kill him, he cuts not my Throat after all, I am beholding
to him I confess; but is this an answer to my Objection, Then is this Church an
Apostate Church, etc. which I have abundantly proved, consequent to his Opinion
to say, You are Ungrateful. -- and never answer one of my Arguments; Is this
Disputing? -- The Title of my Book shows what I designed, not a Vindication of
G. Keith, against all his Citations; no, but to convince B. C. of his feeble
Arguing about Apostasy.

In what sense Baptism with Water is and is not a Fundamental; I shall take no
notice of an old objection, when my answers are not considered: Let him read
once again my Reprimand.

Mr. W Churchman, you tell, What care you should take to keep G Keith out of
your Church: I pray let him attempt first to come in: We do not see he is i^
such have: you say, Y^u will not so easily take Members. I grant according to
your good old Constitution, you should not: We might be agreed about
Communicants; but according to the practice of some Innovators, this body has
for scores of years lost its ^urgative Faculty, and therefore is so ^^healthy
and giddy, by keeping in those D^egs that should be thrown out; you now take
and keep Atheists, Adulterers, Swearers, Ignorant Persons, notoriously ^isibly
such: thus is its Discipline corrupted as well as Doctrine, for its Doctrine it
is one of the best Churches upon Earth: You ask, W^y ^^ave we the Church of
England? I affirm we cannot find it, you have left it, as I have proved in my
Reprimand, clearly, fully, a^^ndantly, which you reply nothing too, and I love
not Landem Cantilenam.

Well, The Presbyterians Perse^uted in New England, say you, Whom? Blasphemers
of Christ, Cursers of Magistrates in the Streets, False Prophets, etc. Obj. In
Scotland now: What? such as were found in Popish Cabals, that say, Their
Interest and Religion is concerned in the bringi^g in of K. James again: But
your Church early Persecuted B. Hooper for not wearing a Surplice, who honestly
condemns all Symbolical Humane C^remonies in the w^rship of God, in his Preface
to his Savory Exposition on the prophecy of Jonah: ^ox, that Glorious
Martyrologer, was a Non Con: Famous Mr Cartwright, and many more, such, must be
involved in trouble for a few Popish Trinklets: Were your New Engl^nd or
Scottish Saints such as these? Are your now Martyrs taken up and sent to Goal,
for being in a Corporation, or within 5 miles of it? Ruined for not coming to
their Communion? etc. It is not the Suffering, but the Cause, that makes the
Martyr, for when Christ was crucified, two Thieves were crucified with him.

Did ever any Presbyterian persecute as your Brethren? Who countenanced Sham
Plots? By whom was Stephen College Murdered? Who condemned him and rejoiced
at his death? I speak the more freely of him, because I was with him often
after his Sentence, and before his Execution: Who believes he came to Oxon with
a design to seiz the King? What he, and he alone? It is well known what the
Earl of Anglesey said: Could my Lord Howard, after his Pardon and Discovery of
another Plot, confirm this? No, he knew nothing of the Shaftsburian Plot: Mr
College, with a shower of Tears, solemnly protested to me, when I begged his
silence if in the least guilty, I never expect mercy from God, if I was guilty,
or know any man to be so that way: Such Sham Plots, put some on real ones,
which indeed were not successful, as your Plot was against James the Second.

I dare say, you cannot believe it, say what you will, That the Presbyterians
railed as much at the Quakers, as the Quakers at them.

Neither can you think the Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments turned into verse
by me, so bad as you say: Pray read, how your Church has done the Lords
Prayer, at the end of the Psalms, approved to be Sung; if mine be Uncouth,
Rhyme Doggrel, Profaning of Scripture, yours much more; so I challenge any man
to take the substance and words of the Ten Commandments more exact in one stave
or eight lines; others approve and more than so, but you will not any thing
that is mine, and for that reason, because mine.

I suppose some in Bedlam have talked better then you, or some others yet out of
it argued more subtly; I have heard of Mr Widows, famous for a Tract of
Natural Philosophy, that being heard to make a great noise in such a place,
some came to him and asked him what it meant? The Devil, said he, has appeared
to me, and told me, he could prove I could not be saved; I told him he was a
Ly^r from the beginning, and would be so to the end: The Devil began
Syllogisti^ally, He whose name is not written in the book of Life, cannot be
saved, but thy name is not written in the book of Life, Ergo thou can not be
saved: I told him, said he, my name was written in the book of Life, and
therefore I denied the mi^or: so the Devil went on, The Scriptures is the book
of Life, but thy name is not written in the Scriptures, Ergo, thy name is not
written in the book of Life: I denied, said he, the minor again, and told him
my name was written in the Scripture, he asked me where, I told him, Honor
them that are Widows: in ^e^d there is my name Widows, so I ^asted the Devil,
and he is gone.

Were you in such an Academy, or amongst such Collegiates, as you phrase it?
perhaps you might hear things more Ingenious with your Ravings than now we do.

How is it you have not a word to favor the Quakers Prophesies? Is it because
you have such in your Church? Arise ap Evan, that mad blasphemous Prophet: Was
it before the Wars, that a Parson prayed, Confound all the Enemies of thy
Church and People, a violent cough took him, when over, he thought he was in
that part of the Pulpit Prayer for the Prelates, and so went on, By what Names
or Titles soever they be Dignified, whether the Most Reverend the Archbishops,
the Right Reverend the Bishops, and all inferior Priests and Deacons.

You a Defender of the Church of England! and take no notice of the Cassandrian
Articles, Non Resistance, Bowing to the High Altar, not indeed, Book of Sports
now; thank our Meetings: Desire some one to answer for you, seeing you cannot
for your self.

Now Sir, you would let the world know you have read more then Cato's Verses,
perhaps the Sentences under, for you bring us Noble Apotheigems.

In ipso limine titubare ominesum est

Nullum reprehenderis vitii, cujus ipse q^^^as reprehendi.

Faedares invidi^ est* et Authori interdum perniciosa.

Ex me disces, quid ingenui homines far non possunt.

O rare discoveries! such as a Parson said, Amor res est bona, as St. Austin
says: Perhaps you would convince ^e, that you have yet your Grammar by you,
but all will not do.

I^sipie^tes est discere non putarem, etc.

Well, Eris mihi magnus Apollo, is right.

De mortuis nil nisi bonum, and all that follows it, was answered in my
Vindic^ae and Reprimand too, therefore I shall not answer now: Only, Are not
those you Revile every 30th of January, Dead? Was not Dr. Owe^ Dead? who never
swore to Richard Cromwell, as Oliver, his son, lately assured me: If I must, I
will produce the testimony of Dr Goodwin, Mr Jenkins, ab^^t Eva^gelista
Quintus; and also of Mr Sydrack Symson, Dr Sanderson and many others, whose
little ^^^ger was thicker than my Loins: We are better reconciled than you
think for, except a few men that talk as you write: You tell me of one that
said of me, I was fit for Bedlam, but it was as the Quakers say, Good Company.

Mr Baxter was a Prodigee for natural and acquired Accomplishments, I never
doubted, only he wanted the culture of better Education; he was a grave Man, of
a sober life, full of life and motion, a hard Student, very Zealous, and of a
Public Spirit, one of the gravest Preachers upon Earth, which pleased me well;
and I more believe he was a Good Man, than that Origin or Tertullian were so.

But the Quakers will (say you) take Advantage of my comparison between
Baxterianism and Quakerism: that I suppose pleases you, why complain you if
so? but others will see where they are going; whose Cure I hope and see, and
could tell of great instances of Great Men already, were it convenient; I
expect no cure of Quakers when others made a comparison be, tween Baxter and
Bellermine: N-doubt Papists triumphed, What theno Protestants Reformed.

Because we are often twitted about some men's expresing themselves in these
points, particularly Mr. Shepherd; I declare I am well assured, that the
Sinc^re Convert was never wrote by him; he gave this under his own hand to Mr.
Giles Fermin, and told him, He never saw it but once, and never desired to see
it more; this Mr. Fermin in censuring that Book, and Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest
and other Tracts, with great depth of judgment has told the world I also with
them, disown Dr. Crisp's wild, unsafe, unsound expressions, and as it is a
trouble to me, so it is to others, particularly some Worthy Congregational
Divines, that some men, who seem to plead our cause, have dared to be his
Advocates: How odious is it to hear some men, when reproved for idle walks
about business Lords Days, to say, Jesus Christ has kept the Sabbath for me,
etc. and then cite Dr. Crisp; why do not such say, Jesus Christ has kept the
sixth seventh and eighth Commandment for them, and therefore they may Kill,
Commit Adultery and Steal; s^^^ may as well say, Jesus Christ intent into
Heaven for them, and that is enough, tho they never go there; we are content
with Mr. Bolton's way for Distressed Consciences, Dr. Sibbs and others, without
the Doctor's Wild Phrases.

But O wonderful! you have some verses out of O^id too, but still mistaken

Quo me fixit amor, quo me vehementuis ussit.

Whether the Printers mistake or yours, is a query with me, for the next verse
which must be yours not his, shows what you are.

Hei mihi quod Amor non-sit Medicabilis Herbis.

This strongly proves what you say, Fools will be meddling; I suppose you
learned it not out of Ovid, but your Grammar, at the end of Syntaxis; look, if
you have it, you shall find it thus.

Hei mihi, quod nullis Amor est medicabilis Herbis

Thou art not able to scan a verse is evident, that took Quod -- a to be a
^^ondee, when both short; now how might I triumph had I but the tithe of thy
Brutallity.

Seeing you love Cato so well, I will direct to some choice verses, and
suitable ones too, as well as I can remember, without Books by me.

Virtutem primam esse puta compescere Linguam.

Had you remembered this and the next,

Rumores fuge, ne inciipas novus Author haberi.

You had never Printed your fal^e stories of Box, etc.

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit au^^ps.

You flatter the Church of England, smile in her face and cut her throat.

Nam sine Doctrina vitu est quasi mortis imago.

There is for you Sir!

Now for some choice Sentences in Prose ( Erasmus if you have learned so far)
instead of your dull ones.

Si male dixeris pejus Audies: That you deserve tho not have.

Beat sapiunt, et Quercus concion^^^

There is for you and the People; now for his Eccho's

Quid agunt, qui ambiunt Sacerdotium? Otium, non felix si boni Literis? Eris.

Now for some Proverbs, Ne suitor ultra Crepidam: Had G. Fox, the poor
Shoemaker, and you, thought of it, he had not set up for a Preacher, nor you
for a Poet.

Ante victoriam canis Triumphum; be sure play the fool no more that way: Omnium
horarum homo: for the Church of England and the Quakers, at the same time too?
There is your man for you: Asinus ad Lyram: W. C. at the Poets.

Now I have stockt you, How often will you throw out these sayings? I have read
them in Erasmus Adag. and else where.

You are coming on as a precious Youth among Friends; Sam: Fisher, or G. Fox
cannot go beyond you for Lying, in loathsome phrases, and homspun Sentences:
Suppose I should, in your words, charge you as falsely as you me, Forty times,
about Box or the Madhouse, etc. would you not (and all the world with you) say,
I was a most Impudent Rogue: Suppose I should say,

You crac't brain; Mad man, in no degree Compis Mentis; you measure your own
Corn by another Bushel (Learnedly Expressed) You Cur, you Yelping Cur, you make
my worship smile; remember the Proverb about your charge of Amorous Passions,
etc. the old woman had never sought her Daughter in the Oven, had she not been
there her self: Remember how you were condemned for an Assassinator, and are
shortly to be hanged: You got loose lately from a Mad-house, remember what you
endured there: You were whipped about London streets for cutting Purses, as all
know.

You D^nce and Blockhead, that write of Latin in Prose and Verse, and
understand not a sentence of either: You deserve to have your bones broken: Do
you hear? Goodman Goose, Goodman Woodcock, you ought to be thankful that I am
so favorable to you: Away you Blockhead, to talk against the Dissenters; I
could answer you if I saw fit; you deserve a kick o'th --

Or suppose my Book bore this Title,

The London Wise-aker, Crack-brain'd Apostate maker, proved an Apostate, ab^ut
his Numseul, being a joco S^tyrical ^eturn to a tale of a Tub, emitted by a
Reverend Conformist:

How should I expose my self instead of you, as you have done your self in
^tead of me?

Who shall believe such shameless ^nfamous Libellers, as B. C. and W. C.
^rethren in Iniquity? Had you served ^ome Men so, they would have ruined ^ou
both; but you have done it your ^elves, as to your Reputations, etc.

I advise you read a Book over before ^ou answer it, and if you have not so
^uch wit as to speak sense, have so ^uch wit as to be silent.

The great Dean, Thompson of Bristol, remember once in the Church, asked Boy,
before all the Congregation:

Quest. Who made the Catechism, ^^d Man's Chief End?

Answ. A company of Perjured Pres^yterians.

Quest. What did I do with one of those ^^^^hisms that that Prodigal Fellow
gave? (That was Trepidantium Malleus.)

Answ. You tore it in pieces, and trampled it under your feet: (He d^^ so in
the open street.)

Quest. What say they of it?

Answ. Oh that it is a most Heavenly Piece, etc.

Quest. But what say you?

Answ. They tell of the Trinity: Distinguish between Justification and
Sanctification, etc.

A Curate of his Preached on (...) 30th of January, on that Text, (...)
stilleth the Madness of the People: O^ went he to work, to prove, The P^^ple of
England were a mad People, (...) that they chose mad Representatives to (...)
in Parliament; and he would prove (...) were Mad, in that they voted against
(...) Succession of his Royal Highness the D^^ of York; in that they sent for
and comitte^ to Prison his Majesty's best S^^jects, particularly one now
present ((...) Thomson) etc. But, said he (as to your Readers) You will say,
th^^ a mad discourse; if I am Mad, said (...) I am sure you cannot say as
Feste^ (...) Paul, Much Learning has made me the People smiled, and said, No^
^ould clear him there You Sir, write like one, if you are such, I also, and all
that read your book, cannot but ^^ear you too in that point.

It is too large here to tell the world of the manner of Mr. Keith's
Convicti^^s, of a Meeting in England, in Pen^ylvania, etc. he has done it.

Now, That it cannot be charged on him, That ever he denied Christ's Body in
Hea^^n, etc. which the others did; and Curtis in ^^dding now still does, Owns
no Christ, ^^r Heaven nor Hell without him, etc.

Can it be imagined, W. Penn and G. ^hitehead had not appeared, when (...).
Keith called a Meeting at Turners^all, had they not known they were ^^iity? How
many vain pleas were ^ere to excuse their Non-Appea^^nce?

I forgive you from the heart, for ^ese Abuses; but were I Quaker, (...) you
had so abused me in Print, ^erhaps I had made my Fleshly Arm (...) have smitten
thy Outward Man.

I thank you for the kindness you ^e done me, Slander is sometime the ^eatest,
that makes all, even Enemies, to Pity, and Pity paves the way (...) Love: and I
suppose, your story about the Presbyterians, and the Lords Praye^ no one will
believe for my sake; the^ that object against the use of it say what I suppose
you cannot answer.

It was made under the Legal Dispensation; that is, when Circumci^^ons
Sacrifices, etc. were in force: nothing in it is explicitly asked in the name
of Christ; if it be the Land a^^ custom of all the Churches to conclud^ a
Prayer, or Grace, if never so shor^ with a Through Jesus Christ our Lord Is
this form proper for us now? H^therto you have asked nothing in my nam^
(mplicitly) sure, what you shall ask t^^ Father in my name (explicitly) y^^
shall receive; after this manner pray yo^ Ties to things, not words; Say thus
(...) such a man, says the Master to th^^ Servant, He does his business,
thoug^ in other words; I will not say, w^^ther the use of it be a matter of
Libe^ty which lies between Sin and Duty.

Be so wise as not to Talk of y^^ Churches kindness; I was once to (...) Tried
on the 35th of Elizabeth; o^ ^as then questioned for saying, the ^^le was good
for nothing but to ma^e (...) humor some, that he received the ^acrament in
Spain as well as at Bristol, ^^ere they pleased for him; that the Com^^nicants
in their Church, looked like a ^^mpany of Geese that were to be crammed; (...) be
had nothing to do at Church but to (...) fair Women; when this was heard, ^any
were in a rage for questioning ^is Gentleman about such things as ^ese, this
was no Fanaticism, and ^elieved that it was Spite, not Zeal, in ^^eir Brethren,
that put some on com^^aints, which they found true.

Well, Mr. Jaco^ite (for all observe (...) deny not this, though you do your
^^ing a Church Arminian or Lauden^^n) I pray remember what your ^^end Mr. Penn,
wrote to Pensylva in Mr. Keith.

I am sorry any should quarrel with ^^est and Learned G. Keith; my Love ^^m,
let him enjoy his Principles; he (...) want no encouragement from me, for love
his Spirit, and h^nour his Gifts, (...) peculiar Learning, Tongues, Mathe^^cks
and Platonic Studies; yet to please others, Mr. Penn played the Proteus, and
Excommunicated him in London, with such Zeal or Fury, that he said, He knew not
whether he S^^^ Stood, or Kneeled; yet had so much wit not to prophecy against
him, as h^ blasphemously and wickedly did again^ others, which came not to
pass, there fore Mr. Whitehead has done that i^ these words,

Thus says the Lord, Thou have pour out great reproach and contempt upon
(...) Servants and People, I will assured pour out great contempt and confusion
(...) thee. Yet we hope he will go to t^ Grave in Peace, as did Thomas Hit^

You Mr. Wicked Churchman, w^^ are such a Lying Historian, cann^ you set up too
for a Lying Prophet and be talked of as such, with Mr. Pen^ and Mr. Whitehead,
your dear Friend

If it be objected by my Reader why I have not been less facetious (...)
dealing with my Adversaries, I ha^ answered to it in other Books, an^ shall
only add, Some think to give (...) ways grave answers to ridiculous Pers^^ and
Things, is to make the answer rid^^^lous too.

Well, Sir, To draw to a close, Whatever bad Properties I have (too many) some
say I have this good one, To be easily Reconciled.

If we fall out, we must fall in ^gain, I know no other Remedy amongst ^en,
unless those that by a figure we call so.

If you please to come to my Lodgings, I am plain without a complement, you go
no where where yon can ^e more welcome; and the subject of ^^r discourse you
shall choose, not I; ^n Amicable Conference or Silence about these things as
you please: I ^^ve often said, It is not falling out that does so much mischief
in the world (for that is to most unavoidable) but not falling in again.

If you signify your Reconciliable Temper (for you seem to be too face^ious to
be malicious) be pleased to let ^e know when, where and with whom, I ^ay wait
upon you and kiss your hand. Anger, says Solomon, Rests in the bo^^m of
Fools: I am not in the least di^turbed by what you have done against ^our self,
and for me Eventually.

Postscript
SINCE this Book went to the Pre^^ Mr. Keith has witten a Just V^^dication;
and his long promised an^ long looked for Retractions are now i^ the Press, and
to them I refer W. C. and his Friends the Quakers. I decla^^ I never read, nor
never will, M^ Keith's former Books, nor dispu^^ what he meant by this word and
that for I stand by him no farther than (...) by the Old, though late Explode
Doctrines of Christianity: The A^thor of the Snake in the Grass, this d^^ has
Learnedly appeared in his Vindication, against Mr. Ellwood (a Quaker The Title
of this Masculine Tract, (...) Satan Disrobed, where he tells us, ^^puted
Righteousness, when examined was in putted Righteousness: Me^ need not seek to
Jerusalem to Christ Blood, Quakers have Printed, Ellwo^ says, It was a mistake
of the Printer too, for whoever did go there to seek his Natural Blood shed; he
says, they condemn them that plead for an Outward Sanctification: Who of us
ever said, Sanctification was an outward thing: a great Preacher among them on
Jo. 14. said, In my Fathers house are many Manchets, he applied it White-bread,
Fine Provision was in God's House: yet all was by Inspiration: One Printed,
such a Friend was Meeker than Moses, Stronger than Sampson, Wiser than Solomon,
more Patient than, Job, Harmless and Innocent as Christ himself; That some
pretended to come beyond the Outward Christ, or Jesus: That Isaac Pennington
wrote to the Jews, and never names the Outward Christ, but the Light within:
That they have condemned going beyond Yea and Nay, and attesting God to any
thing, and made such things Oaths, yet now have consented to this Form, on the
Parliaments giving them this favor, In the Presence of Almighty God, the
Witness of what I say: As the Lord Lives, they said was an Oath, yet denied,
W. Penn swore, when he said, As sure as the Lord Lives, because the word sure
was added, which made it the Higher: Read p 45, 46. about Penn's Prophecy of
Thomas Hicks, what Lies and Folly was used to secure Mr. Penn from being a
False Prophet, which no man can do, and this will be a stain and curse on his
name: He names T. Curtis and others, that deny, or will not own, what Penn's
followers are forced to say after Mr. Keith. -- This Ingenious Author (on whom
our Conforming Episcoparian flings dung as well as on me (became once more an
Advocate for Mr. Keith, who is his Intimate and Correspondent, That nothing but
Conscience induced him to this Change, it being against his interest in the
World, etc. They tried Mr. Keith in Pensilvania for his Life, about his
Doctrine, and no doubt had put him to Death, had not his Majesty at the nick of
time sent over a New Goverrour, W. Penn then Absconding (the world too well
knows for what) they there sent out warrants to seiz Printers and Publishers of
Books against them. He tells how Mr. Pennyman left the Quakers because they
would not in London proceed against Friends for Lying; Deceit, Uncleanness,
that was fully proved against them, whilst they would continue in the Unity: He
proves Cressius the Dutchmans History of the Quakers very lame and defective,
as about Burroughs's Sufferings, when the quite contrary was known, that
learned Man was too credulous and believed their Lies and published them: The
Whoredoms of Arcler proved, for which he fled, and here received, read in that
Book.

I justify the late hand of God on my mind and Body, after many years ease in
both: But was Spira mad? Was Mr. Rogers of this City so? Mr. Tragross of
Cornwall who pined away for a time? to name no others: Such as B.C. and W. C.
who Lie, etc. as if past feeling, are not so safe as Spira, of whom Mr. Perkins
has spoken favorably, and given weighty reasons, and Mr. Baxter more in his
Christian Directory; no Scoffers know what lie between them and their Graves: A
tempestious winds arise on a sudden on Mariners, who just before were in a
Calm, and (it may be) at their Music, which may not only toss them, but cast
them away, and none can allay, but he whom the Winds and the Seas obey; so may
an inward Tempest do. -- Remember that of David, Search me O God and know my
heart, etc. and that of P^ul, Examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith,
etc. for the best may say as Heman, I am even distracted th^rough thy Terrors;
yet was he no Mad Man; None accused him of I know not what Impieties; neither
does my Conscience Accuse of such idle stories, that those men and Mr.
Sylvester (like an old Quaker) have set on foot; none of which I ever saw, and
they dare not face me: Is their cause good? They are Suspicious Commodities
that cannot bear the Light.

It is expected when Muggleton is dead his Journal will be Printed also, and
his Prophesies, as some Muggletonians tell; yet Fox and he damned one another
as False Prophets times without number.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street, and John
Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street near Cornhill.
In Folio.
THe Works of that Eminent Servant of Christ Mr. John Bunya^, (...) Minister of
the Gospel and Pastor of the Congregation at Bedford: The first Volume,
containing Ten of his Excellent. Manuscripts, prepared for the Press before his
Death, never before Printed, and Ten of his choice Books formerly Printed, viz.
Manuscripts. An Exposition on the Ten first Chapters of Genesis; Justification
by Imputed Righteousness: Paul 's Departure and Crown: Israel 's Hope
encouraged: The Desires of the Righteous granted: The Saints Privilege and
Profit. Christ a Complete Savior in his Intercession: The Unsearchable Riches
of Christ. The house of the Forest of Lebanon. A Description of Antichrist and
his Ruin.

Books formerly Printed.
Saved by Grace. A Map of Salvation and Damnation. Christian Behavior. Pray
with the Spirit and understanding. The Strait Gate, Some Gospel Truths Opened.
Light for them in Darkness. Instruction for the Ignorant. The Holy City, New
Jerusalem. Resurrection of the Dead.

Collected and Printed by the Procurement of his Church and Friends, and by his
own Approbation before his Death; that these his Christian Ministerial Labors
may be preserved in the World. Together with a large Alphabetical Table,
containing the contents of the Whole.

The Complete Exposition on the Hebrews, in four Vollums, by the la^^ Reverend
John Owen, D. D.

In Quarto.
An Inquiry into the true Nature Power and Communion of Evangelic^ Churches;
with the True Nature of Gospel Church, and its Governmen^ wherein these
particulars are disti^^^ handled* 1. The Subject matter* the Church: 2. The
Form, Cause of particular Church. 3. The Poli^^ Rule and Discipline. 4. The
Office^ 5. The Duty of Pastors. 6. The O^fice of Tea hers. 7. The Rule, or
Ruling Elders. 8. The nature of Church Policy. 9. Of Deacons. 10. Of
Excommunication. 11. Of Communion of Churches: Complete, 1st. and 2d Part
bound. Those that have the First Part, may have the Second Part singly,
Entitled, The True Nature of a Gospel Church; treating of the 11 particulars
above mentioned. P 3 s Bound.

In Octavo.
ANatomy Spiritualized, in which is Considered, 1. The Happy State of Man's
Integrity in his first Creation. 2. The woeful Apostasy of Man from God by his
Original Sin, and how his Posterity is guilty of the same. 3. Man's Restoration
by the Second Adam, the Mediator Jesus Christ, and the great Excellencies of
the Covenant of Grace. 4. The whole series of Christian Duties, with promises
of Assistance. 5. The particular cases of Affliction, especially Spiritual
Desertion, Sickness, Poverty, Imprisonment, Reproach, Desertion of Friends and
Relations; and the promises in the several cases. 6. The Great Encouragement to
Believers, for Patience and Perseverance; from the Great Reward of Eternal
Happiness; and promises of Assistance; to which is added an Index of the whole.
Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

Vindiciae Justificationis Gratuitae. Justification without Conditions; or the
Free Justification of a Sinner, Explained, Confirmed and Vindicated from the
Exceptions, Objections, and seeming Absurdities which are cast upon it by the
Assertors of Conditional Justification: More especially, from the attempts of
Mr. B. Woodbridge, in h^^ Sermon entitled [ Justification by Faith Of Mr.
Cranford, in his Epistle to the Reader; and of Mr. Baxter, In so^^ Passages
which relate to the same ma^ter. Wherein also the Absoluteness (...) the New
Covenant is proved, and t^^ Arguments against it are Disprove^ By W. Air,
Minister of the Gospe^ and Pastor of a Church in the City New Sarum. The Second
Edition.

Meditation and Discourses on t^ Glory of Christ, in his Person, Offi^^ with
the difference between Faith (...) Sight; with a 2d Part annexed: b^ing the
Application of the foregoi^^ Meditations. 1. Applied unto Unco^verted Sinners.
2. To Saints und^^ Spiritual decays, and of obtaining fresh springs of Grace:
both parts ^ound together. Price 2 s 6 d

There have been 2 Impressions on the First Part of the Meditations of the
Glory of Christ, in his Person, Office and Grace: those that would be sup^lied
with the 2d part of the Applica^ion both to Sinners and Saints, may ^ave it for
1 s bound.

Discourses of the Holy Spirit, being ^n Addition to his Folio, In two Parts:
(...) part in 7 chapters, of the Holy Spirit ^^d his Work. 2d part treating of
Spi^^tual Gifts, their Names and Signifi^^tions; with the difference between
^piritual Gifts and Saving Grace; of ^xtraordinary Spiritual Gifts, and of
(...) Original, Duration Use and End: (...) Spiritual Gifts inabling the
Mini^^ry; how obtained and improved, in chapters, which compleats the whole
(...) Doctor intended on this Subject, you will see in Mr. Mathers Preface. ^th
parts bound together, price 2 s.

Multum in Parvo, Or a Compen^us Spelling-Book, to be used so ^n as Children
know their Letters; the help of which, in a very short time, Children may be
able to (...) and Read the Hardest Words (...) forth for the benefit of Little
(...) and may also help those tha^ (...) better Capacities. The Second (...)
on, Illustrated with diverse (...) Cutts. Price Bound 6 d.

William Penn and the Quakers, ^postors or Apostates, which they plea^ved from
their avowed Principles, ^^trary Practices. Price Bound 1 s.

A Reprimand for the Author of a ^^tituled, George Keith an Apostate, (...)

The Foxonian Quakers Dunces (...) Slanderers, proved out of George For ^^nal,
and other Scriblers; Particular (...) his Quakers no Apostates, or the Ham^^
feated: Ammanuensis, as is said, to (...) he sometime wrote himself)
Guliel^mus, alias William Penn. Also a Reply (a Churchman the Quakers Advo^^^^
Trepidantium Malleus, Intrepidantu^ etc. Price 6 d. All Three by Trepidantiu^

This being the last the Author (...) this Subject, those that are desirous;
(...) them ready Bound together.

A Divine Discourse Representing of a Believer speaking to God by Fa^^^ding to
the Doctrine of the Scrip^^^^ Verse, Price 1 d. but by the dozen are (...)

At the place above named, you m^^plied with most sorts of Stationary (...)
Paper Hangings by the Yard or S^^ Paper, Paper Books, Quills, Wax, ^^cils,
Wafers, with the best Writing ^^tant, f^r Exceeding Holman's Powde^ Blackness,
and holding its Color.


