A VINDICATION Of my Lord Bishop of Worcester's LETTER TOUCHING Mr. Baxter from
the Animadversions of D. E.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the lower walk of the
New-Exchange. Anno 1662.

A VINDICATION Of my Lord Bishop of Worcester's Letter touching Mr. Baxter from
the Animadversions of D. E.
Expected, when I first saw these Animadversions, that my Lord Worcester's
Relation touching his carriage to Mr. Baxter, had been false in many
particulars, and in all partial; for I could hardly believe any Ingenuous
person could write so sharply against a Father of our Church, if he did not
believe that he had truth on his side, as to the main occasion of the Bishop's
Letter. But I confess, I was much amazed, when I found our Animadvertor, not
only silent as to the main business, but of my Lord Bishop's opinion as to the
Controversy, if Dr. Gunning, and Dr. Peerson state it right. And yet he is so
angry, that through all this discourse, he gives the Bishop not one civil
Epithete, never calls him Lord, but taxes him of testiness and choler, of
malicious and ill-grounded fancy, of unpeaceableness and virulency, of trifling
with Scripture, of boldness and impiety. And that this worthy Prelate might
not go alone, he calls the Imposers of Ceremonies unconscionable, and so joins
all our Bishops with him. I never yet, to deal ingenuously, saw so much choler
in so few words come from the pen of any person, much less from one, whose
judgment, as he tells us, is for the Order of Bishops, from one who ever
opposed the Covenant, and is a zealous lover of the King.

I am now more fully confirmed in my former opinion, that my Lord Bishops
Letter is unanswerable, since our Animadvertor strives rather to pick a quarrel
with it, than to answer it. He had certainly a very great desire of writing, or
a very great animosity against this Bishop in publishing of his Animadversions,
since he knew before he writ them, that as to the Controversy, the Bishop was
right, and only here and there takes out a passage, which he thinks may afford
some dispute. How well he has done this, this ensuing Discourse shall evidence.

The first Exception he takes at the Bishop is, that he supposes so strict an
union, and inseparable dependence between Kings and Bishops, that they must
stand and fall together. -- I am glad he confesses the event of this War is
some advantage to this Position: But I believe if he looks but about him, he
will hardly find any that opposed their Bishop but did their Prince, as soon as
they had power to do it. He means nor, I suppose, in his Answer to this Axiom,
the Anabaptistical or Fanatic party, the Munster Rebellion will sufficiently
show, their Principles, by their practices. And as for the Presbyterians, for
them the World esteems the most sober of our dissentors, (although I am fully
of Archbishop Whitgifts opinion, that they differ in nothing from them, but
length of time, because the consequences of their Positions do naturally carry
them to the Anabaptists) I wish I could ever find their Government in any place
established, but upon a War, but upon Arms against their lawful Magistrates. He
that should hear of Zuinglius killed fighting, of Beza's trouping under the
Banner of the Prince of Conde, of the Genevans expelling their Bishop and
lawful Prince, of the Hugenots fighting in France against their lawful King,
of the Dutch subverting their Monarchical Government into a Commonwealth, of
the Scots, to name no more, expelling their lawful Q. Mary; He that considers
who first taught the lawfulness of taking Arms for Religion, invented the
distinction of Offensive and Defensive Arms, and who generally teach the
People, that the whole Power and Government is in them, will easily believe,
that their Principles are inconsistent with Monarchy, which has produced such
fatal effects throughout this part of the World. But this by the way; his first
Reason why this Axiom is not true, is,

1. Because Kings were in all parts of the World before Bishops, and what has
been may be -- I understand not at all how this is argumentative, because there
were Kings before there was any Christian Church, and so consequently before
Bishops, therefore when there is a Christian Church Kings can subsist without
Bishops: for whilst the World was Heathen, we find a Monarchy amongst their
Priests, a superiority and an inferiority evidently amongst them, and so though
there were not Bishops, yet it was necessary to have something that resembled
them. Amongst the Jews we find three distinctions of Clergy, High Priest,
Priest, and Levites, established by God himself, which is a very probable
Argument they were necessary to uphold a Monarchy, for they were necessary to
uphold the Jewish Chuch, or else they had not been instituted. I could not have
believed, that a person that seems Learned, could have thought that Axiom
reached further, than since the World was Christian. But if he only means,
since the World was Christian, why does he not assign some Monarchy that
subsisted with Presbytery, I think he can name none but Scotland, which how
long it kept from a Rebellion, after Presbytery was by Law there established,
the Animadvertor knows as well as I do.

2. His second Reason is, because Bishops as they are by Law established in
England, are purely the King's subordinate Ministers for the management of
Ecclesiastical affairs. -- This I think is more invalid than the former: for
allowing what he says to be true, which I am sure is not, I do not understand,
why because the Bishops are the Kings Officers, therefore there is not a
necessity of Episcopacy in a Monarchy, nay rather it inforceth the contrary,
for it demonstrates that Kings ever judged Episcopacy necessary to Monarchy by
always constituting such Officers to Govern the Church under them. Our
Animadvertor would do well to assign a King that put down Episcopacy, upon his
own free will and consent, without the force of the people, and settled up any
other Ecclesiastical Government, with which the Monarchy did better subsist.
But besides his Position is false: for the Law of England does not look upon
the Bishops meetly as Ecclesiastical Officers, but as a third Estate, without
whose consent no Act of Parliament did legally pass, unless they did
voluntarily exclude themselves; and that they are a third Estate several Acts
of Parliament expressly call them so. Secondly, All Bishops are to be
considered in a double capacity: First, As Officers instituted by Christ, and
so the Power of Church Censures belongs to them, and this Power our Kings never
pretended to, to have, neither does our Law any where cell you, that this
Authority the King gives them. Secondly, As Officers appointed by the King to
exercise that former power given them by God within such bounds and limits. And
many times out Law gives the Bishop much power in the Secular affairs, which
will conduce to the good of the State as well as the Church; which Power they
derive not from Christ, but from the Secular Magistrate. Now when the
Magistrate is Christian, it is necessary that the limits of each Bishops
Jurisdiction be determined by him, but were the Magistrate Heathen, the Church
had that power to prescribe the limits of each Bishop, as we see they did in
the first 300. years after Christ, and we find no Christian all that time ever
question them. And the reason is evident, because Christ that left the Bishops
the Successors of the Apostles, Governors of the Church, could not but give
them sufficient Power to do all things which was necessary to the peace,
increase, and aedification of the Church, which certainly the appointing of
limits for each Bishop to act in must necessary conduce.

But in the third place, I understand not how our Animadvertor agrees with
himself, when he tells us the King may conferr the management of Ecclesiastical
affairs upon Lay Men, and calls the Episcopal power undue Dignity and
Praelation of his inferior Officers, and yet some few lines before says his
judgment is much for the Order of Bishops. If he be for the Order of Bishops,
he must believe they have a power from Christ which no earthly man can either
give or take from them; but I believe he mistook himself, or else he would not
use such uncharitable Epithetes of their whole Order, in calling it undue
Dignity, and as some Antichristian. There is nothing more in these words but
what before is answered.

His third Reason against this Union is worst still. Because it will be found
none has been greater Enemies to the undoubted Sovereignty of Princes than
some Bishops have been -- Ergo Episcopacy and Monarchy are not necessarily
united. I would in answer to this desire our Animadvert or to name me any sort
of Men that are necessary to a Monarchy, and let him examine himself whether
this Argument is not against them. There are by Historians esteemed two
Foundations of Monarchy, Nobility or Arms: and have not many Noblemen, which
should be support of Monarchies, been the ruin of them? Witness the Barons
Wars, what necessities were several of our Kings brought into by them? And how
often do we read in story of Armies deposing one Prince and setting up another?
So that this Argument is as strong against any sort of Men, that a Monarchy
makes use of, as against Bishops. But now to use Argumentum ad hominem, [for I
confess I cannot esteem our Animadvertor a friend to Bishops, though he says
he is, since he uses no civiler language to one of them than to say the Pope
is his Father.] Is that party that call the Dignity of Bishops Antichristian
less Enemies to Sovereign Power than some Bishops have been? I believe
whosoever shall read the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, written by
Archbishop Spostwood, or shall but hear an impartial Relation of the Barbarous
and unchristian usage of our present King, when he was there, will be soon
convinced, there never were a Generation of Clergy so Antimonarchical, as that
Nation has produced, amongst the Presbyterian party.

I think now I have sufficiently overthrown his Arguments against the Union of
Monarchy and Episcopacy, It still remains as firm as before. Yet I would not be
mistaken, it is possible a Monarchy may subsist without Episcopacy, for we may
fancy all people so peaceable and just, as that a Nation may subsist without
Laws. But that Axiom does mean that Episcopacy is necessary to the well-being
of a Monarchy, not simply to the being of it, that the Church under a Monarchy
can no ways be prudently governed but by Bishops, nor the King can no way have
that influence over the inferior Clergy as by the Bishops. I speak here only
in reference to the State. But as to the Church, Bishops are an Order so
necessary, that I doubt it will puzle our Animadvertor, or any person
whatsoever to prove any Ordination but by their hands lawful in any case
whatsoever.

His second Exception against this Reverend Prelate is, that he is the sole
Pastor of all the Congregations in his Diocese -- I could hardly believe our
Animadvertor wanted Ingenuity before: For where does my Lord Worcester say, he
is the sole Pastor of all the Congregations in his Diocese? The Bishops words
are these, For it is the Bishop of Worcester, and not Mr. Baxter, that is
Pastor of Kederminster, as well as of all other Parochial Churches in that
Diocese. For there is much difference between my Lord Bishop's saying, he is
the Pastor, and the sole Pastor: for the Bishop is the Overseer, and chief
Pastor, not only of all the Congregations, but of all the Pastors in his
Diocese, and Mr. Baxter was not by any right present Pastor there, and had no
relation at all to that Parochial Church, as in his third Excep. I shall make
appear. So that this angry confirmation of the Justice of his Exception falls
to the ground. But let us follow him. If this be defensible it is only by those
Arguments which are commonly alleged to maintain the Popes Supremacy over all
Churches whatsoever. For, since a Bishop can no other way discharge his duty
herein but by providing Substitutes, what hinders but that the Bishop of Rome
may oversee a Million of Churches as the Bishop of Worcester 500? This
illustration I think was purposely chosen to fling dirt in this Bishops face,
that the World might suppose Prelacy and Popery go hand in hand, as their
Covenant joins them. But we must allow Ill words, from those that write little
Reason. This is grounded absolutely upon a false Hypothesis, for here it must
be supposed that every Bishops chief work is to feed his people, where his work
is to govern, to see that the inferior Clergy over his Diocese do their duty,
and teach therein sound Doctrine. And this work as it is more honorable, so it
is far more labourious. Neither is there the least correspondence between 500.
and a Million of Parishes, because the account of the one may easily be done,
the other is impossible. Besides, it is quite a different thing the Popes claim
and our Bishops, for the Pope claims to be Universal Bishop, the only Successor
of the Apostles, and that Christ has left him sole Governor of the Church,
and that all other Bishops derive their power solely from him; whereas our
Church teaches, according to the Opinion of the ancient Fathers, as were it
necessary I could show you, that the Power of each Bishop is alike, and as to
their Precincts and Jurisdiction, the Governors of the Chuch under persecution
appointed more or fewer, according as the place required, and ever since, what
alterations have been made in their limits, have been done by Civil
Magistrates, to whose care it belongs, as Governors of the Church, to see that
each Bishop performs his duty.

But let us follow him to his Proofs, letting alone his unnecessary
parenthesis; his first is Act. 10.28. when Paul sent for the Elders of the
Church at Ephesus, he bids them feed the Church of God over which (not he
himself by his sole Authority as Bishop of the Diocese, but) the Spirit of God
had made them (...) Overseers -- I will not here dispute what these Elders of
the Church were, though St. Hierome tells me they were the Bishops of Asia, who
I suppose might better know than any that lives in our age. I would here ask
our Animadvertor, whether St. Paul did not constitute these several Elders over
the several Churches, by laying hands on them, and appointing them to their
work? I hope he does not believe that the Spirit of God did in some visible and
extraordinary manner appoint these Overseers, but that St. Paul being filled
with the Spirit of God, did appoint them to such a work. If so, what makes this
to his purpose? and why should not he believe that our Bishops, though not in
so extraordinary manner, are assisted and directed by the Spirit of God to
constitute inferior Priests over the several Parishes, and to hinder those
that are erroneous, from infecting them? I am confident our Animadvertor does
believe, that the Ministers of his party are assisted by the Spirit in their
preaching; why not our Bishops in their governing? Now that this must be the
meaning of the place, I think may very probably be educed out of St. Paul's
summoning them to him to Miletus, in his charging them to perform their duty,
and in his freeing himself from the guilt of the blood of any of them, if they
miscarried, which he needed not have done, if he had not constituted them there.

2. His second Proof is out of St. Peter, wherein he commands his fellow Elders
to feed the Flock which was amongst them, (...) Oversfeeing them, acting like
Bishops, and not like the Bishop of Worcester, as lording over Gods Heritage,
but as Patterns of the Flock. -- So he. What is gathered from this? Ergo the
Bishop of Worcester is not chief Pastor of all the Parishes in his Diocese. I
confess, I am not quick sighted enough to see this consequence, Nay, I think
it is quite contrary, he bids them feed and oversee the Flock, therefore they
were chief Pastors of their Dioceses: for if it be evidently clear, (as I think
the Learned Dr. Hammond in his exquisite Dissertations has made sufficiently
appear) that Bishops were instituted by the Apostles, then there is no question
but that these (...) were the Bishops he speaks to. And this, were it now
necessary to show, is further evinced, both because the Apostle bids them (...)
and (...), two phrases which are generally both in Scripture, and ancient
Fathers used particularly to Bishops in our sense: Neither yet am I satisfied
why (...) does not signify lording over the Clergy, and I believe my
Animadvertor can hardly render it better; but this is not now my business.

But to go on, his Inference is as infirm as his Argument: for it does not
follow that because a Bishop and a Presbyter are names sometimes given to one
person, therefore as he would seem to intimate, that in the Scripture sense
they are one. But with his pardon, though he will find a Bishop sometimes
called a Presbyter, as our Earls are called Lords, yet let him show me a
Presbyter called a Bishop, either in Scripture or in ancient Fathers. I am very
confident he cannot, till then he has done nothing.

3. His third Exception is still worse, when he says it seems to be a light,
and to say no more, unseemly trifling with Sacred Scripture, to affirm these
words of our Savior concerning such as come not in by the Door, and therefore
are Thieves and Robbers, ought to be understood of such as Preach to
Congregations without the Bishops License. Thus he, And I desire the Reader to
judge, whether our Animadvertor deals ingenuously. Where does my Lord Worcester
say that he is a Thief and a Robber, that Preaches without the Bishops
License? His words are these, That Mr. Baxter was neither Parson, Vicar, nor
Curate of Kederminster, or any where in my Diocese: For he never came in by
the Door, that is, by any legal, right, or Lawful Admission, but climed up
some other way, namely by violence and intrusion, and therefore by Christ's own
inference is a Thief and a Robber, etc. And I desire our Animadvertor to tell
me, whether he that by an unjust, and usurped Authority comes into another man's
freehold, receives the profits thereof, and robs the Owner of his reputation
there, is not more a Thief than he that Robs a Purse on the Highway. I believe
if D. E. had been put out of his Estate for his honesty and loyalty, he would
have counted the Possessors of it worse than many that suffer publicly for
filching and stealing. But besides, where does the Bishop say that he forbad
Mr. Baxter to Preach, because he did it without his License, but because he
sowed the seeds of Schism and sedition there? For which cause I thought in my
duty (as being their Pastor in Chief) not only to forbid Mr. Baxter to Preach
any more, which by the way he had done without my License; but, and these are
my Lords words, now how strangely does he report what my Lord says? He never
says he was a Thief and Robber, because he came not in by his License, but
because he came in by violence and intrusion. But further, allowing the Bishop
did say so, which he does not, Can he be said to be come in at the Door, that
comes in illegally? I can imagine but two ways of coming in, either by the
Door, or over the Pales, [ Joh. 10.] which our Savior mentions, and certainly
if he that comes legally in, comes in by the Door, he that comes illegally in,
comes over Pale, let our Animadvertor understand it either according to the
Municipal Law of the Land, or the Law of the Church, which pleases him best.
But let us see his Arguments, why he that Preaches without the Bishops License
does come in by the Door. His first Argument is, because then he knows not what
Ordination signifies. -- Yes, certainly you do know it gives him Authority to
Preach, but not to another man's flock, nor in a Diocese where he has no charge
committed to him. And this was my Lord's Reason, though he says the principal
reason was because he Preached without his License, and very dis-ingenuously
leaves out the following words, having no cure of souls of his own to Preach
to. Besides, had he had a flock, my Animadvertor by the last words of his
Arguments does sufficiently justify the Bishops proceeding, when he says that
moral and notoriously vicious misdemeanors may be a sufficient cause, and this
certainly Mr. Baxter was guilty of, that Preached Sedition, Rebellion, and
Schism, and that has done what he could to make the King Odious to his people.
His second Reason is more strange, for one Minister of the Gospel (for
certainly a Bishop is no more) to silence another, and that for no better
reason, but because his fellow Minister is desirous to Preach the Gospel
without a new License, is an abuse of Dominion. -- I desire the Reader first to
mark his Parenthesis, wherein he that said before, he was for the Order of
Bishops, now tells us that a Bishop is no more than a single Presbyter.
Secondly, he is impartial in saying that the Bishop did silence him, because he
did Preach without License, for this is one of the Bishops Reasons, he that
reads the Letter will find many more. But thirdly, he contradicts himself, when
he says the silencing Mr. Baxter was an abuse of Dominion, when he confesses
before, that for moral and notoriously vicious misdemeanors he may do it. And
whether M. Baxter be not much guilty, I am loath for his sake further to
enquire. But fourthly, and lastly, allowing all he says to be true, which I
have proved false, that the Bishop did abuse his Dominion in silencing Mr.
Baxter, does this prove that what the Bishop says, that Mr. Baxter came not in
by the Door, is a trifling with Scripture, when nothing is more sure, than that
he that comes by violence into another profession is a Thief and Robber by the
Law of God and man? And this is all worth answering in his third Exception.

4. His fourth Exception is this. How consistent with the Civil Peace (for I
omit your Parenthesis, since it is nothing but railing) is the Bishops
distinction between the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, when he tells us, that
the King by it only pardoned the Corporal punishment, but the Church had not,
nor ought not to forgive the scandal, till honorable amends were made by
Confession and Recantation? -- And now the Reader may perfectly understand what
our Animadvertor is. I confess, I ever found his party very unwilling to
Recant their former miscarriages, I wish to God many were not ready to Justify
what they have done. But till this day was ever there any Christian thought,
that the Church had not power over their Members to hinder them from any
benefit by her Communion, unless they gave satisfaction for their public
offense and scandal? What was the reason the primitive Christians underwent
those severe penances, as the ancient Fathers, and several Councils mention,
the first 300. years, if they believed not the Church had the power of
Censuring? Nay, does not his own party use them, where ever they have had any
power? witness the frequent Excommunications in Scotland. But I understand not
what he means, by saying, the Bishop makes the Church distinct from the State
in coercive Jurisdiction. I know no coercive Jurisdiction the Church pretends
to, for certainly to shut people out of her communion, is not a coercive power,
to deny the benefit of her communion to notorious Sinners, till they recant and
give satisfaction, the Church ever did, before the Magistrate was Christian,
and the Poenitentes, then, that stood at the Church porch bewailing their sins,
and begging the Churches prayers, did give satisfaction and recant, before ever
there was the least show of coercive power in her. And therefore what this
Reverend Prelate says, is most true, that the King did but pardon the guilt or
obligation to punishment, it is Christ's Deputies the Church must have
satisfaction for the scandal and offense. And this is so little inconsistent
with the Civil peace, that nothing can conduce more to it, to have men,
sensible of their miscarriages, recant and give public satisfaction, will be
our best means to prevent others from sinning so again. I pray God the
unwillingness of many to repent here, although the King has pardoned them
their corporal punishment, does not oblige them to a worse hereafter. And thus
I have answered his fourth Exception. For as to the justifying this power in
the Church, it is not my work, here to do it, and till the Animadvertor has
answered Dr. Hammonds Discourse of the power of the Keys, that power he must as
well as I believe in the Church, I have only showed it very consistent with the
Civil peace.

5. His fist Exception is this. It is bold and impious when he affirms, that if
to command an Act which by accident may prove an occasion of sin be sinful,
then God cannot command any thing -- I understand not at all the Impiety in
this Proposition, for the Bishop understands not this of Gods extraordinary
commands, for God may by a new command dispense with his own Law, as in
commanding Abram to offer Isaac, which had been murder had it not been done by
Gods command, and Abram's intention had been murderous and sinful, but of his
ordinary and common commands. Neither can it be any more Impiety to say, God
cannot command any thing, than to say God cannot sin, if Mr. Baxter's position
be true, and though God by his Almighty power may sometimes and upon
extraordinary occasions dispense with his own Law, yet it may be piously enough
said, God cannot command the breach of his own Law, because it must be
necessarily understood in his ordinary way of Dispensations.

6. His sixth Animadversion is. That in Divinity it is false and dangerous to
affirm, That an offense unto which a disproportionable penalty is annexed is
not to be measured by the quality of the Act considered in it self, but by the
mischievous consequences of it. This he takes great exception against, but
answers not the Bishops Reasons for it. But let us see what his Arguments are
against it. His first is, (to shorten his long Expressions) That for not
submitting to trivial Ceremonies, to debar one first from Christian and then
from Civil communion, is not justified by Scripture or Primitive Practice. This
Argument first is particular, and that is no way argumentative: for though all
he should say were true, yet it would amount to no more but to make one
Exception against this Rule, and that would rather confirm than weaken it. 2.
His Argument is perfectly begging the Question, if he means that for such
forbearance they ought not to be forbid the Sacrament, because the penalty is
disproportionable. But 3. did neither the Scripture nor Primitive practice
justify it, yet if it did not condemn it, were there not the least pretense in
either for the practice of it, if it were totally silent in it, there is enough
to persuade the Church to do that which is for the benefit of the whole. But as
his Reason is weak against this Position, so it is false in it self: for it is
much a less inconvenience to debar one from the Sacrament for not kneeling,
than to break the peace of the Church by dividing from it, and by infusing into
a multitude (which at all times is ready to embrace any novelty) principles of
distrusting the commands of their lawful Pastors; and if our Animadvertor did
but look into the practice of the Primiviue Church, he would find scarce any
offense was looked upon with a worse Eye than Schism and separation was, and
that they were more fatal to the Church, than the hottest Persecution. I need
not give Examples for it, he knows enough already. As for the Texts of
Scripture that are produced for it, since they are nothing more, but what every
Nonconformist produces for not conformity, and have been so sufficiently
answered by the Writers of our party, I omit to answer them, and the rather,
because the Reason against this Exception runs us in this Dispute not the
Position it self.

7. The seventh Animadversion is, against that Chain of consequences, which the
Bishop produces. From diversity grows dislike, from dislike Enmity, from
Enmity Opposition, and from Opposition first Schism and separation in the
Church, and then Faction and Sedition in the State, and I would we had not
found it so by our own experience, etc. These are my Lord Bishops words, and
this he calls a Rope of Sand, having first told us, that for proof of this, he
virulently instances in our unhappy times. I shall not here tell our
Animadvertor, that if he would have looked abroad, he might find other
instances besides this of England, but let us examine his reasons, why this is
a Rope of Sand. His first is, because nothing is so clear, That there has
been, nay, ought to be Diversities in external forms, without any dislike at
all as to the person of another. And his reason is, because the Apostles that
Preached to the Circumcision, gave the right hand of fellowship unto the
Apostles of the Gentiles, although their outward Rites in public worship were
far more different than ours in Engl. In answer to this, I say first, That his
instance of the Apostles is not at all the same, for though the Churches of the
Circumcision, and Churches of the Gentiles were oftentimes in one and the same
place, yet they were of different Communions, and this difference did arise not
upon indifferent things, but upon things absolutely necessary. For the Churches
of the Circumsion did follow Gods positive Command, which as yet they were not
convinced were to be buried with Christ, so that the question between them was
not concerning the use of external Rites, but whether Gods Command, that
enjoined them to the Jews, were still in force or no? Secondly, I believe our
Animadvertor himself does not count Circumcision an external Rite but something
more, since it was an Ordinance of Initiation into the Church of God, and was
backed with so severe a penalty, that the Male that was not Circumcised the
eighth day, was to be cut off from the people. But thirdly, though the case be
not the same, yet what animosities and heart burnings did this difference cause
amongst the Christians? was it not the cause of the Council held at Jerusalem?
Act. 15. did it not make St. Paul withstand Peter to the face? 2 Gal. 11. and
how many divisions in after ages did this difference produce? as particularly
the keeping of Easter on the Jewish day of Passover by the Eastern Church, to
name no more, so it appears evidently, the Church was never free from
animosities, till the Jewish Rites were quite laid aside, and the whole Church
became Christian, that is, followed one and the same Rites. I say not this, I
would not be mistaken, that the whole Chuch universal, ought to follow one
Rite, but I say, it is necessary to the peace of the Church, that every
particular National Church follow one and the same Rites.

His 2. Reason for his Animadversion, is because the State may be preserved
without the least reference to the Church. And this I suppose he directs
particulary against the last words of my L. Bishops chain of consequences,
first Schism in the Church, then sedition in the State. And truly no man can
think this an ill inference, that considers the Doctrine of taking up Arms for
Religion, that considers this has not been only generally taught, but by most
of their party believed as a great truth. But his Argument herein is faulty to,
for though the State did subsist without any reference to the Christian Church,
did it not produce most horrible Murders, and blood sheddings of the most
loyallest of its Subjects? neither is the Reason good, because a Heathen State
was preserved without reference to the Christian Church, therefore a Christian
may without reference to a Christian Church: for these States had still a
Church, though not of Gods, which their Laws and Constitutions had reference
to, and without which 'twas impossible to have kept Government in that order.
But lastly, though it is possible a State may be preserved without reference to
the Church, can it prudently be done, and is it likely to hold long, since
Religion has upon many people a greater force than any Law. I am sure, since
the World was Christian there was never such an Example.

His third Argument is, because Unity does not depend upon Uniformity, but upon
Charity. And of this he gives no Reason, but his ipse dixit, unless giving the
Bishop ill words be a Reason. I hope our Animadvertor can distinguish between
Unity amongst Individuals, and Unity with a whole body, for though the first
consists in Charity and candid forbearance, this latter can only visibly
consist in Uniformity, and can only appear, in every person then joynly
assembled using one and the same Rite. The heart, no man can see, and I believe
let men never so well agree in their hearts, that only which makes this
agreement visible is their observing one and the same Rite openly. And so I
have answered this Reason also, if it may be so called.

To follow him, his eighth Animadversion is. Whether as to the Matter of Fact,
the French Protestants do enjoin standing, and the Lutherans kneeling. This he
believes not upon the Bishops saying so, but he has more reason to believe it
than the contrary, since the practice of all those places do testify it, for it
is hardly possible to believe, that people are more willing to obey the Church,
without Laws to back her, than with Laws, unto which a penalty is annexed. Our
Animadvertor here falls from this matter of Fact, and disputes concerning the
Jure of prescribing such Laws. Now that is quite from the business here in
hand, this Reverend Prelate urges it as a good Argument that our Church may
enjoin Rites and Ceremonies as well as the French, Dutch, and Lutheran, he
should show Reasons why our Church may not do it as well as others do, But he
runs into another Dispute, unto which I will not follow him, since all this and
stronger Objections are every where answered, by our Writers, who have
undertaken to handle this Controversy, as Mr. Hooker, the late Lord Bishop of
Durham, and others.

9. His last Animadversion is an accusation of the Bishop of Uncharitableness,
because he says Crimine ab uno -- Disce omnes, as if he did revile all the
Presbyterian party, by reason of Mr. Baxter. I will repeat you the Bishops
words. You have before seen the Ingenuity and veracity, you now see the
Humility and modesty of the man, and in proportion of the whole party. Now this
is but a taxing the Party but in proportion, and I would to God, what here is
said, was not too true. Besides, this has reference only to the humility and
modesty of the man, the other particularly belongs to Mr. Baxter, as to the
occasion of the Bishops Letter, and then are not all the party guilty, of
counting it unlawful for our Church, to impose Rites, as others have done? and
is it not a piece of arrogance and immodesty for inferior Clergy to say this
both of Church and State. But besides, were this not allowable in the Bishop,
how comes our Animadvertor in the same breath to be guilty of the same Crime?
and though he begins it with a Rhetorical flourish, Would his Brethren the
Bishops take it well of a Presbyterian to cry Crimine ab uno -- Disce omnes.
See what manner of Spirits these Bishops are of, and judge them all by the
Bishop of Worcester's Example, yet we may see easily through it, and perceive
the height of uncharitableness, when he prays God to deliver us from such
Bishops.

And I now have done with these Animadversions, and I am glad, as D. E. is,
that the World is not easily gulled with (...), and then I am sure what he has
said will be to no man's prejudice but his own, Yet I must follow him in that
which he calls a Taste of the Bishops wisdom, and I am afraid the Reader will
find little of that in the Animadvertor.

1. His first is, That the Bishop says, they did force all Communicants to be
examined before they admitted them to the Sacrament -- And this he calls a man
of Straw for the Bishop this weather to get him heat with, and why, because,
the custom was to have one but once examined. Why does the Bishop say that a
man was to be examined every time before he received? I find it not any where,
and yet I have carefully read the Letter. Besides, he is much out in thinking
that Cathechizing and instructing the people before they received is all one
with Examining, for the first puts the Receiver in a capacity to examine
himself, the other like Auricular confession, discovers to the Priests, the
thoughts of the Received hearts. But since our Animadvertor justifies not this,
I shall say no more against it.

Secondly, I do not understand, why he should be angry at the Bishops speaking
against the Covenant, and not against Mr. Baxter for Preaching for it, since it
was burnt. And with his Pardon this Reverend Prelate did with a Christian Zeal,
desire those books should be burnt that were Printed in defense of it, since it
continues deluded people in their Errors, and infuseth in them that ungodly
Principle of taking up Arms for Religion.

Thirdly, But lastly, I understand not why he is angry the Bishop will write no
more, when really, neither this Reverend Prelate, nor any else needed to have
done it, unless there were stronger exceptions brought against this Letter
than are by our Animadvertor. And whether the Philistines will thank this Bishop
for sighting, I am sure the Presbyterians have little reason to do it, when
their Goliahs do fall before him. But why the Venerable Age of this Prelate,
his foreign Travels, or rather banishment for a good a Conscience, should make
our Animadvertor sport, I know no reason for it, unless it be the same, that
induced him to make Bradshaw his Patron, and to commend him in Print as his
very good Lord.

And now I have answered all but his railing, and that I shall only do in our
Saviors rule, in praying for them that curse us, and despightfully use us. I
have nothing more to say, but that though the Bishop by other great affairs,
had no leisure to consider such Discourses as this is, yet I that have more
leisure will promise him to answer what he says, provided he keeps strictly to
the business in hand, for if he runs out, to dispute of the power of the Keys,
of the lawful use of Indiffetent things, and such like controversies, I shall
hardly find leisure to follow him, and I am sure there is already that said for
them which neither he nor his party can answer.

FINIS.

