Currus Triumphalis, e Terebintho. OR AN Account of the many admirable Virtues
OF Oleum Terebinthinae. More particularly, of the good effects produced by its
application to recent Wounds, especially with respect to the Hemorrhagies of
the Veins, and Arteries, and the no less pernicious weepings of the Nerves, and
Lymphaducts. Wherein also, the common Methods, and Medicaments, used to
restrain Hemorrhagies, are examined, and diverse of them Censured. And lastly, A
new Way of Amputation, and a speedier convenient Method of curing Stumps, than
that commonly practiced, is with diverse other useful matters recommended to the
Military Surgeon, In Two LETTERS: The one to his most Honored, James Pearse
Esquire; Surgeon to His Royal Highness the Duke of York, and Surgeon General
to His Majesty's Navy Royal. The other, to Mr. Thomas Hobbs, Surgeon in
London.By JAMES YOUNG.

LONDON, Printed for J. Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

TO His much Honored JOHN KNIGHT, Esquire; Sergeant Surgeon to His MAJESTY.
SIR,
AFter Mr. Pearses Command and Approbation, had obliged me to make public,
what (in an accidental congress of some Surgeons in London) I had
transitorily delivered, concerning the constrictive faculty of Oleum
Terebinthinae: I soon resolved to address the results of my obedience to him,
in a dedication to your self; in which presumption I am become encouraged, and
confirmed by many prevailing considerations: the principal of which is, your
readiness to undertake its Patronage, and permission given me so to direct it:
Motives not much less considerable and important, are your kind and charitable
approving, what I have there delivered; the many other favors you have
conferred on me; the courtesy with which at all times and occasions, you have
treated me; the competency of your Judgment, to license and justify my
procedure; the eminency of your place (no mean demonstration of your abilities
and merit. If the extraordinary intuition of the great Master (especially of
men medically professed) and your having so long served him, as his personal
Surgeon, be considered.) And lastly, the benefit of your Countenance and
Patronage, to promulgate and credit the Discourse among the military Men of our
Art, over whom you have so high an Office, and influence.

These, Sir, were the occasions of my affixing your Name to so mean a trifle;
and these are the sentiments I have of those motives: the former enforced me to
this presumption, the latter have obliged me, thankfully to acknowledge your
favors, and ever to be, Sir,

Plymouth, July 5. 1678. Your most devoted humble Servant, JAMES YOUNG.

THE PREFACE.
THough the Mercurius every Term, and the Gazette twice a week, redundantly
answer that common enquiry of the literate, What new Books are come out: yet
considering some writings of the present day, relating to our Art, Solomon long
since anticipated a sutabler Response; There is nothing new under the Sun. Such
plagiary obsolete stuff as they consist of, being obtruded on the World to no
better use, than verify a Paradox of great affinity with that of the wise
King, Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius, justifying also his common censure,
they contain nothing new. Such ridiculous and easy thieves are their Authors,
that they expose to public sale the plate, etc. they steal, without altering
what may discover it, except the name of the proprietor, in place of which they
insert their own: the only thing they can justly call so, except the vain
picture, and ordinary Title in the frontispiece: such uncunning Pens are so far
from obliging the World, that they become our debtors, not only for the money
their books cost, but for the time misspent in perusing them.

That I may with equal innocence, and truth, make this reflection here, will, I
hope good Reader, be manifest to thee, on a candid and ingenuous perusal of the
ensuing Discourse, when in the most material part thereof, thou shall find
things neither old, nor borrowed; somewhat of the last may have occurred in the
collateral part, (disowned by quotation) where also I may have had the luck to
jump with another man's Opinion, and sense: but that being mostly (if at all)
in the reflections, etc. to nick another man's sense, is but to have his
experience, when I aver it impossible, but the same inconveniences must occur
to his notice, and consequently, (be he ingenious) cannot escape his Censure.

To quit my self wholly from stealing other men's Notions, or Inventions, and
publishing them as my own, there remains yet a piece of Justice for me to do,
which relates to the subject Arcanum; if it be not new to the Public, my
memory, or my intelligence has failed me; that it was communicated to me some
years since, by a worthy Dr. J. Sprage, and Dr. T. pencer, are the persons here
intimated, whose names I resolved to conceal, till I found my self necessitated
to the contrary, by one from whom I am sorry and ashamed to receive the
occasion; It Is one Mr. Jinkinson, of this Country, who (whilst these papers
were perused by some Ingenious men of the Faculty in London) clancularly and
disingenuously insinuated among them there, that he was not only the first that
applied Oil of Turpentine to restrain the hemorrhagies of wounds, but that all
the observations I had there written were communicated from himself to me; the
falsehood of which arrogance I could abundantly manifest, together with the
frequency of his so dealing not only with my self, but all other of the
Fraternity with whom he has conversed in these parts, but I consider of a
sufficient eviction that I insert the true Author's name, and thus publicly
accuse him of falsehood in that pretense, as I have also privately done before
some Friends, where both in word and writing he disclaimed what in London he
had assumed; and I do further aver that I was the first, and am hitherto the
only man that ever used it after Amputations, and that this Calumniator has
not for the seven last years, i.e. since he knew the Secret, had opportunity so
to do, nor (except one) any other eminent occasion to experiment it; and
although such rudeness would justly raise higher resentments, and force more
severe reflections (of which few men are more capable) yet I shall here forbear
him in respect to the reputation of our Profession and him, that educated us
both therein, viz. my ever honored Mr. S. Richmond of Liverpool.
Physician, upon my dismembring a Patient to us both, is my duty to acknowledge,
though I conceal his name, because he confessed it a Secret revealed to him by
another, whose private and original exploration it was.

The ground of whose finding it, is so notable, that it deserves your notice.
Some Surgeons using the Levant, had told him, That the Turks, as soon as
they have amputated, use to dip the stump in hot Tar, and that they thereby
securely restrained the Flux, and laid the foundation of a very good digestion:
The way seeming too brutish and terrible to be imitated, he considered how to
contrive it more neatly, and began to think what Medicine had affinity with
Tar: none seeming more like it than Turpentine; he supposed that the Oil
(containing in it the Balsam) as it was more likely to be the stronger
digestive, so also it might as effectually restrain the Flux; he accordingly
experimenting it, found it by many trials, to exceed even his hopes and
expectations.

The distinctions I have made of the several ways of restraining Hemorrhagies,
together with the reasons, censures, and objections contained in my charge
against them, are wholly my own: for though the number of them are exactly
equal, with those of famous Dr. A. Read, upon the like subject; yet the matter
of them will appear, on comparison very different; I forbear to intimate
wherein, in honor to his name, and works.

The Experiments and Observations explaining and confirming the operation of
our celebrated Balsam, I must also own; the former, I want time and opportunity
to enlarge; the later is but a few of many more, I might produce, to verify
what I have said of its stopping Hemorrhagies. Let it suffice that I never yet
knew it fail.

The design of this Publication, is to recommend to thee a cheap, common, and
incomparable Medicine that duly claims preference from all others, for the
first dressings of recent Wounds, performing at once all the principal
intentions, viz. restraining the Hemorrhoea, and lachrymations, inducing
digestion, preventing Convulsions, etc. All which are not otherwise performed,
but by different applications, longer time, frequent miscarriage, and greater
uncertainty.

The occasion of my thus publishing it, for the sake of whose commands, and to
whom you are indebted for the benefit thereof (if any such thing accrue) is at
large discovered in the beginning of the Discourse.

I hope my integrity in those well intended endeavors, will deserve thy
charity and candor, of which there will be great need, because many little
failures and defects, must I know occur, (impossible to avoid) under the haste,
wherewith it was written, the mixture and disturbance of other avocations, and
the disadvantage of my undertaking so unpresidented a work.

As for the great and avowed faults, viz. the boldness of the attempt, the
harsh, and seemingly unbecoming criminations, I hope thou will find my Apology
and justification in the reasons there suggested, in the Authorities there
quoted, and in thy own sense and apprehension also, if thou put these things to
the test thereof. Not that I am insensible how high a presumption, and
confident an undertaking it is, for a young Country Practitioner, to impeach,
as I have done, the Methods and Medicaments which prescription has endeared,
and made familiar; though I have the vanity to presume, I have substituted
better in their room; and thereby recompensed the rejection of those more
numerous, though more fallible ones.

But though I have rejected the practice, I have, and ever will be civil to the
memory of the Practitioners of past-days, and retain a veneration for their
Names: to do otherwise, were to anticipate a censure for my self, because the
Medicine, etc. here discoursed of, may be as much exceeded by Posterity; a
piece of consideration and good nature, wanting in many of the Novel Writers;
especially Helmont, and all the little Chemists that pretend to be his
followers, though they are so, in nothing so much, as in this ranting
opprobrious way.

Somewhat of example, and imitation I might alledg; and excuse the presumption,
by the Mode of the undertaking, for such the practice of this present Age has
made it, it being become frequent to examine, censure, and publicly reject,
almost all the old received Opinions and Practices; and introduce new ones, not
only in Physic, but Divinity, Philosophy, and all sorts of Learning and Arts:
this is the avowed design (and has been very well performed by some) of those
learned Men: the Lord Bacon, des Carts, Gassendus, Dr. Charleton, Mr. Hobs,
Sir T. Brown, Dr. Mayow, Fr. Travaginus, Guardinus, Honoratus, Fabri, and many
more Philosophers: by Paracelsus, Helmont, Severinus, Hostamanus, Zwelver,
Crollius, Sylvius de Boe, the Author of Medela Medicinae, and all the Chemists;
by Dr. Harvey, the Bartholines, Theod. Kirkringius, N. Steno, J. Swammerdam, M.
Malpiglius, Reg. de Graet, and all the Neoterick Anatomists: by Mr. R. Hook,
Galileus, and the Copernicans, Mr. R. Boil, Dr. Willis, Dr. Lower, Mr. Newton,
Mr. Glanvil, etc. with all the Virtuosi, besides the shoal of Yelpers after
amendments, and Reformation, in matters relating to the Church and Religion. In
fine, it is a liberty every one takes, as he (at least) fancieth he has reason
on his side, to explode old opinions and practices, and introduce new ones; how
much Reason, how many undoubted Experiments, and how many authentic Authors
(the three grand inducements to believe) I have on mine, to justify my design,
and oblige my profession, will without doubt appear effectually to all
ingenious practisers of it.

And as in the Histories of the lives of great Men, though they became
renowned, by but one eminent act; all their lesser performances are recorded
(though no way contributing) to their fame; so I have given an account of the
other many Virtues of Oleum Terebinthinae, besides that for which it is here
principally celebrated, by which I hope I have made no unnecessary or
impertinent accession, to the reputation of the Medicine, or price of the Book.

And lastly, I have superadded, an account of a new way of Amputation, and a
speedier of healing the stumps by Consolidation, which (how paradoxical soever
it may seem) has many advantages to the Practitioner and Patient, above all
the yet knowu and practiced ways; some other Curiosities are ready for the
Public, if thy candor and kindness to these invite them to forsake that
privacy they enjoy, under his custody, who is more kind to himself, than
(without such a temptation to allure, and encour agement to secure him) to
hazard more than once, thy spleen or thy scorn.

Plim. July 8. 1678. J. Y.

THE SUMMARY.
THE accidental occasion of penning and publishing this Letter. Page 1, 2 An
Abridgment of the most notorious inconveniences and mischiefs, resulting from
the commonly practiced ways of stopping the bleeding of Wounds. p. 3 No certain
infallible Medicine, or Method yet found that can do it. p. 4. The projected
Method of the Discourse; right ways of restraining the hemorrhagies of Wounds,
first by cooling and stagnating the blood, and by what means it is usualally
performed. p. 5 Exploded as an Impediment to digestion; cold things
perniciously used to cure Wound-fevers, because that accident is inevitable,
and useful. p. 6 This Method defective as to its main intention, hazarding
Convulsions, Palsey's, After-fluxes. p. 7 Catarrhs, a fatal instance thereof;
why such means are pertinent, and successful in other sanguinary fluxes, p. 8
Periodical Hemoptysis sometimes healthful. p. 9 The second way by Escharoticks:
what they are, Mercurial and Arsenical ones are mischievous, proved in a
notable instance. p. 10 Their venene and acid particles, hurt the Nerves, etc.
some preparations of both are benign. p. 11 Sublimated Mercury usually
adulterate: the ill effects thereof in Mercurius Dulcis; directions how to
discover it. p. 12 Actual Cauteries, horrible, scandalous, cruel. p. 13
Difficult, painful, fallible. p. 14 The great benefit of them in other cases.
p. 15 Corrosives hurt the Nerves by their acidity, and so beget direful
symptoms. p. 16 Fluxes breaks a new after the falling away of the Eschar,
begets a debilitating gleet, ill-shaped. p. 17 And difficultly cured Stumps,
Eschars difficultly and dangerously removed, nastily continued, and
procrastinates the cure. Third way is by coagulating the blood, in the mouths
of the Vessels, what Medicines effect it: they are often ineffectual, tedious,
beget crudity, are nasty, sometimes mortify. p. 19 The Aq. Styptica R. often
successless even in despicable Hemorrhagies. p. 20 Buttons sometimes harmful.
p. 21 Diverse inconveniences in the thumbing, etc. A fourth way by clammy
things choking the Vessels, is tedious, filthy, uncertain, hazards new Fluxes.
p. 23 Fifth way by ligation of the Vessel, tedious, successless, incident to
after-flux, and on some accounts impossible, it is use in other cases. p. 24 The
Sixth by Sarcoticks, what such are, they are tedious, uncertain, filthy,
perverts the course of Arts intention, Galen's powder does not so restrain
Hemorrhagies, nor any other Medicine. p. 25 Proved de facto, the seventh way by
revulsion and derivation: how performed. p. 26 How by Cups they are
insignificant, how by Frictions. p. 27 Which are ineffectual and dangerous, how
by Ligature. p. 28 Their design rational, but not complete; a Caution about
them. p. 29 A particular way of Ligature in Amputations recommended, some
cautions. p. 30 How by Phlebotomy, very advantageous in other bleedings but in
that of Wounds, is partial, needless, and often mischievous. p. 31 Hinders
digestion, though in some extraordinary circumstances it furthers it. p. 32 The
Germans reject phlebotomizing of wounded Men: it is improperly and precariously
used to prevent Wound-fevers, which will occur in despite of monstrous
evacuation that way. p. 33 Confirmed by observation, and illustrated by
comparison with the Smallpox. p. 34 Wherein the Fever beginning them is proved
inevitable, and soonest cured by digestives and hot things: which Method is
also best in Wounds till Coction be made, yet with caution. p. 35, 36 The last
way of stopping Hemorrhagies is by closing and uniting the bleeding Vessels, by
styptick agglutinators: it is not evident the Aqua Styptica so performs it. p.
37 Another way mentioned by Pareus and Dr. Read, rejected: An Objection against
the novelty of our Medicine. p. 38 Answered, in that the old way wrought not
the effects so well as ours: Many die of the loss of blood not considered, or
known; the other Methods not always nor altogether fallible, though not
comparable to this. p. 39 Diverse Phenomenon of Oil of Turpentine and humane
blood. Exp. 1. It hardens and becomes a firm integument. p. 40 Exp. 2.
Confirms the same when mixed with blood, demonstrated further by Exp. 3. p. 41
It coagulates even the serous part of the most serous blood, into a tough
substance. p. 42 Whitens the Surface thereof, and makes it very tough. p. 43
Exp. 7. Blood so coagulated is a great Balsam for Wounds. p. 44 Other
Experiments recommended to trial for the further dilucidating this matter. p.
45 Communicated Experiments ought to be tried more than once, if they fail. p.
46 Oil of Turpentine mechanically proved to stay bleedings by contracting the
ends of the Vessels, coagulating the blood internally and externally, and so
uniting them. p. 46, 47 It Is actual heat contributes, as does (possibly) some
adstringing quality known to be in the Tree: directions for the choice and use
of this Oil. p. 48 Spirit and Oil, names promiscuously given it, though it be
properly an Oil, because unctuous; some differences therein. p. 49 When the
hottest is to be preferred. p. 50 The Medicine often adulterate, the Guaranty
of the Apothecaries Hall some encouragement for future confidence in Chemical
Remedies. This must be used hot: the ways of preventing it from kindling, both
at Sea and Land. p. 51, 52 Ligature and Defensatives must be used therewith: it
usually does its work at once, though some circumstances may require its
repetition. p. 53 It may be applied any where save near the Eye, and the Breast
if an Inslammation be concomitant. p. 54 Otherwise is very proper, being
pectoral, pulmonick, proved from good Authors; how to be used to stumps of the
Thigh, etc. Stabs. p. 55 Used to a hot, or to a choleric habit, it vesicates,
but innocently. p. 56 When the oldest Oil is to be preferred. p. 57 The other
Virtues thereof with respect to Wounds: It stops the Synovia, the advantages
thereby acrewed, it is the best curer of punctured Nerves. p. 58, 59 It
excellently digests, without the attraction other applications of that nature
make, the benefit thereof: An Objection. p. 60 How the Medicine can restrain
Hemorrhagies, and yet digesteth. p. 61 It Is the best Balm for wounded Nerves,
no Wound can be made without hurting their Genus. p. 62 It contracts Wounds,
prevents their expansion, without the inconveniency of other applications: It
heals Punctures and incised Wounds, by sympathy: An Objection about the
incongruity of a digestive and consolidative quality, answered: the Magnetic
Unguent, and sympathetick Powder mistaken: how Consolidatives cure. p. 64 This
Medicine effects those ends, without the symptoms attending the other Methods.
p. 65 The pertinency of confirming Theories by Experiments and observations:
diverse Observations proving the Virtue of Ol. Terebinthinae to restrain
Hemorrhagies: Obs. 1. in an amputation of the Arm. p. 66 Another of a
sphacelated Leg, on an aged extenuate Man. p. 67, 68 Two the like observations.
p. 70 Obs. 3. An Hemorrhage in a sinuous Ulcer from an Artery in the Cheek:
another of the same. p. 71, 72 Obs. 5. A Wound in the Thigh. p. 73 Obs. 7.
Through the Body, and down the Throat. p. 74 Obs. 8. From a Cancered Breast. p.
75 Obs. 9. From a Wound by Castration. p. 76, 77 A punctured Artery in the
Hand, and incised Wound in the Metatarsus. p. 78 Another Amputation of the Leg.
p. 79 A Wound on the Forehead, which bled impetuously ten days after the first
Dress: some painful symptoms following the application of our Medicine, and
their causes. p. 81, 82 The Crurals wounded, and cured by our Medicine. p. 83
An Objection answered. p. 84 The many other Virtues of Ol. Terebinthinae
externally applied, frim page 84, to page 87. The Virtues thereof internally
administered, from page 84, to page 89. The Authors whence collected. p. 90 The
Conclusion. p. 91 An instance in Mr. Wiseman's Book that seems to oppose,
answered. p. 91 Medicines curing the punctures of Nerves or Tendons ought to be
hot, dry, and of subtle parts, proved by many Authors. p. 93 Accidents
attending bleeding, ill habits, attributed to Punctures or Tendons without just
cause: some instances thereof. p. 93, 94, 95, 96, 97 The History of a very
remarkable punctured Tendon in a Woman. p. 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104 A
penetrating Wound of the left Ilia, with the Hemorrhage of an Artery wounded
thereby, restrained and cured by this Medicine, not very hot. 105, 106, 107
Amputated Stumps way be cicatrized without scaling the bone, but not without
hazard. p. 108, 109 Bones may be bare without fouling: all foul ones must be
scaled. p. 110 The manner of amputating a Member, so as to cure it by
Consolidation. p. 111 Some Circumstances to be observed in this new Method. p.
112 Consolidation of flesh never before united, is no Novelty: diverse instances
thereof. p. 113 Some particular cases where this sort of Amputation cannot be
used: the advantages this way has above that commonly practiced, in that it is
cured more speedy, without leaving a dysepulotick Ulcer, or scaling the Bone.
p. 114 Or expensive profluence of blood, etc. p. 115 How flesh may be supposed
to stop the Hemorrhagies of wounded Vessels. p. 116, 117, 118 The Cure this way
is done with less pain; and why, easier and cheaper to the Surgeon, more
firmly, not apt to break up, etc. and more capable of using an Artificial Leg.
p. 119, 120.
The Reader will injure himself, and prejudice the Author, if he adventure to
peruse this Discourse, till he have corrected with his Pen the following
Errata; which by reason of the Author's absence from the Press, have occurred.
PAge 1. line 3. read Virtues, p. 5. l. 22. r. eight distinctions, p. 6. l. 4.
put an asterisk over Hippocrates, and another in the opposite Margent over, in
hypp. praed. p. 7. l. 14. r. injured, p. 9. in the Margent, r. anno 73: p. 11.
l. 27. leave out of, p. 15. l. 16. r. these dissuading, p. 17. l. 13. r.
monstrous, p. 20. l. 8. r. Styptick liquor, p. 26. l. 9. r. incarnative, p.
30. l. 8. r. to lay a wadd, l. 18. r. Vessels, p. 32. l. 1. r. used to, p. 35.
put an asterisk on the quotation from Dr. Willis, l. 13. r. Phlegmon: in the
margent r. dixit, p. 36. l. 30. r. digestives, p. 40. l. 22. r. for what, p.
41. l. 26. it adhereth, p. 43. l. 7. leave out, that, l. 13. r. it to be, p.
44. l. 23. leave out, yet, p. 52. l. 21. r. their discharge, p. 54. l. 2. r.
insinuating, p. 57. l. 6. any others, l. 21. the first sentence in the last
period, should be joined to the preceding, p. 58. l. 2. r. general, l. 24. r.
nervous liquor, p. 63. l. 21. r. page 23. p. 64. l. 2. that I attribute, in the
Margent, r. tract 1. p. 67. l. 4. r. Vessels, p. 78. l. 8. r. Carpus, p. 80. l.
16. r. two, p. 82. l. 2. r. Margarit, l. 20. r. temporal and frontal, p. 87. l.
21. r. Nervinum, p. 88. l. 18. r. Comphory, p. 93. l. 4. r. lib. 6. mels. p.
94. l. 1. r. Phlebotomy there, being such, p. 102. l. 2. r. Coag. p. 104. l.
15. leave out q. s. p. 105. l. 6. r. worse, p. 111. l. 9. r. the usual, p. 115.
l. 6. r. Hypersarcosis, p. 118. l. 5. leave out, no. Some mis-pointings and
such less obvious Errata, are left to the Readers Ingenuity to correct as he
finds them.

AN EPISTOLARY DISCOURSE, Concerning the Virtue of Oleum Terebinthinae.
I Can not forget, that at one of the many times, I had the happiness to be
(Worthy Sir) in your company in London, some other of the Faculty being
present, there occurred a Discourse concerning Restringent Medicines: by which
was meant, such as are the most celebrated, approved, and practiced, to
restrain the Homorrhagies of Wounds; the Aqua Styptica, and Galen's famous
Powder, together with proper Ligature, were preferred to all others. After some
discourse on this occasion, I presumed to offer one, which (besides its other
very many advantages for curing Wounds) I had found by many trials, the most
happy and successful, I had ever read, heard off, or experimented, and that was
common Oleum Terebinthinae: Mr. H -- making some doubt concerning it,
constrained me, though before such intuitive men, to attempt the reason
thereof; it being indecent to impose on Company, things which public
experience had not avowed, or my self could not as readily confirm by Sense, or
Argument, as affirm by Narrative; it being more modest where things seem
improbable (though true) and not readily verifiable by reason, or experience,
to be silent.

Wherefore, because the circumstances allowed not of present proof, by the
infallible test of the former, I offered by way of the latter, what my barren
fancy could suggest to me under such discouraging circumstances, as were the
sudainess of the occasion, my unpreparedness, and the sagacity of the Company,
which could not but awe a more resolute undertaker than my self. What I
offered, you seemed particularly pleased with, and advised me to make it known
to the Publikk.

Nothing so much as your approbation, could have persuaded me to think so well
of any thing I there suggested, nor ought besides your Commands, have induced
me to commit to every man's knowledge, what has hitherto lain private in the
breasts of a very few; but Sir, your Judgment ought to be the touchstone of my
Reason, no less than your Commands, the unlocker of my greatest and more secret
Arcanum, whence the Patient, and Practitioner, if any advantage accrue to
either by this publication, become obliged and redevable to you; the defects,
and miscarriages of what kind soever, ought only to rest on my account.

I know it is too common with many of the Fraternity, to slight and contemn all
Novel discoveries, of this or the like nature, thinking that nothing can more
effectually secure the bleeding of wounds, than Cauteries, Deligation, or what
other ways Education or Custom has made more familiar and practicable to them,
but all those men do not consider the direful consequences of some; the
unsuccessfulness of other such means, and methods. The intolerable pain of
Cauteries, whether actual or potential, are sufficiently, and with good reason
inveighed against, by Pareus, Wurts, etc. The After-fluxes, notwithstanding
tying up the Vessels, the Crudity and indigestion occasioned by the common
Stypticks, and Restringents, the Fevers, Mortifications, Convulsions, loss of
substance, ill-shaped Cicatrices, and stumps, the tedious continuation of
Eschars, the the large, and enervating Synovia's; together with a number of
other less accidents, that are the common and fatal consequences of the usual
and most practiced ways, cannot possibly occur by the use of this Balsam, if
the Directions herewith given be observed.

Nor is the securing Hemorrhagies so very trite and easy, as some men make it.
You, Sir, do well know the contrary; and that the death of many a stout
Soldier and hardy Seaman, too sadly demonstrates, that an infallible remedy,
to staunch the bleeding of Wounds is yet wanting, especially such an one, as
with ease and benignity does atchieve it; that this which I here recommend
(though I affirm not its infallibility) merits the precedence of all yet known,
and consequently ought to have the esteem of every Artist, will I hope appear
from the following Reasons and Observations, the latter of which every
ingenious Professor may confirm and improve, as he has occasion and
opportunity.

Give me leave, Sir, (after I have begged pardon for the presumption of this
Address, to which I became inclined and encouraged, by your favorable thoughts
of the more imperfect account I gave thereof, and on consideration of the
fitness such discoveries have for your approbation and notice, as being
deservedly the general superintendent of those for whom it is designed, and
consequently the most pertinent and proper hand, by which it could be conveyed
to their knowledge, or recommended to their practice and consideration) to
manage my design, and discourse in this order and method. First, To relate the
several operations, methods, and medicaments, which are most usually practiced
to stop or restrain Hemorrhagies, and therein to take occasion to reflect on
some, the most inartificial and successless, and to reject them. Secondly, To
endeavor to demonstrate, how our Oil of Turpentine does perform it. Thirdly,
To give some directions to be observed in the use, choice, and application
thereof. Fourthly, To demonstrate the other adventitious benefits, acquired to
Wounds, (besides restraining the bleeding) by means of this Balsam. Fifthly, To
illustrate, and confirm the truth of all de facto, by relating several
observations, wherein it proved successful. And lastly, to relate the very many
other medicinal Virtues of this Oil, both as internally administered, or
externally applied.

The ways in general, by which the Hemorrhagies of Veins and Arteries are
stopped, are reducible to these several right distinctions.

The first, is by stagnating the blood in the extreme parts, and allaying its
briskness, and motion in the larger Vessels: which is achieved by immersing
the body in cold water, or wrapping it in sheets moist with Posca, or
administering Opiat medicines, or other such whose cold quality fixes the
blood, or slackens its circulation. Such are Sal Prunella, aq. Sperm. Ranarum,
etc. against all which I have this to Object.

First, That it is a great retarder of digestion; for whatever cools and
allayeth fermentation, hinders maturation; this I speak of it, when used to
that degree it ought, to effect the aforesaid design; not that I would wholly,
even in the most sedate temper omit the use of moderate Julaps, or sometimes a
slight Hypnotick, to assuage pain and procure rest; nor on the other hand would
I use them too liberally, as they frequently are, and that because (as I have
said) they are so great an Impediment, to the groundwork of healing large
Wounds, nor do I only dislike their use where they pretend to stop Fluxes; but
as commonly they are designed also, to prevent and cure the symptomatical
Fevers, usually attending green Wounds; for that Fever is not only necessary,
but inevitable, and that because it is usually both the effect, and (pardon the
Solecism) the cause also of digestion, as has been long since intimated to us
by Hipocrates, and Lib. 47. cap. 2. in Hipp. praedict. l. 1. c. 13.
Galen. Therefore, where vehement symptoms make such Medicines necessary, I
would recommend the mixture of such ingredients as may also promote the
Coction, by which the Fever shall be more allayed, than by the cold, anodyne
things: This in Julaps, is easily done by cocting in them, saffron, figs, etc.
or the good old Prisan-drink, of Hordeum and Liquoris.

Secondly, This way is defective, imperfect, fallible, and of it self unable to
answer the designed intention, or at best but a cojuvant Remedy, only quieting
the motion of the blood, while more secure ways of stopping the mouths of the
Vessels, may be made use of, completely to effect it.

Thirdly, By the use of Medicines highly cold, (whether actually, or
potentially so) without which this design pretends not to be effected; the
nervous genus, may become insured, whereby the common attendants of large
Wounds, Palsy, Convulsion, Spasms, Nummedness, and Insensation, may be
occasioned.

Fourthly, The immersing the Body in cold water, or the enclosing it in Linen
wet with Water and Vinegar; whatever advantage they may procure pro tempore,
their aftereffects, are like to be very mischievous; and contrary to the design
of their use; and that is, provoking an after-flux, either by begetting heats,
or a feverish motion in the blood, which it accendeth as other colds do; that
is, (to say nothing of the doctrine of Antiperistasis) by shutting the pores of
the skin, whereby the various recrements that used to transpire that way, being
pent up, regurgitate, which Nature endeavoring to separate, and reject by a
febrile fermentation; the blood becomes inflamed; as is evident in Agues, the
great heat in the hands, and feet, and toes, and fingers, and often Phlegmons
(for such are Kibes and Chilblains,) on them both, after great cold, and
handling Snow: or by separating the serous parts thereof; and so a D. Lower de
orig. Catarrh.
Catarrh, Cough, etc. is occasioned, which begets such a saltation in the
blood, that except the wounded Vessels be well secured, it will very aptly
break bounds: this is manifest in Phlebotomy, where it is frequent to put the
Patient a Coughing, to make him bleed. I once had a near Relation, who to stop
an Hemorrhage, lapped his naked body in moistened Sheets, but it begat a fatal
Metaptosis, or commutation, for such a Catarrh ensued, as dwindled away his
life by a five months Consumption: wherefore even in Hemoptysis, or spitting of
blood, from the Anastomosis of a Vessel, either in the lungs, stomach, spleen,
etc. It must be of hazardous use, in which cases, though perhaps Opiats, and
other coolers and thickeners may have been successful; yet does it not
invalidate my objections against their use in bleeding of Wounds: because
first, no digestion being required in internal bleedings, as there is in
Wounds, one great Objection against it, is unconcerned. Secondly, Internal
bleedings are incapable of local applications, so that of necessity those must
be used, for being the less mischievous, become the most convenient. Thirdly,
Internal bleedings are not so apt to be accompanied with Convulsions, Palsies,
etc. as are Wounds and lacerations of the nervous parts, whereby another great
inconveniency in their use is taken away. Fourthly, Internal bleedings
frequently proceed from redundancy, thinness, sharpness, heat, fermentation, or
the like ill temper of the blood, by which it breaks through some of the
smaller Vessels (and that sometimes with innocence and great advantage, as Acta
med. and philos. Hafniensia number. 73.
Bartholine instanceth, and Theod. Spicileg. Anatom.
Kirkringius in a Periodical Hemoptysis, as harmless, and healthy, as those
lunary discharges from Women,) to secure which, there needs no more but to
empty them by Phlebotomy, or cool, thicken, and sweeten the blood, as the cause
may require. Lastly, It Is very rare and unusual for internal bleedings,
proceeding from, or caused by the wounding, Rupture, Erosion, Diapedesis, etc.
of a Vein or Artery, though but a small one, to be cured by any means
whatsoever, and that because they admit not of local application, the most
certain, if not the only way by which they can be cured.

The second general way of stopping fluxes of blood, is by inducing an Eschar,
or Crust, by which the bleeding mouth of the Vessel is choked; these are
procured either by actual or potential Cauteries: the manner of performing the
former, is too trite and vulgar to describe, the latter is the effect of
Escarotical applications: such are Vitriolum ustum, Mercurius sublimatus
corrosivus, Arsenicum, Oleum Vitrioli, Calcanthum, Calx Viva, Aq. fortis, Aq.
Regis, etc.

Before I remark on them, in their general qualifications as Corrosives, I
shall make some reflections on those that are Mercurially and Arsenically such:
I find diverse Authors recommend them, Pet. Forest. ob. chyr. lib. 6. I. Vigo.
lib. 3. tr. 1. c. 3. Clow's. page 135. A. Pareus. lib. 9. c. 7. M. Wiseman.
lib. 5. c. 2.
and have heard of some Practitioners that continue their use in this case, but
with mortal Effects, as most notoriously appeared, Anno 1666. at which time,
nineteen amputated men were sent to Harwich, out of one of the Capital Ships,
and at the same time and place the like number from another; of the one died
all, except one, and of the other all were cured, save that small number; this
account I had from a very credible Artist, then in the Fleet: where it was
generally understood, that the Mercurial applications had made the one so
unhappy, and the contrary the other so fortunate; without doubt, that great
disparity in their fates was occasioned by the venomous particles of the
Mercury insinuated to the Vessels, or from its constant and vehement corrosion
of the Nerves: to which Mercury as such, and more so, as acid, is a known Enemy.

Its true, that precipitated Mercury and some mercurial waters, prepared with
Sublimate, are of singular good use in Ulcers: the former being of ancient
practice, and at this day used as an excellent digestive and mundifier of
sordid Ulcers: but the preparations of them both, does either so explode their
mortal and venenose Particles, as in the former, or dilute them as in the
latter, that they cannot have those poisonous effects.

It is evident also to the reason of every man, that when Mercurial
preparations are applied to the newly divided ends of those sensible parts,
they more aptly insinuate their malignity, invenome their Liquors, and produce
those other fatal effects mentioned, by the intolerable pain they beget, being
applied to parts of such exquisite sense, even when that faculty is irritated
and become exasperate by their contusion, laceration, division, etc.

The poisonous quality in Sublimate, (which was the Medicine of the above
intimated Gentleman, applied to his stumps to stay the Hemorrhage) may be
inconsiderable, if rightly prepared, but its corrosive salts are unmovable, a
sort of it usually brought from abroad, and what is sometimes made in England,
being done with Arsenick is very mortal, as Mons. P. 2. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 4.
and Barth. in Beguin.
Le Febure complains; though there are F. Wurtts p. 4. c. 6.
preparations of Arsenick it self, which are safe enough and with ease applied,
even to so tender a part as the Vrethra, as De utilit. Philos. Not. part 2.
Ess. 5. cap. 8.
Mr. Boil tells us, in a notable instance. Now because a great deal of
mischief has been often done by ill-prepared Sublimate, not only in the
present cases we are discoursing of, but when internally given, as in Mercurius
dulcis which is prepared of it, and crude Mercury [ the fatal effects of which
are now cruciating an unhappy The only Son of Sir H. P.
Gentleman I am attending on, who receiving but sixteen grains thereof in a
purgative Bolus, has for many days, endured severe tortures, and is now
languishing beyond hope of recovery.] I will communicate to my Brother the
young Surgeon a few directions, by which he shall discover whether it be
prepared with Arsenick, or not.

Mercury sublimated j. powder it, and throw thereon a little oleum Tartari per
deliquium; If it give the Oil a blue tincture, it is prepared with Arsenick, and
is dangerous; but if it give the Oil a purple tincture, it is good and safe.

Sublimated Mercury Mairss. powder it, and lay it in a Silver spoon, hold it
over a fire till it evaporate; if it leave a Purple spot, it is good: if any
other color, its dangerous.

It discovers it self also by the strong Arsenical smell, and by cleaving to
your fingers: says M. Le Febure ubi supra.

To proceed, Cauteries and Causticks, considered only as they corrode, have too
frequently the ill effects, hereafter to be mentioned, which though evident to
every man's sense, and complained by good A. Parey. l. 9. c. 7. and in lib. 20.
F. Wurts p. 1. c. 4. part 4. c. 56.
Authors, have notwithstanding been continued with strange fondness by many,
who think they can never secure an Hemorrhage without them.

As to actual Cauteries used in the case before us, besides the mischiefs they
occasion, and that are common to them as Escharoticks, they have their special
ones, of begetting great dread and horror in the Patient, and no less scandal
to the Art and Artists, as is evident in the common upbraidings on that
occasion, to be found in such as Quevedo, and the more solemnly cruel
resentments of mankind against them, in the fate of Archagathos. Were there not
milder ways of attaining the same ends, or were this infallible, it were some
justification and excuse; but the contrary to both being evident, our cruelty
is beyond all Apology: when a member after it has been lacerated, and torn
asunder by a Canon shot, and undergone a new extirpation by the Chyrurgeons
Knife and Saw, must be cruciated by the dreadful, often needless, frequently
mischievous application of his hot Irons also, argues us to have Lions paws as
well as hearts: as if because an old saying had given us the one, we would of
our selves assume the other.

It Is moreover an operation of great nicity and difficult performance,
especially in the hurry of Sea Fight; for if the Iron be too hot, it either
brings off the Eschar with it, or leaves it loose; if not hot enough, it begets
nothing but pain and anguish; these impeachments are so plain, that every one
will excuse my Censure. I leave it to the consideration of any ingenious Men,
to imagine how difficult it is to heat those dreadful Instruments to that exact
degree they ought: and how dangerous when it is time to use them, to delay till
they are reduced to it.

The Summary is this; That considering this operation to be always terrible and
painful; sometimes needless, frequently mischievous, ever difficult to be done
Artificially and exactly, often S. Formius, Ob. 1.
successless, besides the other Objections to which its liable, in common with
Corrosives; and that means more successful, more facilly performed, obnoxious
to none of the ill consequences hereby, are to be had; (all which are evident,)
it ought to be exploded by every one that valueth either his own reputation,
that of his Art, or the good of his Patient.

I detract not hereby from the due worth of such Operations when used to their
proper ends and occasions. I design only to manifest the impertinence thereof
in the particular case before us, and to dehort my Brother the young
Practitioner from being forward with them, in recent Wounds, Amputations, etc.
the incomparable good effects of their application in other cases, where their
dissuading circumstances do not exist, is known to your self, Sir, and all good
Artists; and is well recounted by Johannes de Vigo, Lib. 8. cap. 15.
more principally after the extirpation of a Cancer, or a mortified part, where
there is reason to doubt that some remains are behind, of either the malignant
matter, or cadaverous flesh, as also in all venomous Wounds; but in all these,
their use is not to restrain the bleeding, but to extinguish the poison and
quicken the sense and life of the part, which it incomparably does.

Having in this Classis considered, and rejected all actual Cauteries, and
those potential ones that are so, by any Mercurial or Arsenical mixture: I come
to examine those which in a general sense are so denominated, not having any
venom in them, against the application of which to green Wounds, for stopping
fluxes of blood, by inducing an an Eschar, I have these following Objections.

First, It Is a received truth, and of general belief in Physic, that all Acids
are injurious to the Nerves. It Is spoken of them as received internally. If so,
after they are diluted by the vehicle wherein they are administered, and the
Juices they circulate in, how much more so shall such potent ones be, when
solely applied to them, when their tenderness and sense is irritated by
wounding, etc. Now all Corrosives being so from their acid Salts: they when
applied to a Wound, (suppose it the stump of a member) although with the utmost
care, diligence and skill of the applier, confined to the mouths of the
bleeding Vessels, shall in despite of all his endeavors to prevent it,
diffuse so, that the ends of the Nerves, the Periosteum, and all the sensible
parts shall suffer by their teeth, the effects of which will be Pain,
Convulsion, Watching, Fever, Synovia, etc.

Secondly, It often happens, that when the Eschar they beget falls away,
the Hemorrhage renews, and is then with much more difficulty restrained.
Proofs hereof were endless and needless.

Thirdly, Though a Cautery or Caustic may happily stop bleeding, it occasions
a flux not much less mischievous than that of the Veins and Arteries, to wit a
large The meaning of the word, and the controversy of the thing, is at large
in D. Sennert. de chymic. cum Arist. and Gal. consensu ac dissensu. c. 15.
Synovia, or weeping of the other Vessels, which never occurreth near the
degree where those sharp applications are not made. Sometimes I have seen it
flow at that extravagant rate, as in a very few hours to wet the whole bandage:
the menstruous expense of which Serum (whether it be that of the blood,
Lymphaducts, or Nerves, or all) must considerably dry, enervate and dispirit.
If their uses in the body, (according to Severinus, Paracelsus, Glisson, and
Scheunemannus) are to humect, strengthen, convey the animal Spirits, and (as
Dr. Glisson particularly of the Succus Nervosum) to nourish.

Fourthly, It often happens, where strong Escaroticks have been applied, that
when the Crust has been removed, so much of the flesh is found eroded and come
away thereby, the remaining sound part also shrunk so far back, (as they most
evidently do after Cauteries) that the bone is left bare, and stands out beyond
the Level: so that the Surgeon must either take it off anew, (a thing not
easy to be done well) or by tedious incarnation, raise the flesh to it, the
consequences of which will be an incurable dysepulotick Ulcer, which also
depriveth the Patient of benefit by that part of our Art, which teaches us to
supply the defects of Nature, it being difficult, if not impossible for him, to
use an artificial stump or supplemental Leg, till the Ulcer be cicatrized.

Fifthly, The difficulty and danger of removing Escars, the tediousness
thereof, the filthy stench and putrefaction thereby occasioned, are ills that
are particular to this way of stopping the hemorrhage of a Wound.

The third way of restraining fluxes of blood from wounded Veins or Arteries,
is by coagulating it in or about the mouths of the Vessels bleeding, whereby
they are choked; this is acquired either by local Medicines, or manual
Operation: the former is done by all sweet vitriolate Medicines, G. Horstins.
ob. 12. l. 9. tells us, of the Hemorrhage of an Artery stayed by laying a bit
of Opium in the place bleeding.
such as the Aq. styptica R. etc. as also by Narcoticks and other Specificks:
such are Pulv. Bufonum, Bufo Siccata, Lapis haematitis, Bole, etc. and the
common applications of that nature, but they are not seldom ineffectual, either
because the Vessels are large, and consequently the torrent of the blood also,
which admits not of the designed effect on them, either by diluting the
application, or washing it off, and the small coagulations it may induce before
they become large, or firm enough to answer the intention; or else from the
crasis of the blood it self, which in many habits is so serous, hot and thin as
renders it incapable of coagulation by such weak causes: neither of these are
possible when our Medicine is applied. For first its being unctuous, will not
admit its mixture with blood, wherefore it cannot be diluted thereby. Secondly,
It Is evident by experiment the fourth following, that it thickens even the
serum of the blood, and therefore cannot fail of coagulating it, though the
temperament thereof be very serous.

Every Artist using this Method, is so apprehensive of the uncertainty of it is
effects, S. Formius, continued such a dressing 7 days without moving them.
Observe. 1. to stay the hemorrhage of a bleeding Axillary, after Cautery, etc.
had been in vain used.
(especially when large Vessels are wounded) that they fear to loose or remove
either Ligature, or dress, until the second or third, (sometimes not until the
fourth) day, although it be lacerated Wound, whereby great putrefaction is
engendered, causing faintness, mortification of the part, or at best crudity and
indigestion by extinguishing the natural heat, and destroying the Crasis
thereof; not to mention the stench and scandalous noisome smell it usually
yields by reason of the putrilage, nor the pain of the Ligature so long
continued to retain the dressings; nor its contributing to a Gangrene or the
like ills by its continual pressure, whereby the influx of the Spirits are
impeded.

The great noise and fame of the Royal Styptick figure invented by Monsieur
Denis, communicated to his Majesty, approved and Philosoph. Trans. n. 94, 95,
96.
tried by Mr. Sergeant Wiseman and others: of which Mr. Oldenburgh gives us a
large Narrative, has been frequently found very fallible; a considerable
instance whereof is, that after the extracting a Tooth from -- it could not
restrain the slight flux following it; I say, the first and infant reputation
of this Gallique tincture, and account given the Public of its monstrous
effects and success, does for the most part oppugn what I have here alleged to
disparage that way of Restriction, and would unanswerably confute it, if it
were able to support its own reputation. The Medicine is rationally composed,
and deserves well, but not so much applause as its Author assumed. --

The latter way of inducing this choking Coagulation, is by manual operation;
that is by the use of Buttons, Dossils, Ligature and Compress, or holding the
Thumb or Finger on the Orifice so long, till the blood for want of motion
coagulate, all which are not without their great inconveniences and
disappointments, as to Ligature and Compress thereby. I have just now
sufficiently anticipated any Objections here: you may please to remember, that
Mr. Hobbs furnished me with an instance to the discredit of Buttons, etc. for
that they sometimes bury themselves amongst the Muscles and Eschars, as he
found once at St. Bartholomews Hospital, in a stump sent from Mr. -- where
those Engines which had been applied to choke the Vessels had slipped up the
interstices of the Muscles, and seemed to him (when he first felt them) to be
small shot; so that to a plain stump, they had the kindly accession of a
sinuous Ulcer or two, contracted by their having laid there some considerable
time, the member being taken off at Sea. I find complaints of this nature, and
cautions thereupon given us, page 304.
by Mr. Woodal.

The latter way of the Finger or Thumb: is famous for the effect it had on one
of the former Princes of Orange, of which my Lord Bacon gives an account. Sylv.
Sylv. cent. 1. experim. 66.
It being also used at this day to small and despicable Hemorrhagies: to which
sort only it proves effectual; it being difficult to imagine how it should
have such prosperous success on such large Vessels as are divided in the
amputation of a member. It being very tedious, and while performing, the Wound
must lie without dressing, open and exposed to the air; nor can it be supposed
effectual in the slightest aperture; if it be but either a little deep from the
skin, or of any other form except what it has, by being divided transversly,
that so the compression may be made fully and immediately upon it.

The fourth general way of stopping the Hemorrhagies of Wounds, is by the
application of such things as having a clammy, glutinous, gummy, glewy or the
like nature; hardneth upon, and so choaketh the Orifice of the divided Vein or
Artery. Such are Rosin powdered, whites of Eggs, the hair of an Hare, Clay, all
Earths, etc. I would not, if I could, detract from the worth of that famous
Powder of Galens, to which so many thousands have owed their preservations. I
will only say that none of those Medicines, or any other operating the same
way, can endure competition with ours upon these several accounts.

They answer not the intention so suddenly; Nor so surely,

Thirdly, Nor so generally; for in small deep Wounds, they do nothing to it as
our Balsam does; for if a Syringe-pipe can but enter into them to inject it,
the flux is secured, as shall be anon confirmed.

Fourthly, None of them produce any other benefit to Wounds, not curable by
consolidation but restraining the flux, (of which they often fail); whereas
this of ours incomparably digests, etc. while it is also stopping the fluxes, as
shall be more at large evinced in due place.

Fifthly, All those things, (especially the whites of Eggs and Hares hair) when
applied to green Wounds and stumps: where no digestion being, no matter flows
to humect them; adhere sometimes to the very wounded flesh, always to the skin
on the edges, whence they become difficult to remove without pain, and hazard
of a new flux.

Sixthly, All those Dressings must be kept on long; those immediately on the
Orifices of the bleeding Vessels, much longer, whereby those pernicious effects
are occasioned, already said to follow the like prolix continuance of dressing
to cure the bleeding of Wounds the third foregoing way.

The fifth manner of curing Hemorrhagies, is that of Ambrosius Pareus, Lib. 10.
cap. 3.
by deligation of the Vessel: a way always tedious, often successless; and
whatever vaunts the Author makes of it, it cannot be so secure as he pretends;
it being liable, (sometimes from the slackness, otherwise from the too great
straightness of the thread: sometimes from its smalness, cutting through, or
from its weakness, giving way) to a new flux when not so tolerable to the
Patient, or so easily cured by the Artist as at first; Moreover, where two
Vessels or more bleed in one Wound, (which is very frequent) the one must be
neglected, while the Ligais making on the other, it being no less impossible
that two Operators should be tying together at one Wound, than that one alone
should do it: nor is it easy to come at the ends of the Vessels, because they
forthwith retire when divided. I forbear to insist on many of those things,
they being evident to every man's apprehension; nor on the tediousness of
finding them, nor the difficulty in separating them from a concomitant Nerve,
(where such is.) The ligation of an Artery on other accounts, as in the
Toothach, Epiphoras, Aneurisma, etc. is not hereby impugned.

A Sixth general Method for the stopping of the Hemorrhagies of Wounds, is by
Sarcoticks, or Incarnatives: such are Aloes, Thus, Pulv. Astringens Galeni,
etc. by which it is supposed, the mouths of the bleeding Vessels become covered
and choked with new begotten flesh; but while this new flesh is generating,
they are in such daily hazard of a new flux, that they dare not meddle with
their Ligature, nor dressing in a tedious while, nor much longer with that
lying immediately on the mouth of the Vessel; whence it is easy to guess what
incarning there is like to be, perhaps such putrefaction is contracted by the
detestable continuance of one dressing, as shall constrain the Artist to
pervert the course and intention of Art, by using Mundificatives after
Incarners, and Digestives after both. I presume to tell you Sir, that I am not
without reason if I affirm it a mistake in those, who suppose Galen's Powder
does by this way restrain a Flux; those very few things things in it that are
Sarcotick, are so saturated by the whites of Eggs, and Hares hair, that they
cannot influence their Virtues, whereas they two alone without the commixture
of those Powders, shall do it; where then is the Incarnation? Neither is it
sense to suppose, that a dossil dipped in an Incarnative Medicine, (suppose this
to be such) can beget flesh, when it is not only diluted with blood, but to
operate on a part unprepared for it by digestion, etc. (which ought to precede)
and when perhaps, to abide on the place six times longer, than any incarnate
force remains in it.

I do not deny, that the protrusion of the circumjacent flesh, and the retiring
of the divided Vessels, and perhaps sometimes a little Incarnation may choke
and cover the ends of them which way soever the flux be restrained; but that
being a Postfact, cannot properly be called a stopper of blood, but a securer
of blood stopped; for were it not achieved before by the closing of the ends of
the Vessels, an extravasation or new flux would follow; a memorable instance of
which I shall relate in the thirteenth Observation, where after the bleeding
had been stopped ten days, and Incarnanative Medicines to fill up the Wound had
been used three; yet a strong flux broke out, without any manifest cause.

The Seventh general way of staying Hemorrhagies is by revulsion and
derivation: I put them together, because their difference is very
inconsiderable; and in this case are performed by one method, scil. Cups,
Frictions, Ligature, and Phlebotomy.

The First, by being applied to parts remote from the place bleeding, is
supposed to give the blood a motion (by drawing it) that way; this I confess in
small and internal Hemorrhagies, where applications are impossible to be made
locally, may contribute much; but in the Hemorrhages which attend Wounds, being
usually large, they signify very little being such weak assisters as are
seldom used, never relied on.

The second being made on the extreme parts remotest from the Hemorrhage, are
supposed not only to attract the course of the blood that way, but so to
enlarge and distend the Vessels, as to give them more capacity to contain a
quantity, exceeding their proportion, by which the tendency of the blood
toward the part wounded is not only diverted, but a great and redundant
portion thereof, kept circulating in the part chaffed, (especially if assisted
by Ligature) while the mouth of the bleeding Vessel is securely occluded;
Frictions being supposed to keep at least the due proportion of blood, to the
part where it is used, (wherefore it is so much used in Syncopes and
regurgitations thereof on the heart); which being effected, it is easy to
imagine, that the flux wheresoever it be, cannot much exceed the particular
stock of the part where it is, which may be tolerable enough; because after the
Hemorrhage is secured; it may be supplied by Detachments from the rest.

The same answer given the former, is not impertinent to this: adding withal,
that Frictions, by rarifying and heating the blood, though but in one part,
will yet have influence in the rest: for in despite of this supposition, it
will when so heated and attenuated, mix with the Mass, and not a little
administer that quality thereunto; whereby instead of impeding, it will
considerably inhaunce the Hemorrhage.

The third, being made in the extreme and remote parts also; retains the blood
there, and compressing the Veins more than the Arteries wholly impedes the
return thereof: and yet admits (as far as the spring of the blood is able to
propel, and the capacity of the Vessels to contain) a greater quantity than is
proportioned; this is evident, on Ligature made for Phlebotomy, and the
repletion of the Vessels upon it, whence the blood is at once derived, revelled
and fixed, and indeed a flux many times, if not wholly stayed, yet considerably
rebated thereby, whence it becomes easy to stop by local applications;
somewhat also is attributed to the pain caused by Ligature, which is supposed
to attract (as they all do) to the place where they are made, and so derive the
blood from the part bleeding, as has been often tried, by painful tying the
little Finger only, in an Hemorrhage of the Nose; an other besides this sort of
Ligature, is made also in Amputations to stay the flux, which may not be
improper here to take notice of; for although (besides some other uses not
pertinent to our present enquiry,) they seem to design only, to hinder the
deflux of the blood to the part; yet they thereby also revel, by so turning its
course another way, and thus all those made immediately above the place of
Excision; and those made remotely above that are advantageous, some men (and
not amiss) using always three Ligatures in Amputation, one on each side the
division, the other as far above it as the place will admit.

I allow the Reason and use of all these Ligatures, and except against nothing
they design; but that they are but partial ways, being unable alone, and of
themselves to cure, (though they for the present stop) an Hemorrhage, not being
to continue without great hazard. (I once saw in an hasty Amputation the
Ligature left on, which begat such horrible symptoms, as cost the Patients
life) there being also necessity to slacken them when your dress is in hand,
that you may by the flux see where the ends of the bleeding Vessels are, and
dispose of your applications accordingly.

Sir, I hope it will not be altogether impertinent, if I here take occasion to
recommend to the young Practitioner, one way of Ligature very useful in
Amputations, especially above the Knee; that is to say, a wadd of hard linen
cloth, or the like, inside the Thigh a little below the Inguen, then passing a
Towel round the member; knit the ends of it together, and with a Battoon, a
Bedstaff, or the like; twist it, till it compress the Wadd or Boulster so very
strait on the crural Vessel, that (the circulation being stopped in them,)
their bleeding when divided by the Excision, shall be scarce large enough to
let him see where to apply his Restrictives, nor shall the pain of that
Operation be comparable to what it would be, were not the member nummed by the
Compress. Yet I would direct him in all Constrictions, whether by gripe, narrow
Ligature, or this we recommend, to slacken it a little before the application
of his Dress, the better to find by their bleeding where his care and
applications are most needful; for want of this necessary Caution, poor
Patients do often lose much blood unknown to the Surgeon, it having lain
concealed withing the encompassing bladder: nor is inartificial Ligature, and
many thick pledgets and boulsters of less inconveniency and mischief; for that
they often imbibe the extravasate blood, concealing many large expenses thereof.

As to Phlebotomy, the last mentioned way of Revulsion and Derivation; it is
also to be made on the remotest part from that bleeding, by which it is supposed
to give the blood a motion that way, and so derives its course from the part
wounded, and by emptying the Vessels, slackens and rebates its efflux, from
those that are hurt. This does eminently contribute even in fluxes from Wounds,
where there is a Plethora ad vasa, a repletion of the Vessels, and is
incomparably useful in Hemorrhagies from internal Ruptures, penetrating Wounds,
Haemoptysis, Hemorrhagies from the Nose, hemorrhoidal Veins or Womb, etc. but
in any other circumstances it is so far from being serviceable, that it begets
mischief, and answers not the chief end and design of its use, no revulsion how
plenary soever, being of its self (without local application) able to stop a
flux from a wounded Vessel.

So that briefly, it is always but a partial, sometimes a needless, often a
mischevous way; the first, because it only assists; the second, when need to
temperate Constitutions; the third, because it hinders digestion, I mean in
great Wounds, and moderate habits; but in bodies very plethorick, that have not
bled sufficiently at the Wound, whence the symptomatical Fever may become so
high, as to beget a Phrensy, Delirium, Hemorrhage, etc. or that from some
manner or circumstance of the Wound (as large Contusion, Laceration, Fracture,
Puncture, etc.) there be hazard of a Gangrene. It Is very advantageous,
excepting to such as are caused by a poisonous Weapon or venomous bite, in
which Phlebotomy is pernicious; for though it be for the most part an enemy to
maturation, by rebating that heat which should concoct the matter: yet in such
extraordinary cases, where there is more matter than nature can overcome and
digest, or that because of the plenitude of blood, and vigorous spirits (which
when agitated in this work, would kindle and combust.) there would be danger of
a too violent Fever, and other ill effects of the perturbation; It has been
found, River. lib. 17. sect. 3. c. 1.
that the drawing off some thereby has facilitated the work; but other ways,
and most commonly bleeding retards it, as is evident from the design thereof,
when used after Contusions, in Ecchymosis, incipient Phlegmons, etc. viz. to
prevent their Apostumation.

Of this, amongst the foreign Surgeons which in my Travels I have conversed
with, viz. French, Hollanders, Portuguez, Spaniard, Italian, and Germans: the
latter only have had the discretion to be sensible, and so highly are they so,
that they will scarcely allow of venae section, though very urgent symptoms
that might be remedied thereby, have called for it.

It will be no impertinent digression, if I enlarge this part of my Discourse,
by taking notice of, and reproving another design hereof in Wounds, and that is
the curing or preventing the symptomatical Fevers attending them, against which
practice I object this Dilemma, That it either fails of performing that
intention, or by doing it, quite hinders and destroys Digestion, which being
ever procured with a Fever, (as I have already suggested and proved) he that
bleeds till that be taken away, must do it till all the blood be extracted;
this is manifest to any Artist, that has observed how those wounds from which
so incredible a quantity of blood has been shed, as would tempt a man to
believe it impossible for the flame of a Fever to find any fuel, have yet had
that inevitable accident whilst digestion has been performing; this has been
often evident to me, particularly in the cases to be mentioned in the Seventh
and Ninth Observation, concluding this Discourse: in both which, though the
expense of blood was monstrously great, yet a very brisk Fever accompanied
them, though the former by reason of his internal Wounds had been
phlebotomized, and received several of the following draughts: Crystal.
minerale j. Sir. Symphyt. iss. Aque Sperm. R. Plant. Scabiosae. Papav. Rh. ana
j. misce. Hence it is evident Phlebotomy cannot hinder the Fever; Those are
Avenzoar, Fracastorius, Helmont, Angelus, Sala, Mich. Fehr. Langius,
Deusingius, Rolfinkius, and of our own Countrymen. Dr. T. Sydenham, Dr. Tob.
Whitaker, p. 27, etc. M. N. Medel. Med. p. 408. G. Tomson, cap. 7. Nor is D.
Willis so fond of it, if his Discourse be considered, c. 15. de Feb. Sanguinis
missio, si plethora adfit, -- circa missionem sanguinis instante variolarum
eruptione, valde ambigitur. Of the same cautelous opinion is Dr. Sennertus de
feb. l. 4. c. 12. and Riverius, lib. 17. sect. 3. c. 2.
that it impedes Digestion, has been already made good from the use and end of
it, in Phlegmons, in fieri, etc.

Let me further illustrate all this, by comparison with the Small Pox, merely
putrid; in which Phlebotomy is so much decried, not only by the vulgar and
illiterate, but by the men of Degree and Books: the one from fact and the
frequent unsuccessfulness thereof, the other from reasons in Physic, among
which what I have here alleged against it is use in Wound-Fevers, is not the
least.

I am not insensible of the many Authors, See Mr. Stubbs aagainst Tomson, where
you have them quoted and urged at large from page 172, to page 258. Vide Dr.
Willis, loc. cit. and ubi dicit -- interim cautio sit, ne fermentationis seu
effervescentiae opus ullatenus cohibeatur, -- and River. Ubi Supra.
that by Advice direct, and by Observation confirm the benefit or harmlesness
thereof. But it is rarely found so saving in hot Countries, Flagrant
Constitutions, Plethorick Bodies, (in all which the coctive heat is not weakened
thereby, and yet the extravagance of the matters quantity rebated, by which it
is sooner, and with more ease digested) and in all these e're coction began, it
being equally hazardous, and unsafe to bleed in a digesting Wound, in a
suppurating Plegmon, (that is large,) and in the Variolae that are cocting, and
disposed to extrusion, except in the unusual, and extraordinary circumstances
abovementioned.

The Fever accompanying the incipient Variolae, or Small Pox beginning, is
symptomatical and necessary, and the Delirium that is sometimes thereby
occasioned, very harmless, and what they soon recover when the matter is
ripened and thrust out; wherefore the most prudent and successful Method I ever
found, (having been concerned in many of that Disease) and that is practiced by
prosperous Women, are considerably hot: such are Sack, and Saffron,
Treacle-water, Mithridate, Venice Treacle, Aqua Epidemica, decoctions of Rue,
Figs and Cochianel, Bezoar, etc. whereby the Fever is inhaunsed; but the
Coction quickened and dispatched: which when they find, and that the Pox appear
well out, and the Fever decline, they abandon hot things, and use such as are
altogether temperate, having thereby framed and settled to themselves this Rule,
till the Pox are well out, you cannot use any thing too hot, nor afterward
things too This, cum grano Salis.
cold. This is evident, that very few die of the Initial Fever, or any symptom
concomitant with the Coction, except Phlebotomy have perverted the intention
and design of Nature, by checking the Coction, or disturbing the course they
were in for expulsion.

This I speak, allowing still the reason for bleeding in the former respects
and considerations, and do apply the whole to Practice, in the case before us,
viz. the digestion, i. e. the maturation of Wounds: there being an identity in
the Reasons and Circumstances. Therefore in temperate Constitutions, a due
quantity and quality of blood, I am so far from bleeding, or giving cool
things, though symptoms have been brisk, and seemed to call for it, that I have
administered, as well as applied Digestions, (all which are hot) whereby
assisting Nature to overcome and coct the matter, I have sooner than usual took
off the Fever, dispatched the Digestion, and prevented the expense of much of
my Patients blood, spirits and strength.

The eighth and last general way of stopping the Hemorrhagies of Wounds, is by
closing the Orifices of the Vessels and uniting them. This is supposed to be
done by all mild Vitriolates aluminous, and some Styptick, conglutinating
Applications, who from their asperity, dryness and moderate sharpness, shrink
up the coats, and by that means constipate the bleeding Vessel; D. W. Needham,
and M. Sergeant Wiseman, seem to affirm this done by the Aque Styptica R. Number.
95.
as appears in their Narratives, published in Mr. Oldenburgh's Philosophical
Transactions: but whether they supposed it only, (their enquiry being whether,
not how it stopped the bleeding) or delivered it on certain knowledge, is what I
cannot determine from the expressions made use of: nor whether any such effect
have been produced by any other Medicine save my own, which will be my next
work to discover.

Thus, Sir, I have finished, and examined all the common ways of stopping
bleeding: pardon my vanity, if I think I have showed manifestly, that in many
respects, they are most of them precarious and uncertain. whatever credit, long
continuance, etc. may have purchased for them. This I have attempted, not out
of design the better to establish my own, (a practice common with Innovators,)
but on the sincere suggestions of Reason, Experience and Authority, by all
which every of my criminations are supported.

There is another way very improperly computed by A. Pareus, and Dr. Read,
amongst those of stopping the Hemorrhagies of Wounds, which is by dividing the
bleeding Vessel, that its ends shrinking up between the muscles, etc. may
become choked: but were this true, we should behold its effects in
Amputations, and have no flux in those Wounds that divide the Arteries or
Veins; but the contrary being evident, I have reason to slight it, as being
also impracticable, and of no general application, or use.

And now methinks I find my self accosted by the Critic, with this question;
If these are all the ways of stopping Hemorrhagies, and that all of them are
thus defective, and liable to so many ill consequences: how comes it that so
many large Fluxes are frequently restrained without the assistance of any other
Method, or Medicament?

My Answer is contained in the following considerations: That those ways here
objected against, though they have stopped Hemorrhagies, have not done it with
that benignity and certainty as ours does; for that great expenses of blood
have been made, e're it has been perfected.

Many men have died of the symptoms and effects, not only of the loss of the
blood, but those ill applications, though they have not been noted, or observed
as the causes.

I have no where affirmed them to be generally and in all respects fallible,
that most of them have failed in large fluxes, is a known truth; that I never
found mine so uncertain, but that I might rely thereon, (which can never be
said of the rest,) is not a little sure to me. Now on these respects, though I
have preferred my own, I have not so far disparaged theirs, as to deny them
wholly destitute of power to stay many Hemorrhagies: nor should I my self
decline them, where I were denied my own; that man were certainly mad, that
would rather be naked, than put on cloths much worn, or old fashioned; things
are every day improved, and more accommodated to our convenience; the advantage
of the latter, though it exceed and depreciate, does not altogether invalidate
and make impracticable the former. The old way of Navigation, was to coast on
the shore, whereby a Voyage to Morlaix from hence, became at least an hundred
and fifty Leagues; but the Modern and improved way, by the advantage of the
Compass, shortens it by at least six score: he were certainly a ridiculous
Mariner that would slight that advantage, and he no less that being ignorant of
its use, or in impossibility of having the benefit thereof, would decline his
Voyage, rather than pursue it the old way.

My Second general Undertaking, was to show the way how I conceive, our Balsam
so suddenly, and sometimes without Ligature, secureth Hemorrhagies. In order to
which I shall first relate diverse Observations and Experiments made of Oleum
Terebinthinae, and humane blood, and the various Phenomenon thereof, and then
from thence deduce proofs for which I shall presume in this Particular.

Turpentine; heat it, and spread it on a planed board, or other Timber; the
subtle volatile parts thereof: some exhale, others insinuate thereinto, leaving
the gummy resinous fixed part behind, which becomes a very firm, tough and
adhering integument, and is commonly called Varnish, being so used, to keep the
wood from corrupting by the Air, or from Worms: Painters for that reason also
tempering their Colors therewith, especially the brighter ones; for then
though not heated, it soon hardens, as does Lin-seed Oil, and without
becoming yellowish, as that does.

Terebinth. and they shall soon become like a tough skin, or covering
thereunto: so contracting or shrinking, as to beget a sensible griping or
straitness thereon, and will not easily remove without Oil, or some unctuous
body.

Turpentine on a polished Marble, or piece of clean smooth glass, and the
spirituous volatile parts (of which it mostly consists) evaporating away, the
remainder having at first expanded it self, does now manifestly shrink up: and
(having at first application, by insinuating to the little insensible Cavities
thereof, a firm hold) endeavors as it were to contract it self, and the
substance to which adhereth; but its stubbornness will not yield to so weak a
spring, but in fine cloth and such pliable matter, it evidently effects it; the
reason hereof is very plain, its heat makes it more subtle and penetrating, by
which its rarefied parts get in and fasten themselves to the matter on which it
lies, and by that heat gently exhaling its volatile parts, which being the
most of its quantity, the more tough and gummy remains, endeavor to contract,
to supply the evaporations of their finer particles: in which attempt, being in
their circumference fastened firmly (as all resinous bodies aptly are) to the
matter on which they lodge, they contract that also, if it be soft and flexible
enough to yield to that action.

Oleum Terebinthinae, in a bloud-porringer that would hold three ounces: let a
Vein, or an Artery bleed it full, and you shall find the blood instantly to
coagulate, not a loose frangible crudling as Acids produce therein; but a more
tough, fast, and as it were gummy condensation; let it stand a while, and the
Oil shall all of it separate and superside: the longer it stands, the harder
the blood grows, especially the Surface, which will become very tough. This
Experiment I made many times: and (which is very remarkable) always found it
without any Serum, though the rest of the blood drawn simply, and set to cool
in other Porringers, did abound therewith: now view this condensed blood by a
Microscope, and it appears very firm, compact, close and opake; but the other,
though severed from it is Serum, shows thin, and almost translucid; that crudled
by a solution of Vitriol, looks like a heap of loose black dirt, or gravel: the
former only resembling black Pitch, by which that it is fittest for the
performance, we shall by and by discover.



coagulations; but forcing up the hardened superficies, it broke at some
distance round about it, so that a flap was thereby made like a Trap-door, or a
Valve: which upon withdrawing my Needle, fell into its place again: A clear
proof of its being very firm and tough.

Turpentine, is a most incomparable Balsam, to heal Wounds by Consolidation, or
to digest and incarn those that require it. It Is known that internal Wounds and
Ulcers, being incapable of local application, are cured by vulnerary Dyets;
which, say the Learned, is by hightning and improving the Balsam of the blood.
Now to make it a good Topical Balsam, I think nothing exceeds the celebrated
Oil of ours: as any one that will experiment it, may easily assure himself: for
though there be no sensible commixture; yet after the subsiding blood is freed
from the Oil swimming a top of it: yet by the smell it appears considerably
impregnated therewith.

Sir, I want leisure to make other trials, necessary to a full discovery, and
solution the Question, how this Medicine stops Hemorrhagies of Wounds. Those
here given you, are all I have been able to make, since your Commands have been
upon me: there are a few more, which I would recommend to the examination of
the Curious; and which I shall attempt, as I have opportunity, and give you
account of the success.

First, I would try whether hot Oleum Terebinthinae does not sensibly occlude
the aperture of an Artery, or Vein, by taking the Crural, or Carotid ones of a
Dog, and making Ligature on the further part, would there divide it, and draw
out the untied end as far as it would come, stopping its bleeding, by a
compress of my Thumb and Finger: and so dip it in the hot Oil, slackning my
compressure to let some of the blood flow: after which totally stopping it for
a time would then repeat the trial, till I found how long after its immersion
therein, it would be, before it so firmly closes, as of it self to retain the
blood. I would then also examine, whether any Unition were confirmed; how long
it is a doing; whether the blood coagulate within the Orifice; and by so
oppilating it, contribute to the stay of the Hemorrhage. I would also in one
day amputate the Thighs of many Animals of one species, and bind them up with
dressing of Oleum Terebinthinae: every day afterward, I would examine (even so
exactly as with a Microscope) how Nature works, what she is doing, and has
done, in the several parts of that time to the divided Vessels, to secure their
flowing.

I would also by Punctures, oblique, and transverse incisions of the Arteries;
and which is worst, by tonging them as boys do Reeds, to make music with: try
if if they would not be closed by this Oil; how it is effected with the
different ways and steps Nature takes to atchieve it; these I would recommend
to the men of leisure and Curiosity; as also the re-examination of those trials
I have made, desiring them, if in one or more, they find not all things to
agree with my account, they would repeat them, considering they may sometimes
fail, by reason of a different crasis in the blood, from some fault in the Oil,
or some other unknown occasion, (perhaps his own perfunctory attempts) with
this patience and Ingenuity, Essay the second, of unsuccesful Experiments, page
107. Edit. 2.
Mr. Boil tried some such related Experiments of the Lord Bacon, and Sir
Thomas Brown; and though after diverse repetitions he found they did not
succeed, yet at last had his expectations gratified.

From all the aforesaid appearances, it seems probable to me, that our Balsam
does thus restrain Hemorrhagie; first on its application, it contracts the
bleeding Orifices: Exper. second and third, begetting also that firm
Coagulation of the blood, Exper. first and fourth, and that not externally
only, but internally also; by the former it constipates, by the latter it
chokes and oppilates them: that externally assisting also to the griping the
end, or aperture of the bleeding Vessel, and thereby strengthens the occlusion,
the blood being unable to penetrate it, by Exp. the seventh; it is probable the
Coagulum heals up the Orifice of the bleeding Vein or Artery, either by
uniting the Coat, or by Concarnation, i. e. begetting some intermediate
substance, which it will nimbly do, being internally and externally lodged upon
it.

This, Sir, is the best Mechanical account I can give, or apprehend of the
matter. I hope by future trials of my own, or some more intuitive
Experimentators, I may be confirmed in this opinion concerning it; or that a
truer solution thereof (if such can be) will be dilucidated.

Whether the actual heat of the Medicine, may not contribute especially to the
shriveling the wounded Vessel, is to me no doubtful question; having found on
the cold application thereof, those effects were not produced: from whence I
would also infer, that the first mentioned Experiments operated on the bleeding
Vessel, according to my Explication of them, since without the actual heat
necessary to cause those Phenomenon, the blood is not stayed; Ergo, it must be
stopped either by the immediate effect of its actual heat, or those mediate
ones, related in the first Experiments: or (as I am inclined to believe) by a
concurrence of both.

Whether the adstringing quality, ascribed to the Turpentine tree, by Lib. 8.
de Simp. med. facult.
Galen, Lib. 1. cap. 72.
Dioscorides, Laguna, Gerard, etc. Cortex, folia, and fructus ejus,
adstringunt, have here any juvancy, I know not. There seems to be a stypticity
in the Oil it self, when rubbed between the Fingers: of what use here I leave
to other Judgments.

If the whiteness appearing, Experiment 5. be a tendency of the blood to
maturation, it is a strong evidence of the digestive faculty of our Balsam.

My third general design, is to give some directions to be observed in the
choice and use of this Medicine. As to the former, I am to acquaint my Brother
Surgeon, that there is no essential, though there be a reputed difference,
between what is called by some the Spirit, and by others, the Oil of Terebinth;
they being names promiscuously given to one and the same kinds of thing, when
in reality they are See Mr. Febure, part. 2. lib. 2. sect. 10. cap. 19.
all Oils, as is evident by their swimming on water, wherewith they will also
commix upon shaking together in a Phial, and sever again upon standing a while,
as in the Aq. Gonorrhea Quercetani; the first running in the distilling
Turpentine being a thin limpid spirit, induced Tyroc. chym. lib. 2. c. 4.
Beguinus and Instit. Med. lib. 5. part. 3. sect. 3. c. 5.
Sennertus, so to denominate it; but our College more truly, Oleum tenue and
album, instar aquae; the Augustans and De oleis chym. distill.
Ernestus, the white Oil and Comp. Chym. s. 2. c. 7.
Mons. Glassier, the Ethereal Oil of Terebinth.

But though they are all Oils, they are not all alike so: for when distilled
according to the way of the Augustan Dispensatory, and that directed by
Glassier ubi supra, Tyroc. Chym. l. 2. c. 6.
Beguinus, Euonymus, Thesaurus, page 314.
Philiatrus, Ernestus, (which is R. Terebinthinae pellucidae quantum volueris,
distilletur lento igne per retortam s. a.) there comes first Oleum Album, ad
quod sequitur flavum, and ultimo rubrum -- but when done according to our
Pharmacopoea, Sennertus Ubi Supra.
institut. And one way of Ernestus, by putting four times its quantity of water
into the Alembick therewith; there comes little other than this white Oil; the
former is questionless the best way, (only incident to Empyreumat.) and the
last red Oil coming thereby, the chiefest for our purpose; next to it is the
yellow, and where neither is to be had, the oldest white Oil is to be
preferred, because its fiery particles are spent, and evaporate in age,
especially if not close stopped, or have been often opened; the Empyreuma, if
any be in either of them, is no impediment to, but promotes its constringency,
though perhaps it may hinder its digestive influences.

Yet in aged cold phlegmatic bodies, and parts mortified by the expense, or
defect of vital heat, I should prefer the first and most spirituous white Oil,
which is that most commonly sold by the Druggist, though in hot flagrant
Constitutions abounding with Choler, heat, and sharpness of the blood, I should
choose the other, as being more balsamous, and less biting, and hot.

I have some reason to doubt, that the Chemists do often abuse us, in the Oil
commonly sold us for a lesser price by far than the Terebinth, from which it
ought to be drawn: there is a base Turpentine-like substance called commonly
Terebinth, brought from France, drawn from the Fir and other Trees, much used
to this purpose, which is no more the gum of the Turpentine tree, than Tar is.
It were to be wished, care were used to prevent those great abuses in Chemical
preparations, the public Elaboratory, new set up by the Apothecaries Company
in London, is a design of great utility and public advantage, which may in
time secure us such Medicines as may be relied on.

The Directions necessary to be regarded, and followed in the use of this
Medicine, to Wounds, please to receive thus promiscuously, as they occur to my
memory.

And first, I must not forget to tell you, that it ought to be very hot, and
more, or less so, according to the urgency of the flux, the temper of the
Patient, the quickness or flatness of the Spirits, and native heat of the part;
and because in heating it, it is very apt to flame, and when so, is difficultly
extinguished. I always in Amputations or large Wounds, have two Vessels with
the Oil in them, ready heated; that if one kindle, the other may serve. I do
also heat it on glowing, coals, that have no flame, and in a broad deep Vessel,
that may sufficiently intercept the force of the fire, from kindling the
exhaling spirits.

This circumstance, Sir, seems to render it difficult, if not impossible to be
used in the great fights at Sea; partly from the hazard and inconvenience of
fire; partly from the tediousness of heating it, and the aptness to flame,
while so heating, which would be very perilous; to remedy, and prevent all
which, I have considered of a very effectual way: which is to have a Copper
Vessel, with a long neck, flat bottom, and a narrow mouth, like a chemical
Mattress, or Bolts-head, to which I would have, either a close stopper, or a
Cover, so exactly fitted, that the spirituous parts of the Oil should not by
continual heat evaporate away; this would be kept in due heat by a very little
fire, not more than is necessary to heat Cauterizers, and without any danger of
flaming; nor would its continuance on the fire, rebate its virtue; for by the
Vessels being closed, as I have said, the Spirits and evaporative parts, would
only circulate therein. Some few of the more volatile would be spent upon every
opening it, which however might not be inconvenient, since by discharge, the
Medicine is not so potentially hot, and thereby fitter for recent simple
Wounds: by this means having it always ready, it is but to pour a necessary
quantity into a Porringer or other convenient Vessel, at the time you are ready
to use it: the different particular ways of which I forbear here to recite,
because in the Histories or Observations, they will be sufficiently related.

There are two necessary Concomitants, when our Medicine is used, to restrain a
flux: they are Ligature, and an encompassing Defensative, ex bolo, etc. and
moistning the bandage in Posca. This I speak with respect to Amputations, or
great Wounds: in which it cannot be imagined, that without the former to
compress, retain and continue the Applications, a due and necessary time, the
work can be effected, or the wound preserved from accidents without the latter:
more especially, I would direct to deligation of the member, to be amputated
according as I have already said; that the greatness of the flux being impeded
thereby, might not dilute the Medicine before it can perform its intention, or
come entirely on the part bleeding, to restrain it: for which end, there rarely
appears any occasion to use it more than once: for any other design, as the
quickening the sense of a part, reviving benumbed Paralytick Nerves: it may be
used oftener, as also to quicken dull digestion; but then I suppose it best, to
mix it with other temperate things of the like quality; as Linimentum Arcei,
Unguent. Basilicon, Ol. Hypericonis, Lumbricorum, Catulor. etc. except a flux
of blood, or Synovia, require its entire application.

Which may be indifferently made to all parts: those near, the Eyes only
excepted; for it is of so diffufive and insinmuating a quality, that if applied
near them, it will work in and occasion much pain and inflammation, wherefore in
Wounds about the forehead, great care ought to be to prevent its descent
thither. I once saw much pain and trouble thereby unluckily alighting upon a
choleric person, to whom these, as all other hot applications, are very
uneasy.

Though I never had occasion but once, to employ it by way of dressing to the
breast; yet cannot find any reason in my own judgment, or that observation to
dissuade me therefrom, if the aforesaid occasions needed it. What seems to
render it unsafe to that part (I speak of penetrating Wounds thereof) is its
heat or bitterness; on account of the former, where a Pleurizy, Peripneumonia,
or the like is concomitant, it ought to be forborne; but this is so rare a
Congress, that I think scarce in a man's time, shall it occur to him in
practice; its bitterness is so very inconsiderable, that from thence cannot any
Argument be drawn to deter from its application, where need requires such a
Medicine; and not a better grounded Objection appears to oppose it. I am sure
it is a very considerable Charas. Pharm. R. part 3. sect. 1. c. 42.
Pulmonick, commended by Pharm. Rationalis. part. 2. sect. 1. cap. 6. c Tyroc.
Chym. l. 2. c. 4.
Dr. Willis, in Phthisis, and by c Beguinus, in Coughs, Orthopnoea, etc. Curing
also Ulcers in the Lungs: on all which accounts it is made the Menstruum of the
common Balsamum Sulphuris, and the Balsamum Antihectica of Paracelsus. I have
also in penetrating wounds of the Breast, given diverse times, some drops
thereof in a proper Vehicle, by which I have evacuated much matter by Urine,
bettered the digestion of my Wound, and rebated the conflux of humors, by
deriving them diuretically. Dilatat pectus, and abstergit, In council. wittichii
cons. 30.
and per urinam (quod maxim in hoc casu competit) promovet, -- says
Schroderus of a preparation of Turpentine.

If the Vessel bleeding be large, and the flux impetuous, as the Crurals when
Amputation is made above the knee: then I lay large buttons of Tow dipped
therein on the ends of them. In most other Stumps, I leave all to a large
Pledget or two, of a reasonable thickness, which being immersed in the same,
and applied over all, I lay one or more of the like Pledgets, armed with the
common restrictive of Bole, etc. together with bladder and bandages, moist with
water and Vinegar.

In Stabs and narrow Wounds, penetrating the fleshy parts of the Thigh, Leg,
Arms, etc. where by reason of a Vein or Artery hurt, a great Hemorrhage
ensues. I would inject my Oleum Terebinthinae made duly hot, till the whole
Cavity were replete therewith, and there retain it, by stopping the Orifice or
Orifices with my hands a few hours, by which it would become undoubtedly
secured.

I have sometimes the next day after this Medicine of ours has been applied,
found the edges of the Wounds and Stumps blistered as far as the Pledgets have
extended, the bladders of which have been filled with a milky matter; the cause
thereof I always found to be, the too hot application of the Medicine, when
haste has prevented consideration, and occasioned its being so applied; and to
a person of a very hot constitution, the white matter filling those little
vesications, though thin, is the strong digestive effect of its cause. I never
much regarded them, other than to snip them with my Scissors, and lay on it a
little Unguent. Album Camphoratum, which dries them by the next day; wherefore
those to whom the appearance may be strange and surprising, have no reason to
be discouraged thereat, or afraid to use the Medicine after this intimation;
nor to apprehend it gangrenous, as one lately did, and used a Lixivium to cure
it, though he were no stranger to the use of the Oil, to this end. Other ill
effects I have scarce found, (except the symptoms in the last observation were
such;) but that those Wounds to which I have applied it, have been as easy as
my others, to which I had not used it.

Lastly, To amplify and perfect one Period, which upon a review I find
defective, I must inculcate my direction, that where digestion, more than
constriction is designed, and in all young hot choleric Constitutions, I
prefer the oldest thickest Oil, and which smells least; but where a strong
coagulation is necessary, because a large Vessel is hurt, or where a venene
gangrenous Sanies is to be corrected, and absumed, where the part is afflicted
with a cold distemperature, Convulsion, Palsy, Insensibility, and of
debilitated heat, then the thinnest and most spirituous.

The strong smelling Oil is the most pertinent. These warm productions of this
Balsam, seem liable to an Objection, which you shall find made, and answered in
the conclusion of the last Observation.

The restraining hemorrhagies of Wounds, was what principally occasioned this
recommendation of Oleum Terebinthinae: I will now, Sir, endeavor to illustrate
its Virtues for Wounds, in a more generous sense, by enquiring into the many
other benefits acquired by it, without respect to their bleeding, and this was
the fourth task I laid upon my self.

The first of which, is the stopping of the Synovia, or weeping of the divided
Nerves and Lympheducts, which it does by constipating their little apertures. I
believe no man that has conversed with Wounds, and corroding applications to
them, but has found a large gleet to flow from Wounds of magnitude and
amputated Stumps; and the more the nearer to the Joint, the former being the
lacrymation of the lymphatick Vessels and Nerves, the latter, the efflux of the
Joint Serum: and both of them sometimes to that degree as to wet the bandage,
though large, and the pillow on which the member may rest, as much as if a
quart of water or more had been thrown thereon. It were too large and beyond
the bounds, both of my brains and Letter, to discourse either of the
Controversies, Against which Isbrandus, Demerbrocus, Anatom. oorp. human. l.
10. disputes at large.
whether there be a Liquor, and of what use both it, and the Lympha is; let it
suffice to suggest, that a great and famous Physician of our own, namely, the
ever memorable Dr. Glisson, affirms the former to nourish; and all agree, that
it is the Vehicle, in which the sensitive spirits are conveyed, to furnish the
parts with motion and sense, (or as one ingeniously calls it, The Chariot of
the sensitive Soul;) and that the Lymphatick Idem in lib. 1.
Juice, humects, contemperates, etc. Now being of uses so essential to the
subsistence of life, these consequences do naturally flow; that the expense
thereof, does privatively disspirit, consume, debilitate, dry, inflame, etc.
and therefore that the securing it from so exorbitant a profluence, is as
necessary and beneficial, as the restraining the Hemorrhagies of the Veins and
Arteries; and this I will presume to aver, is a faculty in Oil of Turpentine,
transcendently above any other known Medicine, as is more especially evident,
in punctures of the Nerves, (where the weeping of that Juice, as that of a Vine
when wounded, or Trees when tapped in the Spring, is very obvious and plain.)
For the cure of which, it is become the infallible Arcanum; A. Pareus, l. 10.
c. 38. Fr. Sylvius de le Boe, nova Idea. part 1. cap. 42. parag. 38.
when as before the discovery of that Virtue, the remedy of Punctures, was no
better than either dividing the Nerve or tendon, or severing the member from
the body, both which were not seldom prevented by Death.

Secondly, It most excellently digests: a faculty to which no other restrainer
of bleeding can pretend; and if both those intentions can be performed at once
by one single Medicine, (as they are evidently by this) how much time, pains,
etc. is saved to the Practitioner and Patient, and consequently what value it
is of, there needs no Argument to confirm this Position, it is so easy an
Experiment, that every one may confirm it to his own sense; nor does it digest
Wounds at the ill rate, most other Digestives do, which besides that faculty,
do also powerfully attract; such are Crocus Terebinth. Vitel. ovor. Liniment.
Arcei, Basilicon, etc. whereby great expense of blood and radical moisture is
occasioned to the wasting the body, impairing the strength, hindering the
healing influences of the Medicine, macerating the wounded flesh, begetting
Fungus's, etc. whereas this excellent Oil hinders the deflux of humors,
digesting the contused or extravasate blood, without drawing, or permitting the
efflux of much more.

Here, Sir, I must take notice of two Objections to which this seems liable:
That if Oleum Terebinthinae close the mouths of the Vessels, how can it digest,
it being a Faculty inconsistent with that of Constringents? or what should it
digest, since by its application, little or no matter extravasates for that
faculty to work on? To this I reply, That though there be not such large
digestion, as is usually produced by the aforesaid applications, yet it does
maturate in a lesser degree, what part of the blood, Lympha, etc. may be shed
before application can be made; it being impossible to imagine, that the most
quick and diligent application thereof, can so prevent the efflux, but that
some will get between the Dressings and the Wound, which coagulating about the
mouths of the Vessels, by capping, secures them; or it may be supplied with
matter for the digestive faculty to work on, from the lacerated and frequently
mortified Fibers, or from what even in sound members, and a healthful body, is
by transcolation extravasate, and always lodging in the interstices of the
Muscles, and their Fibers, and also of those in the other Carneous parts.

Moreover, It cannot be imagined, nor is it by me asserted, that the Vessels
are all of them, even the minutest, so wholly occluded, as that thin matter
cannot extravasate; but so sufficiently done, and to that degree, as to secure
a too liberal and extravagant effusion of their several Liquors, and ferous
Juices; to which may be added, that its restringency is not by any manifest, or
strong Stypticity, but by the way and accidents, already explicated by the
foregoing Experiments.

But to proceed: Thirdly, It is incomparably the best Balsam to heal Wounds of
the Nerves, to which it seems so particularly adapted; that as it seldom
fails of doing it, so nothing else has been hitherto found to come near it
in that quality, saving as they have more or less thereof commixed: Every one
is so much an Anatomist, as to know that it is difficult, if not impossible to
make a Wound (great enough to deserve the name) without hurting some branches
of the Nerves, they being so thickly divaricated into all the parts of the body
(the Lungs excepted) some being of a belief, that the skin is a fine woof of
Capillary Nerves, I.B. Hamelus de corpore animato, lib. 4.
Veins, and Arteries, receiving into it the ends of the excretory Vessels,
arising from an infinite number of little Glandules. Now the whole Genus
Nervosum being the conveyers of sense and motion, are vehemently aggrieved,
when wounded, distorted, contused, etc. the former of which especially, this
Balsam pacifieth, and heals no less wonderfully, than evidently; by which
Convulsions, Palseys, and other effects thereof are prevented and remedied;
especially those direful ones, which follow their being punctured, as I have
already intimated.

Fourthly, After Amputations, it has one singular good effect above most other
Applications; that is the contraction of the Stump, keeping also the lips of
large wounds from expanding to that degree, which more lax and soft
applications admit, whereby the intention of cross stitches is in part
prevented; this is done partly by hardening the lips of the Wound, (at which I
would advise him that finds it, after the application of this Medicine, not to
be concerned) but partly by the edges of the Pledgets, adhering to the lips of
the Wound, when the spirits expiring contract them, according to the Second and
Third Experiments. Hereby is prevented those ghastly and unseemly swellings of
Wounds, and spreading of Stumps: not that they stick so firmly, as to be
obnoxious to the objections made against the like accident of glutinous
Applications, Page 14.

Fifthly, It solely and perfectly heals Punctures, and incised Wounds by
Symphysis; (where neither of them are very large), and that maugre its
digestive Faculty. I know the same is performed by the application of moderate
Astringents that have no Acids in them; but as such cannot secure the
Hemorrhagies that are large and deep, neither can they reach effectually to the
bottom of deep Punctures. Now that it may not seem strange, I shall attribute a
Power Consolidative, to a digestive Medicine. I suggest, first, That
Consolidation is naturally performed; I mean, that Medicines do not actually
unite Wounds: but by accident, viz. by one way or other, preventing or stopping
extravasation of the blood, and Lympha, and resisting the influences of the
survening Air, both which would hinder unition: the one by humecting, the other
by corrupting the divided Fibers, etc. There being those that spare not to
affirm publicly, confidently, G. Hieron. Velschus. Cent. 11th ob. Phys.
Medicarum. Paracelsus Vuln. trad. 1. c. 14. Mr. Wiseman, page 346.
and perhaps very rationally, That the great and celebrated Cures, said to be
performed by the Sympathetick Powder, and the Magnetical Unguent, are not
beholden to them, but to the less regarded means, of keeping the Wounds clean
and close: so that our Medicine, though it do digest, yet by occluding the
Vessels, (as has been shown) it hinders extravasation, and being gummous,
defends from the Air, whereby it may be thought, as well to consolidate, as any
other, since it does as much as they, in preventing and defending from what
would hinder it.

Secondly, No Consolidation was ever made altogether without Digestion; for it
being impossible to restrain totally the extravasation of the blood, etc. It Is
senseless to imagine but that if the solution of Unity can be reunited, that
matter must be digested, as is evident from what comes off, though perhaps it
be but little and not well cocted; and this usually occurreth in despite of
Applications, drying, and binding, this though it may be not always discharge
it self at the Wound, is yet to be supposed, for that Nature either recovers it
by assimilation; or as it is, introvasates it, and so circulating with the
blood, etc. is thrown out qua data via.

The sixth and last advantage of its application to Wounds, is, that it
performs all those things, especially restraining the fluxes of blood,
without the pain, burning, Synovia, prolixity, flux of matter, and all or most
the other ill accidents attending, and already discovered in the other means
and applications: I hope it is not improperly called a Benefit, though it be but
privatively so.

And now, Sir, I am come to give you some particular and remarkable instances
of the successful effects, attending the application of this Medicine; which
confirming de facto, all I have said concerning it, I think is not Illogically
placed here, it being according to the method of late practical Writers,
Willis, Wiseman, Stubendorfius, etc. which last named, in the conclusion of his
Theory on the Scorbute, justifies the pertinency of annexing Observations to
such Discourses, Sect. 49.
in these words: Nam si Galeno gravissimo medicinae testi credimus, non
sufficient ad exactam cognitionem universalia, Lib. 9. Method. cap. 6.
nisi in exemplis and particularibus una exercitemur, quod in iis, ut Galeni
verbis utar, methodus, in his exercitatio consistit. -- Those which I present
you, shall be few and concise, though I have often used it in diverse
Hemorrhagies not here mentioned, and with the same prosperous success, and that
by Experiments on Dogs, etc. Also by communicated observations, and by my own
in diverse Wounds and Amputations, made in this Hospital, I still found it most
happy and successful, yet think it needless and too tedious here to recount
them all: those following being of different circumstances, I have collected
from the rest.

Observation I.
A Man of a plethorick Habit, aged about forty years, was sent to the Hospital
from his Majesty's Ship the Adventure, being shot through the right Elbow with
a Musket-bullet, which had lacerated the bones, and torn the Vessels
exceedingly; the member from the Wound downward, was Oedematous and senseless
for want of a due influx, the Vessel being so hurt. In short, an Amputation
became necessary, and I accordingly took off the member in presence of two
Chirurgions, besides my own people, my Ligature and other preparations were
common; after Excision, the bone being also divided, I covered the whole Wound
with one well-made Pledget of fine Tow, dipped in hot Oil of Terebinth; upon
which I laid two more, armed with the common Defensative, and bound it up S. A.
dipping my Linnens in Posca, taking off my Dressings the next day; I found the
whole Wound look excellently well, with a white tendency to digestion; some
little vesications were on the edges, but without smart or inflammation; those
I dried up with Unguent. Album, first snipping them with my Scissors: I
repeated my Dressing of Oleum Terebinthinae once more, and in a little time
healed the VVound.

Observation II.
About the same time, I was called to one Mr. Collings a Woolsted Comber, of
sixty five years old, who by a malignant Fever (under which he had labored
five weeks) was not only much emaciat, and dispirited, but had a confirmed
Sphacelus of the right Leg, from the Knee downward. I was in company with some
other Surgeons, when I was called to this Patient; and understanding the
business, I invited them to see it. In their presence, I made diverse large and
deep Incisions, but neither sense nor blood appeared, but a very noxious scent.
We all concurred in opinion, that a speedy Amputation was to be made: while my
Servants were preparing the Dresses, we discoursed the place where the work was
most needful, and what applications were most proper; they advised the former
to be done above the Knee, and the latter to be hot Egyptiacum, and spirit of
Wine. I resolved another course, for making my Incision a little above the
usual place, below the Knee, and there dividing the bones, I laid on two
Pledgets, dipped in very hot Oil of Turpentine, and common bandage over all:
there issued a little grumous blood after the Incision, and because I found
some remaining parts of the cadaverous flesh, I touched the whole Stump with a
cauterizing Iron, not to stop any flux, but to assist the exfoliation and
separation of the Sloughs, quicken the life of the part by so attracting the
spirits, and killing any remaining venom and Sanies. The next day, having
prepared Lixivium, ex. Absinth. Scord. Rutae. Centaur. Ciner. Lignor. cocted in
Seawater, and impregnated with Brandy; I fomented the Stump therewith, and
dressed it again with my hot thin Oil of Terebinth; the next dressing I found
the relics of the Necrosis dried up like a Crust, and considerably separated
from the quick flesh, from whence I saw good tokens of digestion; the old man
was very courageous, I continued (in all four days) to dress with Ol.
Terebinthinae. After seven, the Sloughs came all away, and never did I see
fairer digestion; but when the quick and sensible parts became naked by the
exfoliation of these Eschars, though my dressing were as benign and mild as
could be, yet the smart and pain happening to disturb him of his rest, under
which his depauperated spirits were unable to subsist; he languished to Death,
though the wound altered not, and that I gave him high Cordials very liberally,
with what else Art directed; I being very greedy of the recovery of so
remarkable a Patient, after such prosperous beginnings.

That which made me prefer Oleum Terebinthinae here, was the success thereof in
two such cases on a couple of young men, whom I had amputated in the mortified
parts of both their Legs, and found that a soft Cautery and this Medicine, did
incomparably absume the Sanies, and excited the spirits of the adjacent sound
parts, so as to induce a speedy separation and good digestion: My success, I
say with them, encouraged me to hope the like here; though theirs were both
Legs taken off within twenty four hours distance, and not wholly quit of a
spotted Fever, in which having been delirious on board the King's Ships, to
which they belonged; they had either kept their Legs over the Hammacks, (it
being a very cold Winter,) and so nummed and mortified them, or they became so
from the stagnation of the blood, the effect of that coagulation, which highly
venene Diseases do usually beget therein, if it be not carefully diluted, kept
fluid, and in warm motion by proper Sudorifiques.

Observation III.
Anno 1672. A Surgeon of this place (now dead) craved my advise concerning
an Hemorrhoea that vexed him, in a very weak Patient, who had a sinuous Ulcer
about the middle of the Tibia on the infide; the Cavity of which ran under the
bone, and ascended obliquely toward the Knee, where probably (the matter being
thin and sharp) it had eroded an Artery, or a Vein, and begat this flux, which
became intolerable to one so much extenuate as he was; I advised him to inject
equal parts of Oleum Terebinthinae, and a Decoction of Tormentil, Bistort, and
Knotgrass-roots made in Styptick Wine, and to retain it from one dressing to
another: which he accordingly did, and the bleeding molested him no more.

Observation IV.
A Carpenter, by name Richard Sellar, looking up toward the top of an House,
whereon some Helliars were at work; by chance a shindle-stone falling down,
alighted on his face, and made a long deep Incision, from the right Nostril
toward the Grinders: an Artery that was wounded thereby spouted out blood, in
as large a stream, as an ordinary Syringe-pipe could vent. I stopped it with my
Finger, whilst my Servant warmed some Oil of Terebinth in a Uvula spoon; when
it was ready, I withdrew my Finger from the bleeding Artery, and it pissed out
as before: I immediately poured the hot Oil upon it, which instantly stopped the
bleeding like a Charm, and permitted me to stitch it up without any flux. When
I had so done, I laid a Pledget of the same over the closed lips, and a
Plaster upon it; the outward lips soon consolidated, leaving no very apparent
Cicatrix; the inside kept open somewhat longer, thereby expediting the unition
of the outward part, by which a very fine seam was made.

Observation V.
Shortly after this came to me a Woman, cut from the middle of the Nose, down
to the right end of the Mouth, by a Knife done by a Dutchman, who pretended she
had defrauded him; there issued such a stream, as from the last mentioned, and
was after the same manner stopped, with no difference in it, or the success;
only that here a more inconspicuous Cicatrix was induced, whether from the dry
stitch which I here made, or the fineness of her skin; or because the
penetration of the Cheek was larger, whereby the matter had a more liberal vent
that way, I cannot determine.

Observation VI.
Anno 75. I was sent for to a Dutch Seaman, who being gotten drunk, threw
himself into his Cabin with all his Clothes on: it unluckily fell out, that he
had in his Pocket a sharp-pointed Knife, such as they usually carry, and that
it lay in so ill a posture, that the weight of his body forced the point
through sheath and clothes, and run up above three inches (entering about the
middle of the Thigh) obliquely toward his buttocks, so that the point might be
an inch and half directly in from the skin, under which it lay; I drew it out,
and found no part of it broken off; the Man complained of great pain, and there
flowed much blood: I then injected warm Oil of Turpentine, and put up above
halfway, a thin Flamula dipped in the same: then rouled him up, drawing also
about ten ounces of blood from the Arm. The man slept well all night; and after
two days, I using nothing but a Pledget and a Plaster on the Orifice, the
Solution being all united, I let him walk about. I bled him because he was
plethorick, and I intended to heal the Wound by sympathy.

Observation VII.
A young melancholy Apothecary, being disappointed in an Amor, resolved to
destroy himself; in pursuance of which desperate determination, he first ran
his Sword through his body, entering on the left side below the heart, and
passing out at the right opposite to it, wounded the Lungs and Mediastinum: the
Orifices were small, so that no blood issued from them, nor could I find much
had been cast into the breast. I bled him largely, and gave him Aq. Veronicae,
Scabiosae, Sperm. Ranar. Plantaeg. an ib. Lap. Prunella j. Sir. de Meconio j.
Misce. and appointed people to watch by him, and more especially to keep from
him any thing wherewith he might do himself more mischief; he lay under great
horrors all night, and in the morning by a cunning stratagem, (calling for his
Breeches to give his Sister a Key, he seemed willing to commit to her
particular charge,) conveyed among the Bed-cloths a Penknife he had therein;
which when all was quiet and without mistrust, he ran downwards into the hollow
of the breast, from the upper end of the Sternon, thinking to make the same
mortal Wound, they usually do that way to young Pigs; but though he thrust it
as far as he could, it answered not his end, till all was discovered. By the
large quantity of blood that flowed from the Wound, I could not find that he
had thereby hurt any internal part, or that any blood was fallen into the Cavity
of the Thorax, but that all issued from the Vessels hurt in the containing
parts, which I stopped with a small Flamula dipped in the hot Oil, and had almost
conglutinated the Wound, as also the foremost of those in his breast in seven
days: when (under continual horrors, desperations, fasting and restlesness, he
had spent that time, and brought himself very low) he died.

Observation VIII.
A Plethorick Woman, by a Contusion had her right breast apostumated; she
suppurated it by a Cataplasm of her own, (she being one of those Skil-less
Midwives wherewith the World is become pestered.) She kept the Cavity so long
open, by Tents and Salves of her own making, that it became cancerous: the
Cavity was below her Niple about an inch and an half, toward her side, from
which in one night, there issued a very large quantity of blood, which she
discovered not until the morning, and in the surprise it begat, sent to implore
from me somewhat to stop it. I ordered her a little Aqua Styptica R. which she
used to no she had bled monstrously, and that the blood was very florid, I
thrust a thick dossil of Lint, dipped in warm Oleum Terebinthinae into the bottom
of the Sinus whence the blood came, and cramming the whole Cavity with the
like, dipped in Posca, to make the better pressure: I bound her up as well as I
could, and so left her; she bled not afterward, but died in six or seven weeks
of the Cancer, which she would not by any persuasion be prevailed on to have
extirpated.

Observation IX.
Anno 76. A young Man about twenty years old, living with Alderman W. (whose
Nephew he was) from some disappointment in Love, as was imagined, or rather as
himself confessed, on a Religious account, to cure salacious heats, did
castrate himself, by griping up the Testicles, with the whole Scrotum in one
hand, and with a keen Knife in the other cutting them off close to the body;
the sudden pain and effusion of blood made him faint and fall back on the Bed,
where he sat while he thus acted Origin Secundus. He bled very largely before
any one discovered it: when I came, finding such a large flux, and the man much
weakened, I hastily griped up the Wound in my hand, thereby stopping the excess
of the Hemorrhage; while Mr. Munyon prepared the Dressings: when they were
ready, withdrawing my hand to make way for their application, the blood
forthwith spouted out, as it had been from a small Quill: but we soon stopped
it, by laying on the divided Vasa buttons of Tow dipped in the hot Oil of
Terebinth; and over all a large Pledget dipped in the same: over which also we
put two or three Pledgets more armed with the common Defensative and boulsters
of Linen, moistened with Posca, and so rouled him up: the blood instantly
staunched, but the refraction thereof threw him into a Syncope, together with
coldness of the extreme parts, no pulse, etc. I concluded Death would follow;
we gave him a glass of Sack while the following mixture was preparing, of which
he afterward drank liberally, till his spirits were recovered to a good
degree; Aq. Mirabilis, Flor. paralysios, Melissae, Cerasor. nigr. an iij. Sir.
Croci optimi ij. Conf. Alkermes S. M. iij, Spec. conf. Hyacinth. j. Pulv.
guttatae ij. misce.

We opened the Wound next day, found tokens of good digestion, and as fair as
heart could wish. It was long e're he could recruit his spirits, so much
exhausted by the Hemorrhage; but the Wound in a months time was almost
cicatrized, so as he followed his business.

Observation X.
A Seaman came to me, who having by accident thrust the point of a Knife deep
into his hand, between the Corpus and the Contracter of the Thumb, an Artery
being thereby wounded, the blood spouted out very impetuously; heating some Ol.
Terebinthinae in my Uvula spoon, I poured it into the bleeding Wound, which
immediately stopped it; I only laid a Paracelsus and Diapalma Plaster over it,
and bound him, and so let him remain two days, in which time it was perfectly
closed.

Observation XI.
A Cooper, striking hard with his Addis on the Chime-hoop of an Hogshead,
standing an end, and missing the place whereat the blow was designed, the Tool
flew out of his hand and hit him cross the Instep or Tarsus, making a large
Wound, dividing the Veins, etc. to the bone, he bled very much, he was a thin
man, and of hot sharp blood; I dressed him with hot Ol. Terebinth, which
restraining the flux, gave me opportunity to stitch up the wound: some little
vesications occurred by the Medicine meeting such a habit; but it begat no
trouble at all.

Observation XII.
John Boddam, belonging to Captain Patrick of Yarmouth, standing in the coil
of an Halcer, by which the Ship was fastened: the straps that tied it giving
way, he was drawn forward, and griped therein: so that both Legs were shattered
in pieces, he was brought to shore and committed to my custody. I reduced all
the bones as well as could be, but when the contused flesh came away, one of
them hung by a Tendon or two above the Ancle. In fine, an Amputation was
inevitable; he was a florid young Man, and of a replete Habit, though some of
it had been rebated by the method of Phlebotomy, etc. used at first: after the
member was severed at the usual place, I only laid on a large Pledget of Tow,
dipped in hot Ol. Terebinth, and the other things as is usual, whereby the flux
was suddenly and safely secured.

Observation XIII.
Anno 77. Captain P. Piper, the only Son of the Honorable Sir Hugh Piper,
Deputy Governor of his Majesty's Citadel of Plymouth; a man of a temper
abounding with Choler, adust humors: his blood sharp and thin, received a
large contused wound on the forepart of his Head, dividing some branches of the
temporal Artery, contusing the frontal and temporal Muscles: he bled much,
which was stopped by Mr. I. I. a great deal of pain, Spasmus Cynicus, and Fever
followed it; a Physician was called, Phlebotomy, Clysters, Julaps, Emulsions,
etc. had been used for nine days, and an Incarnative Dress too; when on a
sudden, and without any manifest cause, the blood rushed out from the Wound
under the Dressings very copiously. I was hastily called, and cut off the
Rowlers, laying the Wound bare, did attempt with my Fingers to choke the
bleeding Arteries while my Medicine was heating: the Gentleman began to faint;
I encouraged him, and directed him to keep his Eyes close shut, that none of my
Medicines might get into them and pain him. He sat up whilst I laid two Dossils
dipped in hot Oleum Terebinthinae into the Wound and bound him up, the blood
immediately staunched; but some of the Oil stealing into his Eye, begat great
pain therein, which we endeavored to mitigate, by often washing it with
Spawnwater, Milk, whites of Eggs, etc. but in vain; for in despite thereof, it
continued two hours, and then began to range to his Wound, as severely as at
first to his Eye. I freely consented to remove my Dressings, that the Wound
might be examined. Accordingly the Head was unrouled, and all taken off, save
only the two Dossils, which we also were about to remove. When he desired us to
forbear, for that his pain was gone. Upon which consideration we let him lie,
and applying over them a mixture of Bole, etc. rouled him up again very slack;
but no sooner was the Head covered again with the bandage, but the pain
returned as sharp as before. We thereupon administered a Clyster; in the working
of which he fainted: when he was recovered thereof, he became very fearful and
impatient. I proposed the giving him an ounce of Sir. de Meconio, they were
unwilling for fear of prejudicing his Nerves: at length we agreed to give half
an ounce in a Cephalic Julap; Ex Aq. Cerasor. Nigr. Flor. Paralys. Jugland. S.
Peoniae. Marguerit. V. Pp. etc. which in less than a quarter of an hour made
him sleep, in which he continued some hours; upon his waking, he found himself
quit of all pain, which induced us to forbear removing his Dress, till complete
thirty hours after its application: at which time I took it off, in presence of
the Doctor and Mr. I. who first dressed him; both whom can testify, that the
wound was neither inflamed, red, blistered, nor crude, but of a lovely white,
having in it a little, but very good matter.

I cannot imagine what should cause this pain in the Wound, except the heat of
my Application accending the bilious particles of the blood about the Wound,
made them heat and prick the Pericranium, frontal Muscles, etc. but why then no
ill effect should appear in the Wound, is to me very strange; as also that upon
taking off the Rouler, the pain should vanish, and return upon its being
re-applyed; he was very impatient, and every one knows, that to such, small
things are a greater burden, than weighty ones to a pacifique temper. There
was one action did very much justify me, and satisfy them: which was, that
Sir Hugh Piper himself, when run through the Thigh by a broad two-edged Sword,
which wounding some of the crural Vessels, begat a monstrous flux; had this
Medicine injected very hot into the Wound, and there retained by the hands of a
Surgeon, till it had secured the Hemorrhage; after which, Tents dipped in the
same were applied also: I say, that the prosperous effects of that Application,
both in restraining a flux of blood, which would have killed a man of his Age,
which had not his courage, besides the other benefits it procured the VVound,
quieted him very much, who would otherwise have been tempted to believe upon
the suggestions of a very invidious Person familiar with him, that some
inartificial application had begot all this trouble; but he recovered, and
became very sensible, that I saved his life.

If this Accident seem to disparage our Medicine, or be an Objection against
it, on account of its heat; it is but to consider, whether if in this very case
I had used a Cautery, or Corrosive, to which (they being the Vltimum Refugium)
I might have been tempted, on such an extremity, I had not in all likelihood
provoked worse symptoms from their much greater heat, which would have kindled
the humor into a stronger flame, and perhaps (though he had been so much
bleeded) have begotten a Frenzy.

Sir, It were endless to enlarge upon this matter; I suppose here is enough
said to satisfy every Artist; if they are not persuaded hereby, let them
experiment the thing, and if it answers not all I have said of it, they will
not be so fortunate as my self. I am sure I have been very faithful in the
relation of fact; how defective in the Theory, I must leave to the judgment of
every ingenious Reader.

And now, Sir, having showed you the bulk of the best Treasure in this Cabinet;
bless me with your patience, while I take notice of the more obvious, and less
considerable Riches it contains; I mean the more common and known Virtues of
this celebrated Oil, and those I distinguish into two Heads: those purchased by
external Applications, and those by internal Administrations.

Our Discourse hitherto having consisted wholly of the former: The Virtues of
Oleum Tereb. externally used.
I deem it most methodical to continue it, by taking notice of that sort first.
I have already manifested, that it restrains Hemorrhagies, quickens Digestion,
consolidates, restrains the extravagant profluence of the Serum, whether from
the Joints, Nerves, Lympheducts, or Sanguiferous Vessels: cures Punctures, and
all wounds of the Nerves, and is an excellent Balsam against any hurt to them:
its other external Virtues are, (with respect to VVounds above what has been
said,) that it warms and comforts those, wherein from any cause the spirits and
native heat is destroyed, or impaired; it acuates the digestive quality of any
Medicine; recovers Crudity, Palsy, Convulsion, etc. of a Wound; it moderately
incarneth, and does not a little Cicatrize, as is evident from its curing chaps
of the Lips, Breast, and Fundament, or any excoriation without heat, and from
whence much Serum flows; it is celebrated for producing fair Cicatrixes, and
mending deformed ones: to both which purposes, it is used after the small Pox;
as Euonymus Philiatrus in his Thesaurus commends, from Brasavolus, Page 316.
as a great Secret.

It crusts up Sloughs, whether fungous, or grangrenous, Cadaver, and sometimes
not only used hot with Pledgets, but mixed with Lixiviums; by which also it
quickens, comforts and strengthens any part, paralytick, mortified, oedematous,
etc. for it warms, and attenuates, whereby the afflux of the animal spirits is
accelerated; it also opens, Paracels. chyr. magna, tract. 3. c. 7. Beguinus
Tyro. chym. lib. 2. c. 6.
discusseth, softens, etc. cures malignant and sordid Ulcers, Cacoethe ulcera,
phagadena lupus, is a good Liniment in Contusions, being mixed with Oleum
Hypericonis.

One dram thereof, mixed with Axungia Porcina, is a most admirable Ointment
for cold swellings and stiffness of the Joints, Muscles, or Sinews, from the
Scurvy, Cold, or Obstructions. It betters the penetration of any Liniment
wherewith it is commixed, making it also more warming and strengthening; it is
Anodyne to Tumors that are painful from Cold; it is an excellent Liniment,
either used by its self, or with other strengtheners, to cure Atrophies.

It acuates the balsamic quality of any Salve, being it self a true Balsam.
James Cook gives us an Oil (which he stole from Hartman and Ernestus) quod
vulnera in 24 horas sanat and est expertum. Ol. Hypericonis, Lumbricorum,
Terebinthinae, Mastich. ana p. e. Misce and calide cum pauco gossypio applica;
Oil of Terebinth also dissolveth hard swellings, proceeding from a cold cause,
is excellent being dropped warm into the Ears alone, or commixed, to cure
deafness, or noise therein, from cold obstructions, etc. it also cleanses, or
heals Ulcers therein.

It Is excellent to anoint parts contracted, nummed, crampt, convulst,
paralytick, cold, gouty, pains, especially the Sciatica: in all which effects,
a Medicine of Paracelsus, called Balsamum Galbanatum, and made of a solution of
Galbanum in this Oil, and so drawn over the Helm, is a most admirable Secret,
which I would commend to the practice of the Sea-Chirurgeon; whereas he shall
find it a most excellent, (being also a cheap) Medicine, either used alone, or
as I do, mixed with double, treble, quadruple, sometimes tentimes its quantity
of any proper Oil or Ointment: Such are Ol. Castorei, Catulorum, Lumbricor.
Unguent. Martiatum, Cervinum, etc. as need shall require. I have cured
contracted members thereby in a little time, and have seen wonderful good
effects produced by it in the Paresis of the Limbs, following bilious and
scorbutic Colicks.

Being put hot into hollow Teeth, it asswageth their pain, especially if
therein a little Opium, or Camphor. be dissolved; The internal virtues of Ol.
Terebinth.
as to the Virtues thereof, when administered internally, It opens the Urinary
passages, tempers their heat, prevents and cures the Stone, cleanses the
Reins and Lungs from any tartarous mucilages; cures the Gonorrhea, cleanses
the generative parts from venerious impurities: is excellent in the Strangury,
Dysuria, Ischuria, brings off Gravel and calculous matter; cures Ulcers in the
Reins and Bladder, pain in the Back, poceeding from any of the said causes, or
from Cold; cures pissing of blood, taken in juice of Yarrow, Nettles, or
Plantain.

It cures Coughs, taken in Scabious, Coltsfoot, or Hysop-water; cleanses the
Breast and Lungs, taken in Ptysan or pectoral Decoction; cures Ulcers there
taken in Conserve of Roses, Camphory, or Ground Ivy, or drunk in equal parts of
Aq. Veronicae, Hedera terrest. and Aq. Calcis: sweetened with Sir. Pilosellae,
quickens expectoration of matter, taken in pectoral Decoction, sweetened with
Oxymel of Squils, or Sir. de Erysimo, cures the Phthisis, mixed with the
Conserve of Roses, and all (especially cold) afflictions of the Breast; it
opens, warmeth, and comfort nervous parts, See Matthew's Unlearned
Alchymist, page 27.
taken in a proper Vehicle, as the case may require; it is an excellent
corrector of Opium; it cures internal Contusions, given in Spruce-beer,
Carduus-water, or Aq. Polygoni, consolidates internal Wounds and Ulcers,
especially of the Breast, where it not only heals the parts, but deriveth and
evacuates the matter by Urine, being given in vulnerary Drinks, etc. It
cleanses the stomach of viscous, sordid, filthy matter, taken with Aq.
Menthae, Centauriae, aut Absinthij, vel vino Albo: it warms the seminal parts,
and libidini stimulos addit; it cleanses the Womb, and cures Uterine
suffocations, taken in Aq. Naphae, Aq. Artemisiae, Decoctum spleen bovis,
Querc. it opens the Spleen, taken in Tamarisk, Ceterach, Ash, Hart's-tongue,
Heath, or Smallage-water; resists pestilential malignity, taken in some
proper Alexiterial Medicine.

Though the Gonorrhoea, being usually accompanied with heat in those parts,
seems a Disease more aptly aggravated, than remedied by this Medicine; yet it,
by carrying off those fiery particles, and cleansing the parts from that venene
matter, which is the pabulum, and inflames; takes the heat also (which is its
effect) away: stopping also the flux, by healing the vellications of the
Prostata, which causes that weeping, commonly supposed, and denominated a flux
of the Sperm, and running of the Reins.

In all which cases, its dose is from Gut. V. ad j. and ss. always taken in a
pertinent Vehicle, never alone: all those additional virtues which I have here
adscribed to the Medicine, have been the suggestions of the following Authors,
my own Reason and Physiology, and for the most part confirmed to me by
experience: The Authors wherein all, or most I have said, may be found, are, J.
Beguinus in his Tyrocinium Chymicum, cum notis J. Barthii. and J. G.
Pelshoferi, lib. 2. cap. 4, and 6. J. Ernestus de oleis Chymice destillatis,
page 434. M. Le Febure, part. 2. lib. 2. cap. 9. sect. 10. M. Charras
pharmacopoea 11. R. Galenique, and Chymique, part 3. lib. 1. c. 42 Mr. Woodal,
Zwelfer, and the Augustanes, Mant. Hermetica, Euonymus Philiatrus, deremediis
secretis, page 316. Paracelsus Chirurgia Magna, tract. 2. c. 4. and tract. 3.
c. 7. M. C. Glassier in his Complete Chemist, lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 7.

And now, Sir, This occasion would tempt one that understands so well as I do,
the great kindnesses you have done the Practisers of our Art, in an age wherein
they are so much contemned and disparaged; to Caress and Complement you for
that Obligation: but I will not offer that affront to your modesty, nor can I
imagine it needful here, because the public military Surgeons, are the
persons for whom it is designed, who having had all of them the sensible benefit
thereof, as well as my self, cannot be wanting in their resentments of those
advantages you have so generously and heartily procured them, as I am a
participater of the latter; I Will assure you the former has very strictly bound
me, ever to be your most affectionate, and grateful, as I am,

Your very much obliged Servant, James Young.
Plim. April 8. 1678.
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE my finishing these Papers, I have met with a passage in Mr. Sergeant
Wiseman's Book, page 359. which seeming to oppose and deny some of those
Virtues I have here attributed to Ol. Terebinth, obliges me to take notice
thereof, and to justify what I have affirmed, contrary to what he there
delivers in the History of a Maids case; Who, says he, by a young
Surgeons attempting to bleed her in the Saphena near the Ancle, had a
puncture of a tendon there, which was dressed with hot Oil of Terebinth; her
pain thereupon increasing, I was called, and found the Surgeon about to
renew the application of his hot Oils: but observing the lips of the Wound
turgid and dry, and the parts about it inflamed, I prevailed with him to dress
with warm Basilicon, to embrocate cum Ol. Rosar. etc. and apply a Diapalma
Plaster malaxed over all, and let is so abide three days: in which time it
became well.

The implication is strong against the use of Oleum Terebinthinae, as if it had
made the Wound turgid, and dry, and inflamed the part: the first and last are
known usually to follow punctures of the Tendons: and yet even where they urge,
Johannes de Vigo, and A. Pareus do especially, direct to the use of scalding
hot Oils and Cauteries. Now as to this case in particular, if it were a
punctured Tendon, the Oleum Terebinthinae had healed it (as appeared by its
dryness) and prevented the common and most pernicious accidents, as
Convulsions, Contraction, etc. which would without doubt have seized her
without it, and that those mentioned were cured by the after-application, for I
never heard of any cured by the absolute use of Anodynes: or one application of
a slight Digestive, as by his advice was here applied; but as he had before
generally directed, by applications hot, and dry, and of subtle parts, (though
therewith Anodynes to prevent accidents are very necessary) in which all
Authors treating thereof, seem to concur: Such are Galen, lib. 6. with c. 2.
Avicen, lib. 3. c. 4. Vigo, lib. 3. c. 15. Guido, in lib. 3. Gal. Pareus, lib.
10. c. 38. P. Pigreus, lib. 3. de Vuln. c. 5. P. Barbet. c. 8. p. 2. Mr.
Bannister, lib. 2. c. 10. Dr. A. Read, Lect. 2. F. Sylvius, nov. Idea, part 1.
c. 42. Mr. Clows obs. c. 10. as is also evident in the method of P. Forestus,
lib. 6. obs. chyr. obs. 38. Scultetus, obs. 64. All which are according Mr.
Wiseman's excellent Direction, hot, dry, and subtle; such are Aq. Vitae, Ol.
Terebinth, Ol. Euphorh. Ol. Sabinum, Castorei, Pulegii, Powder, Plaster, and
tincture of Euphorhium, rectified spirit of Wine, etc. all to have an actual
heat added to their potential, especially when the pain increases, and the
lips swell; so that I may rationally presume to doubt, whether the wounded
Tendon were not cured, and the usual symptoms attending them prevented by the
first Dress; and whether a reflection on the neglect of cojuvant Anodynes, had
not been more just and rational, since de facto it appeared, they only (and not
much neither) were wanting to complete the work, by removing those lesser
accidents, which might be the effect of the Patients ill habit, most Women,
needing Phlebotomy, there being so, else it becomes doubtful, whether any
Tendon was punctured, except there were more pertinent symptoms to prove it,
than the Sergeant was pleased to relate. This I am tempted to scruple also,
from its being cured by one pledget of Basilicon, and a mildly Anodyne
Plaster; which doubtless, as it could not without a Miracle heal a punctured
Nerve; so it is a most incomparable way of remedying those ill effects, the
consequents of festering punctures, in ill Habits; the Basilicon digesting, and
discharging the matter, while the Plaster and Liniment prevented and cured the
pain, heat, and conflux, which would otherwise beget worse effects.

How frequently Women that need Phlebotomy in those parts are either
Cachectick, obstructed, or phlethorick, needs no proof, nor how incident such
habits are, to have severe symptoms follow; not only regular and
well-performed Phlebotomy, as Mr. Wiseman has well hinted, but even small
punctures of Pins, Fish-bones, Needles, or the like, where no Tendon or Nerve
has been touched; as has been evident from the symptoms which have had no
relation to them, or their kind: but have apparently been produced by that
blood and matter, (especially if a Vessel be hurt) that has been extravasate
into the inconspicuous Wound, which being either very menstruous, as in Women,
or venereal, as in some Men, or sharp, etc. as in most others: has for want of
vent diffused among the tender sensible parts, gnawing and corrupting them,
which (as all pains do) also attracting, and heaping up matter: and as soon
debauching it, gangrenates, or at best rots the part, so much as in some, to
cost the member. This I have again and again seen to succeed punctures in the
Fingers, for want of timely Art.

That exquisite symptoms have been the effects of slight simple punctures,
meeting an ill habit, is the positive averment of Galen; Lib. 3. Method.
Observe. 5.
of which also there is a notable intance in Mr. Grand Prez, which though he
calls the puncture of a Nerve made by a Needle, was doubtless no such thing;
first, because he had no pain in two days, which were impossible in a puncture
of a Nerve or Tendon; secondly, because it submitted only to an antivenerial
suffumigation of the part, which he was induced to make use of, because he had
been lately pockt; and that all the commonly practiced ways had no good effect.

And Mr. Wiseman himself excellently well observes, that after Phlebotomy,
severe symptoms do sometimes arise on the part bleeded, which though they are
not from a puncture, yet the vulgar, and the envious usually so apprehended
them. I know a very good Surgeon who had an Erysipelas invade an Arm, he had
bleeded, the which to revel, and derive, he opened a Vein in the other also,
which became thereupon afflicted, as its fellow-member was: both which he cured
by purging and diet, which plainly demonstrated that there was no puncture,
though the people to his great damage would not so understand it.

I never had the misfortune of puncturing a Nerve or Tendon once, nor the
unhappiness of the imputation more than twice: the one was of a young choleric
Man, who sitting all the following night at Dice, (which he managed with the
hand I had bleeded) had the part apostumate over the median Vein; in which
place he being thin, and impatient, it made severe symptoms: my absence
induced him to apply himself to one, who mistaking it for a puncture, dropped
upon it hot Oil of Terebinth, and laid on a Paracelsus Plaster, which so
accended the humors in the part, already inflamed with a beginning Phlegmon,
that he could not endure it; by which time I being returned, laid on an Anodyne
and mildly suppurative Cataplasm, a small pledget armed with Unguent.
Basilicon, being first applied to the Wound, which soon opened it, and
discharged the matter to his great ease. I enlarged the Orifice, and gave it
more liberal vent, upon which it soon healed up.

The other was a person of Worship, Sir B. G. the Engineer, who laboring under
an intermitting Fever, (as I take it) was by Dr. Sprages order bleeded by me,
after which I saw him not in three weeks, and then found him among the Workmen
at the Citadel, where he told me all was well, save some Colical pains, which
had lately seized him. Soon after this he journeyed to London; about six weeks
after the operation, his Worship's Arm began to pain him, and impostumate; it
was my ill luck, that he fell into the hands of some Surgeon in London; no
less envious, than ignorant; who affirmed it to proceed from my inartificial
Phlebotomy, made so long before, and (which was a great Miracle) that I had
pricked a Nerve: this so enraged the Knight, as made me bless my self, I was
beyond the reach of his Swords point: I labored to satisfy him with (what is
not always prevalent) Reason; and did earnestly importune him, to give me the
name of that good man my Accuser, which though a most reasonable Suit, was yet
denied, and to this day I know him not; but if this Paper ever fall into his
hands, and if he have any sense of generosity in him, it will oblige him to
acquit, or justify himself.

He might have affirmed innocently enough, that my bleeding him had occasioned
this accident; had he assigned the true Reason, not the puncture of a Tendon,
as he ridiculously did: but as I am induced to believe, that it was the remains
of the Febrile Pabulum: part of which, having been before discharged that way,
and now moved by a critical Fermentation was come to seek vent, (or rather
Nature endeavored to eject it) the same place: but missing it, did there
deposit it, and begat that apostumation. which in a part so tender, from the
complication of many Vessels, and a person not less so, from his long sickness
and choleric habit, might beget sharp and violent symptoms, resembling those
of a Puncture; differing herein, that all such are sudden as well as violent,
and do soon affect the whole nervous genus with Convulsions, Spasms,
Contractions, etc. as the late quoted Authors do all aver, and the following
notable Case, notoriously manifests.

A Woman aged about twenty five years, living with Mr. B. His Majesty's
Surveyer in this Port, being of an Habit replete with ill Juices, and full of
other effects, resulting from Uterine obstructions, was punctured by an
Apothecary attempting to open the median Vein, in the great Tendon under it:
intolerable pain, contraction, and tumor immediately seized the part, together
with faintness, etc. though the unhappy bleeder had given her a draught of some
hot Cordial-water to prevent it. The accidents gaining considerably and
increasing upon her; he was sent for, and though it were very apparent from the
great and sudden inflammation, tumor, contraction, and sensible tendency to
Convulsions, that the Tendon was pricked; yet he affirmed it was nothing
extraordinary, nor more than would be soon cured, by anointing the part with
some Oil of Elder, and Rose-flowers: they unhappily believed it, and relied on
that one Medicine till the next day; at which time, the symptoms were become
so vehement and threatening, that they called me. I immediately assured them of
the reason and danger of all those accidents, and betook my self to remedy what
I could of them, and prevent the survening of worse, which I saw at hand;
whilst I ordered some topical application, my Servant bled her at the opposite
arm, and drew ten or twelve ounces: by which time my Medicines being ready, I
dilated the Orifice, and poured into it equal parts of rectified spirit of
Wine, and Oleum Terebinthinae, made very hot, and upon it a Pledget of Unguent.
Basilicon, embrocating the member with this Liniment; Ol. Rosarum, Catellorum,
an. j. Bals. Galbanati j. misce. and so wrapped it in Linen, dipped in Posca,
and rouled it up from the Carpus to the shoulder: I also ordered a sharp
Clyster to be administered, and the following Julaps, and Powders to be
prepared; Aq. Naphae, Cerasor. Nigr. ana iij. Lumbricorum Mag. Brion. Comp.
Peon. C. Sir. Artemisiae, Peoniae. S. ana iss. Tinct. Succini Castor. ana j.
misce.

Pulv. Guttatae. S. M. j. Marg. verij. p. p. Sal. Succini ana j. m. f. chart.
4. un. quart. quaque hor. sumend. c. haustulo praedicti Julapi.

But e're these things could be given, her pain, inflammation increased, and
threw her into frequent Convulsions: I repeated my Dress to the Wound, and
wrapped the arm in an Anodyne Cataplasm, ex lacte, micae panis Alb. Florum,
Sambuci, Rosarum, Croci and Unguent. populei; appointing a temperate Diet, viz.
Grewel for meat; and for drink, a ptysan of Barley, Liquorice, Rad. Peoniae.
flor. Peoniae. Tamarinda, cocted, and made pleasant with Syrup of single Peony
Flowers.

The next morning, I found the contraction of the arm increased, the
Convulsions had come oftener, and Lipothymia more frequent, which had almost
induced me to divide the punctured Tendon, but I determined yet to forbear; and
repeating the Clyster, I embrocated the Neck-bone down the Spine, shoulder,
over the Biceps, Deltoides, and Brachicus musculus, etc. especially, with the
aforesaid Liniment: toward noon, finding no abatement, and my Patient in
imminent danger of life, led by what resolution I know not, I still resolved to
forbear the cutting asunder of the Tendon; and instead thereof, I scarified all
the forepart of the arm, from the shoulder to the Carpus, especially over the
muscles abovenamed, and about the Puncture, from which issued a thin blood in
great abundance, even to a pound: I made one deep cut over the Tendon,
according to his length, making him bare almost an inch, into which I poured my
mixture of spirit of Wine and Oil of Terebinth, made very warm, and bound up
the arm with Ligature, etc. as at the first, and continued all the other
Medicines; by the next Dressing, which was at night, I prepared this
Fomentation.

Foliorum Paralysios, cum Flor. Salviae, Betonicae, Hyper. ana m. iij. Laurini,
Lavendule, Rorismarinae, Scordei, Rutae, ana m. i. s. Flor. Sambuci, Melliloti,
ana m. j. Concis. and coq. in conq. i. s. Aq. Fontanae, ad tertiae partis
absumptionem, fiat Colat.

Wherewith I bathed the whole member for half an hour, designing thereby to
strengthen and ease the Nerves, discharge the Sanies from the punctured part,
and discuss the matter, which the pain had plentifully contracted in so ill an
Habit, and which threatened a Gangrene; and because in many nights she had not
slept, and was ready to perish for want of it, and ease, I ventured to give her
this, slight Hypnotick: by whose mixture, you will see I endeavored to prevent,
and had regard to the mischief it might do to the Genus Nervosum, here so
considerably aggrieved.

Aq. Jugland. S. Flor. Paralysios, Papav. Rhead. ana vj. Sir. de Meconio ss.
Specdiambrae. s. m. Guttetae s. m. ana ss. Tinct. Castorei, Laudan. Liquid.
Helmonti, ana gut. 6. misce.

And the better to secure the Brain from any prejudice thereby, I ordered a
Clyster to be administered half an hour before, and so left her; I was unquiet
all night, in fear of her, the case being esteemed desperate by all people,
made me so anxious, for fear of missing the reputation I should gain by so
considerable a Cure, if I could effect it: I visited her early, and no less to
my joy than admiration, found she had slept well all night, was in moderate
temper without that ardor and thirst, heart and pulsation, tumor, pain, or
Convulsions, which had been so severe upon her; there seemed none of that
legion of Devils that tormented her left, but the contraction and debility of
the part, with the hardness and intumescence of the injured Tendon; there was
reasonable tendency to digestion, in all the incisions I had made, excepting
that over the Tendon, which was still somewhat crude, and Ichorous: I somented
the member as before, adding now a little spirit of Wine thereunto, and dressed
the incision over the Puncture, with Basilicon acuated with Oleum
Terebinthinae, and both made warm; encompassing the member, in a cerat of
Diapalma; Stict. Paracels. and cera citrina, ana parts aequales, and so rouled
it up. To be short, from this time she amended, in all respects, the
scarifications soon healed, saving that on the punctured Tendon, which being
largest, and on the center of all the pain, etc. was last cured, when nothing
remained but the contraction of the member, and hardness of the sinew, which
however was not so much as before; hereupon I added some E. Oxicroceum to the
Cerate, and framed the Liniment thus: Unguent. Nervin. Martiat. Ol. Palmae, Ol.
Catellorum, Castorei, ana j. Bals. Galbanat. iij. Ol. Succini, ss. m. fiat
linimentum, S. A. By these in six or seven days time, the contracted Tendons
and muscles did manifestly relax; so that her arm, though still weak, was
passively extensible, above half its due latitude. I now purged her, with Pill.
Succino. Tartar. Quercetani, ana j. Resinae Zallap: gr. viij. cum q. s. Bals.
Pemiviani p. Pill. 7. aurat. q. s. They wrought about eight motions, and seemed
to have relieved her very much; from which time I left her to generals, and
Diet, continuing the Ointment, once in two days, which I directed to have
chaffed well in, after the member had first been well soked in the reeking
Viscera, of a newly slain Bees; it was long e're she could of her self extend
her arm fully, and somewhat longer e're the strength of it returned perfectly.

It happened, (which I had forgot to intimate) that a few days after her
purging, she being returned toward evening from a walk she had made to visit
some Friends in Town, fell into a severe Paroxysm, convulst, hysterical, etc.
in which I thought she would have died; I gave her a draught, etc. which
recovered her, after which it never returned; I repeated the Pills, etc.

The prick of a Tendon, could scarcely have happened with more circumstances,
than it did here; for the pain thereof attracted so powerfully the ill Juices,
wherewith she abounded, that she was in equal hazard of Death, from their
causing a Gangrene, as from the convulsive effects of the Puncture: more severe
and cruciating symptoms I never saw in my life, in a body so unfit for them,
and so unable to brook them: and certainly, had I delayed making that liberal
discharge, by the scarifications, comforting the part, and discussing the
matter by the Fomentation, and allaying the fermentation of the blood and
humors by the Opiat, but that night, she had been in her winding sheet, by the
next; for the restoring the strength, and extension of the member, I own my
self indebted principally to the Balsamum Galb. of which I have already spoken
so well.

Sir, I will relieve your patience when I have related one Observation more of
the effects of Oleum Terebinthinae, in an Hemorrhage, happening by a Wound to a
young Gentleman, Mr. A. Cock, Servant to an eminent Merchant, and then Mayor of
this Town, Mr. J. Lanyon, who whetting a long Penknife on a Hone, the Knife
dropping out of his Hand, fell toward the ground, between him and the wall of
the Window, against which he stood: he inconsiderately thrusting his belly
forward to stop it, and it unhappily falling with the point toward him, run up
into the inferior part of the left Ilia, from whence issued a great stream of
Arterial blood, which in a very small space had ran a great quantity: I found
him bleeding, in great pain, and very faint; I forthwith injected Oleum
Terebinthinae, and thrust in a large Tent, dipped in the same, and bound him up,
administering a Clyster, by the working of which, I saw the Intestines were not
hurt, as I feared; I continued my Tents armed with Linimentum Arcei, and put
some Oil of Turpentine with the injection I used; the extravasate blood cast
into the hollow of the Abdomen, digested; and a Fever happened while Nature was
on that work, which I endeavored not to check by any refrigerating course, but
by drinking a decoction of some Vulneraries, with Crocus R. Glyz, etc. and
repeated Clysters of the same: which hastening the Coction, calmed the
effervescence of the blood by consequence; and so securely was the hurt Artery
closed, that not any recent blood appeared after the first Dress, though the
flagrancy of that Mass made it hazardous. When I saw fair Pus, I put in a
Fistula Tent, and discharged it, and afterward let it close. I became induced
to superadd this Observation, because in it the Medicine restrained so obscure
an Hemorrhage, though not made hot, for fear of injuring the Guts.

A new Way of Amputating large Members, and a more speedy convenient Method of
curing Stumps, than that commonly practiced.
Discovered in a Letter, to his esteemed Friend, Mr. THO. HOBS, Surgeon in
London.
SIR,
IFind by yours, that you are surprised with the intimation I gave you, of a
way of amputating large Members, so as to be able to cure them per Symphysin,
in three weeks, and without fouling, or scaling the bone. It is a Paradox that
I will now evince to you to be a truth, after I have first taken notice of what
you affirm, that there is a necessity of scaling the ends of those bones, left
bare after the usual way of dismembring, before the Stump can be soundly cured;
that you never yet found it otherwise but that where it has been attempted,
the Stumps have apostumated, and the Caries come off thereby.

Sir, I do assure you, I have been so happy to have seen the contrary, in an
Amputation made between the Cubitus and the Carpus; where, though the Wound was
almost nine weeks in curing, and at Sea too, yet the bones never scaled, and
the stump remained (to my knowledge many months) without the least tendency to
eruption; the person then principally concerned was an old Practitioner, and
one that had long served in the Northern Wars: he did assure me, he frequently
neglected the scaling of the bone, and healed most of the Amputations he made
in the Army, and in Scotland without it. I acquaint you of this for its rarity,
not that I ever but once practiced it, when I made Amputations the usual way,
and I think it not prudent, because there is no necessity to imitate it in such
stumps: for that in curing them, we have time enough for the disquamation,
which is also achieved without any great trouble; whereas should we neglect
it, and sind when the stumps come to be almost cicatrized (as once I did in
designing to imitate the said Artist, and which made me resolve for ever to
decline it) that there were necessity of doing it, by reason of a Caries then
contracted, or but then discovering it self; it is manifest what trouble it
would beget, and how greatly impede the desiccation; there are those that think
they ought to scale all bones, that have though but by a recent Wound been
bare: and others I have met with who on the other hand too much slight the
Caries of bones, pretending they moulder off with the matter; how equally
unreasonable and vain both are, I need not discourse to so competent a Judge as
your self. Wherefore passing these matters, I shall now entertain you with an
account of the manner of this Operation, I would recommend to you, after I have
told you, that it was from a very ingenious Brother of ours, Mr. C. Lowdham of
Exceter, that I had the first hints thereof.

The Ligatures and Gripe, being made after the common manner you are with your
Catling, or some long incision-Knife, to raze (suppose it the Leg) a flap of
the membraneous flesh, covering the muscles of the Calf, beginning below the
place where you intend to make excision, and rasing it thitherward, of length
enough to cover the stump; having so done, turn it back under the hand of him
that gripes: and as soon as you have severed the member, bring this slap of
Cutaneous flesh over the stump, and fasten it to the edges thereof, by four of
five strong stitches: having so done, clap a Dossil into the inferior part,
that one passage may be open, for any blood, or matter may lodge between, but of
that there seldom occurreth any: then lay on a common Defensative, Ex Bole.
Sang. Dracon. Mastich, Terrae-sigil. etc. cum alb. ovor. and Aceto, and thereto
girt it close with your cross bandage, and other Compresses after their usual
manner: the former, viz. the Defensative, not only defends from accidents: as
heat, pain, fluxion, etc. but gently constipateth the Vessels, thereby
contributing to the securing the Hemorrhage, and very considerably assists to
the agglutination: the latter, scil. the Compress Ligature, keeps the flesh
snug and close to the ends of the divided Vessels: confirms the Consolidation,
keeps the parts from Cavity, and the blood from Extravasation, and hinders that
deflux of humors, which would otherwise destroy the intention of Cure.

In this sort of Amputation, that manner of compressing the Thigh by Ligature,
or the arm near the shoulder, which I have recommended in the foregoing
Discourse, is of excellent use, because thereby you may restrain the descent of
the blood, till by your Dress and bandage, you have so far secured the part, as
that it can receive no damage thereby.

In this way of Cure, Phlebotomy, Julaps, Ligature of the extreme parts, if
need be, with what else may contemperate the blood, hinder defluxion and
maturation, and promotes Consolidation, though declaimed against in that
Discourse, is in this case very useful and necessary.

In the succeeding Dressings, Medicines healing per symphysin, are to be used;
and amongst them perhaps there are none better, than that already mentioned,
adding some powder of the roots of great Comphery thereto; the dossil if you
use any, may be left out the next dressing, or that following it.

That this Method has cured such a stump in three weeks, is a truth I can
vouch by sufficient testimony, and I believe you will not much doubt it, when
you have perused this, and considered how easy, and soon such large
Consolidation has been made; for this, though it be no re-unition, but the
consolidation of flesh never before united, will yet be nevertheless effected,
as is evident in the coalition of Hair-lips, the aptitude of the Fingers,
Eyelids, Lips, glans and praeputium, and the 3. Ob. Med. Chyrurg. de Clausura
uteri, ob. 2.
Vagina uteri, when ulcerate, (of which last, Rhoonhuse gives us a memorable
instance) to unite, and is also more strangely evident, in the stories of Sir
In the 115 page of his Discourse of the Sympathetical Powder.
K. Dighy, Lib. 23. cap. 22.
Amb. Pareus, and Taliacotius, concerning supplying lost Noses, not only by
knitting a part of the homogeneous arm; but of another man's, to supply the
scandalous want of that obvious part, to which the incomparable Author of
Hudibras thus alludeth,

So learned Taliacotius from
The brawny part of Porter's Bum,
Cut supplemental Noses, which
Should last as long as parent Breech.
But --
I must not forget to intimate to you, that this manner of dismembring, etc. is
not to be made use of, where the part has been much inflamed, tumified from
fluxion, or otherwise vexed therewith, nor in members amputated for Chronick
causes: as Cancers, Fistula's, etc. or where the body is pockt, or very
cachectick, because in such, digestion (which would destroy the unition) is
necessary to rectify and sweeten the Mass, which it does by draining off the
Miasma of the disease, more than ten fontanels can do. It Is also no less
unavoidable; for the course of matter that has that way discharged it self so
long, (as in a Fistula) cannot of a sudden be obstructed, without hazard of a
mischievous apostumation; moreover in such ill habits, as those cases either
cause or result from, Consolidation is difficult, if not impossible to be so
suddenly performed, as this manner of Cure requires; the dyscrasis of the
blood having destroyed or weakened its Balsam, that it cannot expedite the
work, which if not speedily done, cannot be performed securely and firm; and in
parts inflamed and tumified by fluxion, or by congestion, it is easy to
imagine, there must be a discharge of that concrete matter, which cannot be,
and yet the Wound cured by sympathy.

But in most of the Amputations made at Sea in fight, or on Land in Battles, or
wheresoever acute accidents, such as Wounds, recent Lacerations require it, it
may be done, and that with those advantages of the other way it Rivals.

First, That it is more speedy; I mean the Cure, not the Operation: for it
effects it in at least one third, or fourth part of the time, that the other
method can possibly atchieve it: and of what good use this is, both to the
Surgeon, and Patient, I need not trouble you to mention.

Secondly, Here no dysepulotick Ulcer can possibly happen, as there frequently
does; especially to stumps of the Legs, when by the unavoidable prolixity of
the cure, such a course of matter has that way discharged it self, as cannot
afterward be restrained, without great trouble and difficulty, if at all.

Thirdly, Stumps are this way cured without scaling the bone: perhaps there is
not much trouble, etc. always prevented thereby, as I have already told you,
yet some there is at all times, and at some very much: for instance, when
Nature is slow in casting off the Caries, and the Hyposarcosis usually invading
stumps, about the time of Cicatrization, cover the bone before it separate, so
that applications cannot be made locally, to dispatch it, which many times
proves a great Remora to the desiccation.

Fourthly, Here is no expensive profluence, either of the Radical moisture, by
maturation, and fluxion, or of the blood by Hemorrhage, or of the Succus
nervosus by a Synovia: or of the lymphatick Liquor, by the lacrymation of those
Vessels: ill consequences usually attending the other Method, and Medicaments.

I need not prove it, with respect to all these, they being truths too manifest
to need it: I shall be particular as to the Hemorrhage, because it may seem a
strange Assertion, that this way should have any advantage of the other, for
restraining them.

That it has so, will appear to you, if you please to consider, how much more
likely it is, that the bleeding Vessels should be secured, not only from
present fluxion, but future Hemorrhage, by the so close adhesion, and firm
unition of flesh, to that which is circumjacent to them, and (as may be
presumed, de facto) to the ends of the Vessels themselves, than by any of the
common Methods, or Medicaments I have examined; for that here the Consolidation
is so quickly and securely made, by help of the Application and Ligature, that
the divided Vessel can no more break out, than in cured stumps, where they have
not only been stopped by any of those common Methods, but covered by the
Incarnation and Cicatrix.

It will seem less strange, if you further consider, that after the Ligature of
an Artery, for an Aneurism, etc. when the Silk rots, or the Vessel is fretted
assunder thereby, there is nothing but this incompassing flesh that stops it.

Adding also hereto, that the flap which is to cover the stump, and ends of the
bleeding Vessels, after Amputation, being of the membranous flesh; is for the
most part fatty, and therefore sometimes called membrana Adiposa: by which,
though it be not so apt for Consolidation, it is the more sit for securing the
flux, because lying upon the ends of the Vessels, the blood endeavoring to
issue from them, cannot penetrate or strain it self through it, as in all
probability it would do, in that which were more fibrous, and less pingued: the
latter of them being impervious, the former full of little interstices:
Moreover, it is by Galen. morb. cur. l. 5. A. Pareus, lib. 9. c. 7. Dr. Read,
Lect. 2.
some allowed, one way of restraining Hemorrhagies to divide the Vessel, that
his bleeding end retiring among the Muscles, their compressure may by closing
him, stop his bleeding; if there be any reason for that Method, and what it
presumes, it is very considerable here.

No less is a more generally allowed Method of stopping Hemorrhagies, viz. by
Incarnation, that is, by covering the mouths of the divided Vessels with newly
generated flesh: this Method of the flap, having as much the advantage thereof,
as such flesh whereof it consists, is more firm and fit to do it, than what is
newly generated, which is always soft and spongy.

Nor is it ridiculous to believe, that recent flesh, by some specifique quality
or manner of performance, stays Hemorrhagies, and that very strangely too, if
you believe two notable Stories delivered by Felix Platerus in sunguin.
excretione, ob. lib. 3. the one of a Thief, who by order of Justice, having
both hands cut off, had the blood stayed. -- Gallum gallinaceum, vivum, interea
cultro a podice verus illius sternum scindendo, aperiebat and brachium
mutilatum statim post ictum, in hane aperturam includebat. -- The other of one
that had his Finger bitten away by a Horse, Sanguinisque fluor, multis frustra
tentatis non sisteretur: was cured by the same way -- fluorque statim
substitit. --

But to proceed: Fifthly, The cure is this way performed with no less pain and
hazard to the Patient; the great pain of stumps, the watching, Fever,
Convulsions, Syncopes; the effect of that pain especially at Sea, where
necessaries are wanting, are here prevented partly from Natures great
complacency, and the delight with which she seems to cooperate with Art, in
curing per symphysin: I say, it is that wherewith she not only seems pleased,
but what of her self (as I have already suggested) she will perform, if the
lips of the Wound be kept clean, close together, and free from the impressions
of the Ambient Air.

Partly from her not being put upon the work of digestion, or maturation: which
(as I have proved) she never performed without a Fever, and perturbation.

And partly from the nature of the different Applications, which are here (as
all Agglutinatives) Anodyne; whereas those cured by the other way, must endure
the heat of Restrictives and Digestives, the fretting of Detergents to
mundifie, and Corrosives to erode, the Fungus's, always occurring more or less
to Stumps.

Sixthly, It Is much easier and cheaper to the Surgeon: the first, because
much sooner cured, and seldomer dressed; the first in three weeks, the last
once a day: the second, for the same reason, and because fewer Medicines, etc.
serve at each dressing: of what advantage the former is to him when many men
are wounded, and especially when distant from the ease of an Hospital, I leave
those to tell you that have tried it, as I have done. The benefit of the
latter, considering the scantiness of public allowances, and the great number
of men, that may at one time be under Cure, especially in a Mediterranean
Voyage, is obvious.

Seventhly, Stumps this way healed, are not obnoxious to break open again on
every slight rub, or knock, as do those healed by the other Method, a mischief
they can hardly avoid, though they endeavor it with the greatest Care and Art;
whereas this being fenced with a firm skin, is no more incident to it, than a
man's Fingers ends.

Eighthly, A new and commodious sort of Artificial Leg, having a Cavity to
which the stump is to be intruded, and on which the weight of the body, on the
alternate motion of the Legs, must be laid, is here most tolerable and
convenient: whereas the other way, scarcely admits the laying the due stress on
them, by reason of the tenderness of the stump, or its incidency to strip and
excoriate.

These are all the considerable advantages manifestly acquired by this new Way,
without doubt, use, and trial, will discover more equal to them, and an
abundance of lesser conveniences, which at present occur not to my
consideration; these are enough to show the Novelty to be considerable, and
worthy of imitation: let them have with you this accessional manifestation,
that I am very ready to obey, and serve you,

Plim. Aug. 3. 1678. James Young.

FINIS

