A SERMON CONCERNING The Wisdom of Fearing GOD; Preached at SALISBURY, ON
SUNDAY, July XXX. 1693.

BEING The Time of the Assizes.

By E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester-College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's.

Published at the Request of the Lawyers.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

TO THE Worthily Honored THE SERGEANTS, And other Council of the WESTERN
CIRCUIT.
SIRS,
WHEN I received Notice of your Desire, That this Sermon should be published,
under the Style of being published at the Request of the Lawyers (as is prefixed
in the Title Page) I looked upon it as a Desire intended to express not so much
your Approbation of the Preacher, as your Zeal for the Subject, and the
stipulation of your Assistance to promote the Fear of God, and a declaration of
your selves to be Professors of the Religious, as well as you are of the Civil
Wisdom: This being a Design suitable to the Honor of your Profession, and to
your known Personal Abilities; which as they give you greater Power to serve
the Interests of Religion, so they lay a greater Obligation upon you to do it.
Wherefore in combination with your Piety, as well as obsequiousness to your
Desire, I publish my Thoughts upon this Subject; not as mine, but (as they are
by Espousal) Yours; to the end that Your Reputation may give them Credit, and
make way for their Reception, and conferr on them the Felicity of doing Good in
the World. If they shall do any Good (which is a most desirable, but casual
Event) I must impute it to your asserting them; for Authority may reach Men's
Affections, when bare Arguments cannot: And therefore I humbly recommend them
to that part of your Patronage, and your selves to the Blessing of God for a
Requital: Who am, with all Respect,

SIRS, Your very Humble Servant, E. YOUNG.

A SERMON CONCERNING The Wisdom of Fearing GOD; PREACHED At SALISBURY, July 30.
1693.
JOB xxviii. 28. And unto man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.
THE fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; is a Sentence we meet with in several
places of Scripture, and delivered by several of the holy Writers; so that it
seems to have been in proverbial use amongst the Ancients; and it is a probable
Conjecture, that they derived this Proverb by Tradition from GOD himself, and
that Adam was the Man in the Text, to whom it was first spoken: For when Adam
had eaten the forbidden Fruit, which he was induced to do from the hopes of
being made wise by it, it was then (as some have thought) that God thus
admonished him, The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; this Admonition properly
serving to set before him the grossness of his Mistake, when he thought that
any thing which made him sin, could possibly make him wise.

If this were spoken to our First Parent, we cannot doubt, but that the Truth
of it entered into his Soul with a full conviction: The shame and terror which
he felt within himself; for having departed from the fear of God in one
instance, thoroughly convinced him, that there was nothing so wise, as to fear
him always.

And there are certain Seasons, wherein every Son of Adam, even the most loose
and careless, does readily deliver himself up to the same Conviction: Scarce
any one in the World, when lying under the sense of Guilt, or the fear of
Punishment, or the destitution of Worldly Comforts, or the apprehension of
Approaching Death, but will soon acknowledge, That the fear of God is the true
Wisdom, and that all other Seize are but Folly, in comparison of it. What
therefore all men at some time or other confess for a Truth, and most men with
a Regret, that they have no more considered it, That it is the prudent man's
part to consider at all times, and to set it before him for a governing
Principle of his Life.

We may observe by the way. That if the Fear of God be Wisdom, it is a happy
step and advantage toward the Duty, that Nature has planted in us a common
Ambition to be wise. To be wise, is the thing we long for above all other; as
(on the contrary) to be accounted Fools is the most hated of all Reproaches:
And this is an Appetite as univerfal as Hunger it self: So that the difference
betwixt Wisemen and Fools lies not so much in the difference of their
Affections toward Wisdom, but only in the Controversy about what Wisdom is,
and wherein it consists. Which Controversy my Text comes in to determine, and
I shall deliver the full sense of it in these two Propositions.

I. That the fear of the Lord is wisdom; and, II. That it is the Only Wisdom;
for so much the emphasis of the Relative imports, -- The fear of the Lord that
is wisdom: As much as to say, There is no Wisdom without it.
I. I begin with the first, -- The fear of the Lord is wisdom.

To fear God (if we will state the nature of it) consists in the having such a
due sense of the Majesty, and Holiness, and Justice, and Goodness of God, as
shall make us thoroughly fearful to offend him; for each of these Attributes of
God are proper to raise a suitable Fear in every considering Mind: His Majesty,
a Fear lest we affront it by being irreverent; his Holiness, a Fear lest we
offend it by being carnal; his Justice, a Fear lest we provoke it by being
presumptuous; and his Goodness, a Fear lest we lose it by being unthankful. But
through all, the ceasing to offend God is necessary, for otherwise we cannot be
said to fear Him: And therefore in the Holy Scripture we have the Fear of God
defined by departing from evil; as if its very Essence consisted in this
necessary Effect. So Solomon tells us, The fear of God is to depart from evil:
And the same definition is implied in the Text, where the fear of the Lord, and
to depart from evil, are used only as two different expressions to signify the
same thing.

And from this Observation it follows, that Wicked Men can never be said to
fear God, though they do certainly fear his Punishment; but where the Punishment
only is feared, there the Person is properly hated. I confess, that to hate God
carries a Horror in the very sound of it, and implies a Guilt of such a dye, as
few Sinners will own to have been in their Intention. But when we consider that
a Man cannot continue in deliberate Sin, but that in the mean time his Heart
must needs give him to wish, that there were no God to punish him; and that
such a Wish is Formal Hatred: all we can conclude upon it is this, That our
Sins are seldom stinted by our own Intention, but when we give Guilt leave to
go so far, it will go farther without our leave; and so those ill habits will
insensibly lead us on to pure Enmity with God, in which, at first, we intended
no more than the bare pleasing of our Passions. But the Fear of God is a sure
Guard against all these Mischiefs; for, when once this Fear has made us take
care not to offend God, our Souls will naturally tend to love him, from the
prospect of those gracious Promises, wherein such as fear him are secure of a
growing Interest.

Now, the Wisdom of fearing God will be manifested, 1 sty, by considering the
Reasonableness, and, 2 dly, the Advantages of it.

1 st, I shall consider the Reasonableness of the Duty. God Almighty gave us
the passion of Fear on purpose to make us wise; and its subserviency to Wisdom
is visible in the whole course of Human Affairs: For, set aside Fear, and there
is no Providence in management, no Weight in Counsel, no Prudence in Election,
no Discretion in Acting; all runs to Rashness and Folly, and ends in exposing
us to all manner of Evils. As therefore in a Town alarmed by an Enemy, a
Sentinel is set to watch their Approaches, and to prevent the danger of a
surprise; so, in regard of those many Evils and Dangers to which we are
obnoxious in this Life, God has set Fear in our Soul for a Sentinel, to watch
when and which way they come, and to give us Caution that we may avoid them.
But the same God that has given us Fear for a Caution against Evils in general,
has, in the mean time, given us notice, That His Displeasure is the greatest of
all Evils: and therefore as we account it a point of Wisdom to be watchful
against other Evils, so it is necessarily the chiefest point of Wisdom to be
watchful against this.

The Fear of God is of so great importance to us, that God seems to have
intended a gracious intimation of it in every motion of our Natural Fears. Our
Natural Fears (we know) are either sudden or deliberate; the sudden are such as
come upon us surprizingly, and without deliberation, and of these we may
observe, that they are very often immoderate, boundless, and ungovernable; and
as they prevent our deliberation in their coming, so they often baffle it being
come, and are not to be controlled by any power of Reasoning. How wonderfully
will a man sometimes be affected at the hearing of a sudden noise in the Night?
his Blood runs back, his Spirits sink, his Soul melts within him, and a Horror
passes through every part of his Body. Now, such a Fear as this seems absolutely
unreasonable, a Wise and Good Man would not fear any Accident of Life, no, nor
Death it self, at such a rate; and yet a Wise and Good Man cannot sometimes
hinder such a Fear from rising upon a mere Bugbear occasion. Now, how
unreasonable soever this Fear seems to be, it carries a most reasonable
Admonition along with it. And as the Sentinel, when set, has a Word given him,
whereby to distinguish his proper Officer; so GOD, when he set this Fear in us,
seems to have given it his own Word, a Word which it whispers to us upon each
of its surprising motions, (viz.) Thus it is that a man ought to fear God; Thus
it is that a Man ought to fear God, because even as a man fears, so is his
displeasure: Even as a Man fears, when he fears most boundlesly, most
extravagantly, so is his displeasure; his Displeasure bears proportion to such
a Fear as this, though nothing in Nature does so besides it. Thus God has made
nothing in vain, no, not our vainest Fears, from whom, if we will give our
selves leisure to reflect, we may learn so important a Lesson.

Our deliberate and just Fears are as just to the same intimation; and each of
their motions point out God to the first glance of our Reasoning: For, if it be
reasonable to fear Want, how much more reasonable is it to fear Him, whose
Bounty is the Fountain of all our Supplies? If it be reasonable to fear
Disappointments, how much more to fear Him, whose Providence disposes the issue
of all we project? If it be reasonable to fear Disgrace, how much more to fear
Him, whose estimation imports more toward it than that of all the World
beside? If it be reasonable to fear Pain, and other Inconveniences of Life, how
much more to fear Him, whose Pleasure determines both all our Ease, and all our
Sufferings? In a word, if it be reasonable to fear them that can kill the body,
how much more him, who after he has killed, can cast into hell? This then is
the Moral, and this is the Lesson of all our Fears, Fear God: And if it be not
Wisdom to do so, it is equally no Folly to kick against the Pricks, to embrace
a Scorpion, to run under a falling Tower, into the mouth of a Lion, into the
bottomless Pit.

Thus much for the Reasonableness of the Duty; let us, 2dly, consider its
Advantages.

And to give my Thoughts a Track in this wide Field, I shall confine them to
this Particular, viz. That the Fear of God is the cure of all other Fears; and
when I have said this, I have implied a mighty Advantage, because Fear (when
loose from God) is undoubtedly both the greatest Burden and the greatest Snare
that Human Life is acquainted with. I call Fear the greatest Burden of Life,
because of its natural torturing power; and I call it the greatest Snare of
Life, because of its moral corrupting power. Let us reflect a little upon them
both.

1. Fear carries with it such a torturing power, that could we but estimate the
Conditions of all men together, we should find that the World is at all times
more miserable from what it fears, than from what it feels. Nay, Fear is such a
Tyrant, that let us feel never so much, it will still heap on weight, and make
that which may be worse than that which is. As the Author of the Book of Wisdom
tells us concerning the Egyptians, That when they lay under their grievous
Plague of Darkness, yet their Fear was more grievous than the Darkness.

But, 2. Beside this torturing power, Fear has in it a corrupting and
debauching power, whereby its moral Mischiefs come to be excessive; for, Fear
is the main Rock upon which most men split their Faith, their Honor, their
Integrity; all are sacrificed to some sort of cowardly compliances, and Men
become vicious perhaps less from the love of being so, than from want of
Courage to be otherwise. And this is a sufficient Reason why, Rev. 21. 8. the
Fearful are set first in the List of those that go to Perdition.

So that though Fear was given us on purpose to make us wise, yet it never
effects that purpose, till such time as it is fixed upon God, and receives
Virtue from that supreme Object, to govern its motions, in reference to all the
rest; for the fear of God, like a wise Monarch set up in a disturbed State,
composes all the Tumults of vulgar Fears, and keeping them subordinate to it
self, renders them both harmless and useful to their proper Ends.

It Is a sad mistaken Project (though yet it be a common one) to cast off the Fear
of God in order to be free; for, in so doing, Men only pass from one Fear which
is without Torment, to a multitude that are without Relief: As Cain, when he
had departed from the Presence of God, became terrified with the presence of
every thing he met. And though all men in Cain's case are not so fearful as Cain
was, yet they make the mischief equal by being more stupid than he.

How galling must the Fears about the things of this Life needs be to one who
carries no eye to the Blessings of a future? They make the World look like a
Shaft thrust into a man's Body, which grieves and tortures while it stays in,
and when it is drawn out, draws away Life along with it: But he that fears God
has a Preservative against the fear of all Worldly Evils; for he fears them not
before they come, because he is secure of the Good Providence of God on his
side, and when they come, he has wherewithal to break their blow, because he
has assurance of Recompense at least, if not of Relief.

But especially, how amazing must the fear of Death be to him that fears not
God? Death! that, like a dark passage to a comfortless Prison, puts an end to
all he would have, and a beginning to all he would not. I confess indeed, that
Sin, even while it is drawing on such formidable Consequences as these, has
likewise Arts to fence off their Affrightment: For, as there is sometimes an
Excess of Fear, that betrays all the Succors of Reason, so there is sometimes
on the other hand such a Hardiness, and want of Fear, as stifles all the
Actings of Reason: And hence it comes to pass, that some Men, who are
altogether careless how they live, do yet seem as indifferent about the Concern
of dying. The Scripture gives us the Emblem of such hardy Spirits, in a Horse
rushing to the Battle, and an Ox going to the slaughter; Creatures that are not
frighted with Consequences, because they are not capable of thinking: Which may
likewise serve for an intimation to us, That when a man fears not God, and at
the same time fears not Death, it is not Courage in him, but Brutality; for, it
is impossible there should be any Guard against the Fear of Dying, to those who
are reasonable, and aware of the Issues of Dying, but only the Fear of God,
which secures against all other Fears: And as to this in particular, it makes
Death resemble a Viper, when its Poison is whipped out; its very form indeed
brings some Horror to our Nature, but Reason tells us in the mean time, That it
is so far from doing harm, that it is altogether medicinal and restorative.

By the way, it is remarkable, how this Passion of Fear will not suffer it self
to be slighted by any of the Children of Pride, and therefore it takes a
mocking Revenge upon those that seem to slight it most: for we may observe,
concerning such as fear not GOD, and pretend likewise not to fear Death, that
yet they extremely fear the vain Breath of the vainest Men, which they falsely
set up to be the Standard of Honor: This Breath (as despisable as it is) they
fear as much as any others can fear Death, and will run themselves into greater
Mischiefs to escape it. Whereas, in truth, nothing is honorable neither, but
only the Fear of God, and such Offices as are consequential to it, if God
himself may pass for the Standard, who says, Them that honor me I will honor.
And therefore whatsoever is acted contrary to this Principle, and whatsoever
Men dare, contrary to the Rules of Piety, it can be no other than dishonorable
and weak.

As for the debauching power of Fear, it is deplorable what Multitudes it
brings under captivity to Sin. The Fear of being laughed at, of being
reproached, of being frowned upon; the Fear of Contempt, of Hardships, of
Poverty, of Shame, of Death, are each of them Cords that draw Men daily from
their Integrity; and though they are all of different strengths, yet by means of
opportunity they all equally serve the Ends of the Tempter; insomuch, that as
many are debauched by the Fear of being laughed at, as by the Fear of being
undone.

But the Fear of God is Armor of Proof against all these Temptations; it
fortifies the Mind, and works it to firmness, such a firmness as was glorious
in the three Israelites in Babylon, who when the Question was put, Whether they
would worship the Image, or be cast into the Furnace, they replied with all
composedness, Oh Nebuchadnezzar, we are not sollicitous to answer thee about
this matter: As much as to say, The Question which thou, O King, take to be
so puzling to us, by reason of its Terror, is not worthy the shortest of our
Deliberations; we can resolve in an instant what to do in this case, because we
were resolved long ago to suffer any thing rather than God's Displeasure.

I have thus far shown the Reasonableness and the present Advantages of the
Fear of God, in order to evidence the Wisdom of it; but I must carry the
Argument a little farther. For, although allMen did not only desire to be wise
(as certainly they do) but would allow us this Point too, That the fear of God
is wisdom; yet this would not convince them, that they must necessarily fear
God, in order to be wise, unless it appear likewise that they cannot be wise
any other way: For, as when there are several Meats of several tastes, one Man's
choosing what he likes best does not tax the Discretion of a second for choosing
of another kind; so, supposing there are several kinds of Wisdom, ungodly men
may acquit their Pretenses to Wisdom, by choosing to be wise after their own
Palate, and in their own way. I shall show therefore in the next place, That no
such Choice is to be had; but that the Fear of God is so essential to Wisdom,
that there is no Wisdom without it.

It is the design of holy Job, in the Chapter of my Text, to put us in mind,
that there is a mighty Difference betwixt to know and to be wise: He tells us,
That Man finds out the veins of silver, and the ore of gold, and the beds of
sapphires: That He cutteth out rivers among the rocks, and his eye sees every
precious thing: That He binds the floods from overflowing, and the thing that
is hid he brings forth to light. But amidst all this, Where (says he) shall
wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? Man knows not the
price thereof, neither is it to be found in the land of the living. In which
Passage the Holy Man intimates, that Wisdom is the pure Gift of God, and that
it cannot be found by the most curious Enquiries into Nature: And we may add,
That neither can it be found by the most curious Enquiries into Truth it self,
whether Moral or Divine, till such time as Grace accompanies the Enquiry: For,
a Man may know all the Offices and Bounds of Virtue, and all the Precepts and
Ends of Religion, and yet not be wise, because Wisdom is not the Speculation of
these things, but the Love and Practice of them. Wisdom is not only Light, but
Strength, to the Understanding, whereby it is enabled to govern the Passions,
and make the Life regular; whereas a bare Knowledge leaves the Understanding as
weak in Government, and the Life as irregular as before; and (indeed) serves to
nothing so much as the more inexcusable conviction of our Folly.

In ancient Rome, when the Empire was come to its height, and Learning and Arts
were grown into reputation among them, it was the Fashion for such as aimed at
the Credit of being Accomplished Gentlemen, to frequent Conferences, and
entertain the Company with Discourses of Philosophy, and all other Specimens of
Study and Wit: In consequence to this it happened, that others, who had neither
Parts nor Industry to accomplish themselves on this manner, and yet were
ambitious to have a share in every thing that made Men look Great; made it
their Practice to buy some Learned Slaves out of Greece, and to carry those
about with them into Company, and there whatsoever Wit or Learning the Slaves
could produce, that their Masters looked upon as their own, and took the Glory
of it unto themselves. How ridiculous soever the affectation of this Practice
may seem, it is but too just an Emblem of the Generality of Mankind, priding
themselves in the attainment of mistaken Wisdom: For, while we please our
selves with the knowledge of Arts, and Laws, and Policies, and Business, nay,
of Virtue and Religion too, yet in the mean time our Understanding, the Faculty
where this Treasure of Knowledge lies, is very often no other than a Slave,
held in servitude to our Lusts and Passions: These rule and command, like the
Roman Gallant, and that only serves, like the poor Greek, to furnish Matter for
our Vanity; insomuch, that we are not really the wiser for all the Wisdom we
carry about us. And thus it must be; nor can it ever be otherwise, till such
time as the Fear of God presides over what we know, and directs it to the
Purposes of a Holy Life.

As for the Opinion of the World in this present matter, which conferrs the
Character of Wisdom upon several human Endowments, however found separate from
the Fear of God; well may it pass for a Courtesy, but its passing for a Due we
have this Consideration to hinder, ( viz.) That not any of those Endowments,
no, nor all of them together, can prevent a Man from being a Fool.

And this is a Truth I shall choose to prove by Example, Example being a good
Remembrancer, and this being a matter which we are not so like to doubt of, as
to forget.

I shall begin with the Example of the Rich Man, mentioned St. Luke 12. who
according to the vulgar Standard, must certainly pass for a Wise Man; for, he
understood Business, and Improvements, and Managery, as we may guess by the
increasing of his Estate, and the enlarging of his Barns. And another piece of
reputed Wisdom he was Master of too, that is, he resolved to enjoy what he had:
And yet how emphatically is this man called Fool, in his peremptory Summons
from God? Thou fool! this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and then
whose shall those things be that thou have provided?

The next I shall mention is Achitophel, a man of such sagacity and insight
into Affairs, that (as the Sacred Story tells us) his Counsel upon all
occasions was, As if a man had enquired at the oracle of God; and yet this
Great Man, for all his mighty Talent of Wisdom, had so little as to make a
violent end of himself upon a small Affront, and so at one Act to cut himself
off both from all the Enjoyments of this Life, and all the Hopes of a Future:
Too great a Proof of being a Fool!

I shall end with the Example of Solomon, whose Character for Universal Wisdom
is this; That there never was the like before him, nor ever shall be after him;
and yet so soon as he turned his Back upon the Fear of God, see whither he
sunk; His heart clave unto strange women; he had seven hundred wives, and three
hundred concubines: and forasmuch as most of them were Idolaters, he complied
with them all, in worshipping their several Idols. And now say how the weakest
man in the World could have showed himself a greater Fool than Solomon did in
these Extravagances. Well might he take it for his Motto, as he does in the
Book of Ecclesiastes (which he is supposed to have written after his Recovery
out of this Infatuation) All is vanity, -- but the fear of God.

And though perhaps few of those that fear not God have Appetites to carry them
to the Extravagances of Solomon, and fewer to the Desperateness of Achitophel:
yet none of them can escape the Folly of the first Instance; that is, to have
their Soul stripped of all its Enjoyments together, without the provision of any
to succeed.

And therefore we may conclude, That whatever commendable things Human Wisdom
may do by the bye, yet it certainly fails of its main pretense; that is, of
making a Man wise: For, it is not some Actions, done with the semblance of
Discretion, in matters of smaller moment, but the Discretion a man shows in
actions of chief concern, that must give him his Character. And what then must
be the Character of those that always want Discretion in the main?

And now I shall leave the whole matter upon your Thoughts, under the
illustration of this sensible Image, (viz.) Human Wisdom, (in the prospect of
its whole management) looks like a man showing great Skill in the choice of
curious Paintings and Hangings, and other Rarities, wherewith to furnish his
House, when all the while an Enemy is burning the Town: For, thus it is that
Human Wisdom provides noble Furniture for the Soul, but never reflects that the
Soul it self lies perishing at the same instant. Knowledge, and Art, and
Reasoning, and Experience, and Dexterity, are excellent Furniture, and these
Human Wisdom brings in. But, in the mean time, what need of all this Sail to
run against a Rock? What needs the Pomp of all these excellent Qualities to be
undone, when a Man may be undone less reproachfully without them? For, it is
certain that all these Qualities do not in the least prevent a Man's being
undone; it is only the Fear of God that can do that; and therefore we may most
confidently determine, That the Fear of God is the only Wisdom.

This is Wisdom, not in Semblance, but in Deed; not Parcel-Wisdom, but Wisdom
entire; not Wisdom for the Bye, but Wisdom for the Main; not Wisdom for a Day,
but Wisdom for Ever.

To God, that is the Only Giver of this Wisdom, and of every Perfect Gift, be
all Glory, etc.

AMEN.
Sermons written by the same Author, and sold by Walter Kettilby.
A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 4. 1682. on St. Mat. V. 3.

A Sermon, exhorting to Union in Religion, preached at Bow-Church, May. 20.
1688. on St. John XVI. 31, 32.

A Sermon preached before the Queen on Easter Day, on 1 Thessalonians. IV. 18.


