A SERMON Preached at LAMBETH January the 25 th.

At the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS Lord Bishop of
Bath and Wells.

By EDWARD YOUNG. Fellow of Winchester College.

LONDON, Printed for William Grantham at the Crown and Pearl over against
Exeter-Change in the Strand, 1685.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
AND Primate of All ENGLAND.
May it please your GRACE,
THE Commands of Your Grace, as well as of Those other Honorable Assistants at
the Consecration, having encouraged this Sermon to appear in public; I have
presumed farther to set Your Venerable name before it, in order to give it
Countenance and Commendation to all Good Men. The world will judge what
abatements the Argument may have possibly received from the weakness of the
Manager; but (abstracting from these) I am sure that Religion has no Subject
wherein the Interests of Piety are more nearly concerned than they are in that
here treated of: And therefore I cannot doubt but that Your Grace will be easy
to forgive the Confidence of the Address, in contemplation of that advantage,
the Argument may thereby get to serve those ends of Piety to which it is
designed. And yet I have one end more in this Address, and that is, That it may
withal testify to the World the just veneration I have for those mighty
Accomplishments both of Nature and Grace wherewith God has Blessed You, in
order to bless his Church with the fruits and benefits of them,

London Feb. 2. 1685.

Your GRACE's Most humbly Devoted in all Duty and Obedience EDWARD YOUNG.

A SERMON ON 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the Gift of God, which
is in thee by the laying on of my hands.
THEY are the words of St. Paul, the Apostle for whose Doctrine and Example we
this day peculiarly give God thanks; They are his words to Timothy, whom, after
he had planted the Church of Ephesus, he did by the Laying on of his Hands
Consecrate and appoint Bishop of that Church: Of which St. Paul, Theodoret
tells us, De Cur. Graec. Affe^t. Sermon. 9.
That he likewise planted this Church of Ours: And if so, (Most Reverend
Fathers) You bear a Relation to the very Hands in the Text, from which through
a long and venerable Succession you derive your Authority; However, you bear an
equal Relation to the Advice of the Text; and Favor me therefore, I beseech
you, while I make some Reflections upon it, with an Humility as great as is my
Unworthiness for such an Undertaking.

The words do, 1. Offer to our Consideration The Solemnity of Laying on of
Hands, that Ancient Rite of Blessing by Prayer; and thence accommodated by
Divine Authority to the Designing of Men to any peculiar Charge in the Service
of God.

2. They offer to our Consideration the Charge or Office conferred by this
Solemnity, and that is the Office Episcopal; St. Paul Consecrating a Bishop and
Investing Him with such Rights and Powers as we never find committed to a
Simple Priest.

3. The Person on whom hands were laid, Timothy, whose Character is given in
the foregoing Verse, That He was a Man of unfeigned Faith. But these are Heads
I shall not insist on; I shall only take occasion from them to bless God for
the great Happiness and Glory of our Church, in the Legitimate Mission of Her
Clergy; The Due Distinction of Her Orders; and the Virtue and Worthiness of Her
Governors: And in (that which, under Providence is the great occasion of all
this) the Pious care of Her Sovereign Guardian the King; Whose eyes are upon
such as are Faithful; Who, as God made choice of Ioshuah to lead the Israelites
into Canaan, because he had dared, against the wishes of the People, to give a
True Report of that Good Land; So He (by whom Providence has designed to make
us Happy, if we will be Happy) chooses such to lead us, as by Their ardent
Love and Zealous Contention toward Heaven, have given a True Report of the
Desirableness of that Good Land: A Truth which, were it not for some few such
Reports, the World lies always under a propension to distrust.

I shall pass over these several Heads, and insist only on the remaining matter
of the words, and that is, the Gift conferred on Timothy at his Consecration:
Stir up the Gift of God that is in thee by the laying on of my Hands.

The word here rendered, Gift, does, in its General sense, signify any thing
that God does graciously bestow upon Men; But in this place it signifies that
which we more peculiarly call Grace, i. e. the Sanctifying Gift of God; and so
the Fathers interpret it, or rather so our Apostle interprets himself in the
following words; where he specifies the Gift he means to be The Spirit of
Might, o^ Love, and of a sound Mind.

Grace then is the Subject; concerning which I propose these Three things.

1. To show the Importance of it to Christian Practice. 2. Its Distribution to
Men and the Measures thereof. And 3. Man's Relative Duty toward it, in stirring
of it up.
I begin with the Importance of Grace, to Christian Practice: All that I shall
say thereon being designed to confirm this Proposition, ( viz.) That the Grace
of God is absolutely necessary toward the discharge of every man's Christian
Duty.

That there is a Sanctifying Principle communicated from Christ unto Believers
preparing and assisting them to the fruits of Holiness, and therefore called
the seed of God: 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
That this Principle is mo^e than all Natural Endowments, or any Improvements
of Nature, that are merely Human, and therefore called the Gift: That it is
more than the Objective Influence of all Revealed Truths, or of all the outward
Actings of Providence, and therefore called the Gift within Us: That this
Principle is wrought in us by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, and therefore
all Virtues are called the Works of the Spirit, and Christians the Temples of
the Holy Ghost, are Truths that will appear to any indifferent Enquirer as
evident as any that are written in the Book of God.

And, it being the manner of the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures to bring down
sublime Truths to our Understanding by familiar resemblances, and to convey
them more strongly to our minds by the Images of sensible things, Ephesians. 4. 16.
Col. 2. 19.
Our Apostle has in Two several places of his Epistles represented this
Communication from Christ to Believers by the resemblance of those Spirits and
Animal Iuyces that are communicated from the the Head to the several Members of
our natural Body; from which Spirits every Member derives its vigor, and
sensation, and power to execute those functions which are due to the common
service; insomuch that if this influence from the head to any Member be
casually obstructed, that Member must necessarily languish and grow useless,
and retain no more than the Figure of a part: And thus it is in the Mystical
body of Christ, the Visible Church; There is a like variety and subordination
of Members, some Eyes, some Hands, some Feet, etc. some of more curious
contexture and more noble Offices than others; but the Grace from the Head is
the common Soul and animation of them all; insomuch that whosoever is any way
obstructed from the participation of this Divine Influence, he must in the same
proportion languish and fall off from his Duty, and degenerate into the bare
figure of a Member of Christ.

Thus the Holy Scriptures do instruct us in the Existence of Grace, as they do,
(2.) In the necessity of it.

And the necessity of Grace is founded in the Scriptures, upon Man's weakness
and insufficiency to do his own Duty: So our Savior has laid down this Truth,
as the first step to Practical Wisdom, St. Ioh. 15 5.
(viz.) That without Him we can do nothing. For although it may undoubtedly
appear from the lives, both of Heathens and Hypocrites, That Man is not without
a considerable Talent of Natural power to do Good; though it may be
demonstrated, to the Reproach of Christian Professors, That All men may
advance farther into the state of Goodness, by the bare conduct of Civil
Prudence, and the force of such Resolutions as are merely Human, than most
Christians do arrive, amidst the great, but neglected advantages of Divine
Grace: Yet when we consider that in Religion, it is not enough to do Good,
unless it be done well in its Circumstances, and Uniformly in its parts; when
we consider that Religion is not satisfied with many good Acts, no nor many
Good Habits, but only with an Integrity of Goodness, and equal respect to all
that is commanded; when we consider that our Partial Understandings are never
well reconciled to the Principal duties of Christianity, I mean the Duties of
the Cross, but are apt to look upon them sometimes ^s Needless, sometimes as
Indiscreet, sometimes as Cruel, and so are always ready to shift their
Obligation; when we consider how hand it is for weak unsteady Souls to refine
themselves to such a pitch as to Love God above all those Idols after which we
naturally go astray from the Womb, and yet if we do not Love God so, we have no
Principle in us that can either support or recommend our services: When we
consider all these difficulties, the great Task before us, the great
indispositions within us, and the Avocations, seductions, sna^es and violences
that are always ready to divert us from our work; we must confess that they are
Difficulties purely insuperable by our own strength; Nature must start aside
from their Level like a Bow broken with too strong intention; we must confess
that in Equivalence to our Duty, and in proportion to Acceptance We can do
nothing. It Is true indeed that there are other Graces of God beside this inward
Operation we now treat of: There is soundness of faculties, Happiness of
Temper, a sober Education Choice of Employments and Friends, the light of the
Holy Scriptures, the prospect of future Punishments and Rewards, the
opportunities of Religious Advices, and the Monitions of Providential Events,
all these are mighty Graces of God in their kinds, and we speak of Men as
living under the possible advantages of all these; and yet nevertheless when we
consider (in balance to these) How the Tempers even of the Best Men are not
exempt from treacherous propensions to ill; How the Presence of things does
work much more forcibly upon our Affections than any Reasonings about things
distant can; How strong and delusive the Injections of Satan are, and how
stupifying and deliriative every Act of Sin; How great a distance there is
between keeping our selves from scandalous sins, and Raising our selves to the
height of a fervent Piety and Resigned Will: When we consider how our Savior,
amidst all his Preaching and Miracles, St. Ioh. 6. 44.
cries our None can come to Me except the Father draw him, that is, He himself
could not draw men as a Prophet, but only as a God; we must still conclude
that, without this Inward Principle of Sanctification supernaturally aiding us,
we can do nothing.

It Is true indeed, and we readily acknowledge, that there is an Obscurity
fitting upon the face of this Dispensation of Grace: For we cannot feel the
Impressions nor trace the footsteps of its distinct working in us: The Measures
of our Proficiency in Goodness seem to depend entirely upon those of our Own
Diligence; And God requires as much Diligence as if he gave no Grace at all:
All this we acknowledge, and that it renders the Dispensation obscure: But
then, on the other side, it is as plain That there is the same obscurity upon
every dispensation of Gods Temporal Providence; and so there is no more Reason
for doubting of the one than of the other. They that will not allow that God
does by any inward efficacy confer a sound Mind, allow nevertheless that he
gives Temporal good things; but how, in the mean time, does this Dispensation
appear more than the former? For when God intends to bless a Man with Riches,
he does not open Windows in Heaven, and pour them into his Treasure; he does
not enrich him with such distinguishable Providence as that wherewith he
watered Gideon's Fleece, when the Earth about it was dry; but he endows such a
Man with Diligence and frugality, or else adorns him with such acceptable
qualifications, as may recommend him to the opportunities of advancement, and
thus his Rise to Fortunes, is made purely Natural, and the distinct working of
God in it does not appear: When God intends to deliver or enlarge a people, he
does not thereupon destroy their Enemies, as he did once the Assyrians, by an
Angel, or the Moabites by their own Sword; but he inspires such a people with a
Courageous Virtue, and raises up among them Spirits fit to command, and
abandons their Enemies to luxury; and softness, and so the method of their
Raising, becomes absolutely Natural, and the distinct work of God in it does
not appear: And, in the same manner, when God does by the inward Operation of
his Grace promote a Man to Spiritual Good, and bring him to the state of
undefiled Religion, he does not thereupon suddenly change the whole frame of
his Temper, and chain up all the movements of his natural affections, and
infuse into him such a System of Virtuous habits as may make him Good without
application and pains; but he works his Spiritual work by a gradual process,
and human methods; instilling into such a Man, first a considering mind, and
then a sober Resolution, and then a diligent use of all such moral means as
conduce to the forming and perfecting of every particular virtue: And now while
God, in all these Instances does work in a human and ordinary way, and never
supersedes the power of Nature, but requires her utmost Actings, and only moves
and directs, and assists her where she is weak, and incompetent for her work;
both his Grace and his Providence are like a little spring, covered with a
great Wheel, though they do all, they are not commonly seen to do any thing,
and Man when he pleases to be vain and ungrateful may impute all Events to his
own power and application. Now it is certain that God leaves this obscurity upon
his Dispensations on purpose to administer an advantage and commendation to our
Faith, not an opportunity or Argument to our Doubting; but yet if we will
Doubt, the Case is plain, that we may as well doubt of any act of his Ordinary
Providence as of his Sanctifying Grace; and so (by this method of Reasoning)
God will have no share left him in the managment of the world.

We allow again that there is another Obscurity upon the face of this
Dispensation; we know not the Philosophy of Sanctifying Grace; not unto what
Class of Beings to reduce it, nor under what Modes to conceive its Operations:
And this is a speculation that our Savior himself argues us Ignorant of, as
much as we are of the Issues and Retreats of the wind; and yet he thought fit
to leave us so: Whether the knowledge of it were too Excellent for us; or
whether it were too useless, as no way conducing to the ends of Practical
wisdom: For we may observe of our Savior, that in all his Discourses, he never
entertained his Auditory with any Doctrine that was purely speculative; because
such kind of Knowledge is apt to make us more Vain than Wise: Had he led our
Understandings through the whole Theory of Grace, we could not have
accommodated it better to our uses, than an honest heart now can without any
farther insight; No more than if he had stoopt to teach us the Philosophy of
the Wind, any Mariner could have gathered it more commodiously into his Sheet.
It is not then our Emulation to determine How the work of Sanctification is
done; our only care is that it be done: We pretend not to declare, but
thankfully to admire; By what Ray the Divine Grace opens and shines in upon our
understanding, clearing it from worldly prejudices and the impostures of Flesh,
and rendering it Teachable, Considerative and Firm; By what Motion it inspires
Good thoughts, excites good purposes, and suggests wholesome Counsels and
Expedients; By what welcome violence it draws our Wills, steers our Appetites,
and checks our Passions; By what Heat it kindles Love and Resolution and
Cheerfulness of Endeavors; By what Discipline it extinguishes sinful
Imaginations and loose Desires; By what Power it aws the Devil, and foils
Temptations, and removes Impediments, and strengthens and exhilarates amidst
all difficulties; And finally, by what patient Art it turns, moulds, and
transforms our stubborn Nature into new Notions, new Savours, new Powers, new
Acts, new Aims, new Ioys; as if we were entirely new Creatures, and descended
from another Race: All these effects do as well by their wonder as their
Benefit render Grace, as our Apostle calls it, the Unspeakable Gift; 2 Cor.
9.15.
a Gift surmounting our Apprehensions as well as it does our Merit. That these
are all the Esfects of Gods Grace we know, because he has declared them to be
so; That they are so, we know, because many of them are wrought beside our
Thinking, many without our Seeking, and all beyond the reach of our too well
Known and experienced infirmity; That they are so, we know, because their being
so, comports best with the great end of all things, (that is,) the Glory of
their Maker; For it tends much more to the Glory of the Mercy of God, to watch
over and lead and assist Infirm Creatures than to have made them strong.

And so I pass to my Second Head, the distribution of Grace unto Men and the
Measures of it; The Doctrine whereof I shall form into this Proposition: (
Viz.) That God distributes his Grace to every Man in proportion to the measures
of his Necessary Duty.

God, who has laid our burden upon us, and commanded us to be strong, mocks us
not; but so far as we are weak, offers us strength out of his own treasure,
with this prospect, that receiving it thence, we might behave our selves more
reverently and thankfully under the sense of the Obligation. To every one
therefore that considers his want, and values the supply, and applies himself
for the Gift, with a worthy affection, and through appointed Means, God gives
it liberally, and the measure of his giving to each, is that Rule of the
Friend, St. Luke 11. As much as he needs. For as Gods Providence has ordered
a diversity of States in human life, producing a diversity of Duty; so the same
Good Providence has ordained diverse Sanctifying Gifts, and diverse Measures of
the same gifts to be distributed respectively among Men; that no man might
Necessarily be wanting to the Duty of his particular state. The Prophet Isaiah
( Cap. 11. 2.) Speaking of that fullness of the Spirit, that was to rest upon
our Savior, distributes the Holy Spirit (according to its operations) into the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit
of Knowledge and the Fear o^ the Lord: Which the Church looks upon as a proper
Enumeration of the Sanctifying Gifts of the Holy Spirit; which God does
diversely distribute unto men, in order to the Common Salvation: There is Wisdom
for those that Teach, and Understanding for those that Learn, and Counsel for
such as are in Perplexity, and Might for such as are in Difficulty, and
Knowledge for them that Err, and the fear of the Lord or Piety, (as other
Versions read it) for all that will be Pious. Now of these Gifts God gives
such Kinds and Measures to every Man as he has need of: To every Private person
so much as is necessary for a private Salvation; and to every one of a public
Character so much as is necessary to promote Salvation in the public:
Salvation of Souls, and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom being the only scope
of all his Distributions. We may take an Instance of the whole, from our Bishop
in the Text: He was a Good Man and endowed with Grace sufficient for a private
Salvation before the laying on of Hands, as the foregoing Verse implies; but
being now by that Sacramental Rite to enter upon a new Station of life, where
greater measures of the Divine assistance were but necessary for the discharge
of his duty, God confers greater measures of his Grace upon him through the
same Rite; God confers (I say) both Grace and Duty through the same Rite, to
put us in mind that they are Two things morally inseparable; For he that does
more Duty shall have more Grace; and he that receives more Grace, receives an
Obligation to do more Duty.

But here it is of importance to observe the Restriction of the Proposition, I
say it is Necessary Duty to which God apportions the measures of his Grace:
Where by necessary Duty, I mean the Duty of that State or those Circumstances,
which Gods Providence does assign us: For instance; If a man shall fall under
an unavoidable perplexity of Wordly affairs, such a state does bring new
Difficulties upon his Duty, and requires new measures of Grace to support him
under it; and accordingly such a person may safely depend upon God for such
measures: Or supposing a Man to want the (...), the happiness of Natural
temper, and to lay under complexional indispositions to Virtue; this state
brings unavoidable difficulties upon his Duty, and requires greater Measures of
Grace to be able to live well; and accordingly such a person may safely depend
upon God for such measures: God Almighty takes pleasure to manifest the
strength of his Grace in such opportunities of humane weakness: But, on the
other hand; if a man shall affect such Difficulties, and run himself by choice
into such Indispositions, such a one certainly brings a check upon the Divine
assistance: For, in all the dispensations of Gods mercy the Wise Man's Rule is
to be observed, Wisd. 1. 2.
That God is found of those that tempt him not. And so likewise in the Case of
public Charges, (which necessarily enlarge both the difficulty and the
measures of human Duty) the Conduct of Providence is always to be regarded: We
may safely follow Providence through any Difficulties; for there God shall be
with us, and his right hand shall help us: But if we advance to Difficulties,
as Ahab did to Ramoth Gilead, only directed by some false Prophet of our own
Passions, we Tempt God beyond a reasonable assurance of finding him in our
Undertaking. And this is the Reason why Pious Men, of all Ages, have trembled
at the thoughts of seeking the Episcopal Charge; lest by running officiously
into the obligation of a mighty Duty, they might tempt God and provoke him to
withold that measure of Grace which was necessary for the due discharge of it.
I know that Our Apostle has said; 3 Tim. 3. 1.
If a man desire the Office of a Bishop, be desires a Good Work; Implying that
it sometimes may lawfully be desired: And without doubt it has sometimes been
so, and possibly may be so still: It was so in those Times when Persecution
raging against the Church fell always most severely upon her Bishops, When the
Office was accounted a Degree of Martyrdom, when there were no splendid
advantages annexed to it, which might tempt the carnal affections of Men to
regard them more than they did the Duty: At that time to desire it, was to
deserve it: and a sufficient proof of an Inward Call or rather Animation to the
Charge: But as soon as it came to be baited with Honors and advantages; then
all Good Men became Jealous of themselves, lest in desiring the Office of a
Bishop they might not so much desire a Good Work as a Good Accommodation; lest
their Passions should draw them more prevalently than their Consciences: which
must necessarily have brought a check upon the Divine Blessing; for the want
whereof no Parts, nor Wisdom, nor Industry in their Administration could ever
compensate. From this pious Jealousy of theirs it followed that the Greatest
Bishops have been not only Wished and Nominated, but Sought, Wooed, and
Commanded, out of their Retirement to the Undertaking of their Charge: Where,
after they had Undertaken it, we find them bewailing themselves upon the
Tremendous prospect of its duty, St. August. Ep. 148. ad Valor.
and Crying that it was in punishment to their sins, that God had committed the
Helm of a Diocese into their hands. Teaching the World what Caution is needful,
lest in a Charge of the most important service of God, where it is impossible
for a Man to acquit himself well without Gods particular Blessing, and yet if
he does not acquit himself well, the miscarriage must needs be damnable, any
one should enter upon such a Charge, with any other Motives, than such as were
conciliative of Gods Blessing and assistance. 2 Cor. 2.16.
For Who is sufficient for these things? Says our Apostle; and having left the
Question undetermined, he has left men under the obligation of a long suspense,
before they determine it in their own behalfs.

But when God who makes those, whom he pleases, sufficient, shall determine it
for any Man; then Compliance is safe, and the Blessing indubitable. And thus it
was in the Instance of our Bishop in the Text, upon whom this discourse is
grounded; Of whom you may observe, that he had a Providential designation to
his Charge, before Hands were laid upon him to Invest him in it: He had his
Designation from Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Says the Text, that is, from the declaration of the Holy Ghost through the
Mouth of some inspired Christians: Now, what was extraordinary in this
Instance, and proper only for an Age of Miracles, we must not draw into
Precedent; but from what was Ordinary in it we must form our Rule; and that
Rule is this, viz. That when the Authority, to whom the outward care of the
Church is committed by God, shall from the good Report of a Person, as of One
of Unfeigned Faith, call such a Person to the Charge, this is a Providential
designation; and such a Person going in the Conscience of his Duty, to the
subsequent Rite of Laying on of Hands, needs not doubt of such an Effusion of
Grace as shall enable him to give a cheerful account of his Duty: This only
Caution being born in Remembrance, That the Grace so given must be stirred up,
Which is my third and last Head.

The Original word signifies primitively the stirring up of Fire; Grace being
sometimes, in the Scripture, compared to Fire; which, by reason of its
properties of Lighting, Warming and Purging, bears a just Analogy to those Aids
that Grace brings in to reform the disorder of each faculty of our Souls: But
beside these, Grace resembles Fire in another property, and that is, Unless it
be stirred up, and blowed, and Matter rightly applied, it will go out: The
Natural Agency of the Fire, and the Moral Agency of Grace agreeing in this,
That neither will serve our uses, unless we work with them. We may therefore
receive the Heavenly gift in vain; 2 Cor. 6. 1.
Nay the Negligent do always do so; but if we stir it up by exercise and use,
we make it spread and improve, and secure it is Aids to the full accomplishing
of our Duty. So that Grace and the Soul are like two Free Agents combining
disc^etionally to the same effect; the one acting out of Duty, and the other
out of Compassion, and both requiring mutual excitements, and mutual
endeavors: Humane Diligence engages Grace; because it is not consistent with
the Laws of Mercy, that they who are sincere, should miscarry for want of
assistance; and Grace engages diligence, because it is not consistent with the
Laws of Virtue, that they who are slothful should either succeed or be
assisted. I shall exemplify the Doctrine in the Instance of the Text. Where we
are informed that Timothy at his Consecration received a Gift or Effusion from
the Holy Ghost; and this Effusion our Apostle distributes (in the following
Verse,) into three particular Graces, all necessary for the discharge of the
Episcopal Office, ( viz.) Might, Love, and a sound mind: We may conceive his
Soul was at that time touched with some supernatural Motion, that carried it
forth in a strong ardor after these Episcopal Graces, and likewise that it was
then endowed with such a Virtual power, as if stirred up, should render him
eminent in the Practice of them: And now I will show what Timothy was
particularly obliged to do in order to the stirring up of this His Gift;
beginning with the first Branch of the Effusion, Might.

By Might here is meant no other than Religious fortitude and Courage to do our
Duty; the First Requisite of a Good Governor: Whence it is that we hardly meet
with any Commissionated by God for any special service, but that he has this
given him in principal charge, To be strong. To be Courageous, Josh. 1. 7. and
2 Chronicles. 18. 10.
Our Apostle-here opposes it to Fear or Pusillanimity, that most Treacherous of
all Vices; entangling Men into such necessities of sinning, that the Fearful
are therefore set by St. John in the head of all those who have their part in
the Fiery Lake. Rev. 21. 8.
And now if Timothy will stir up this Spirit of Courage, he must (in the first
place,) bethink himself well of his Undertaking; He must imagine himself a
Champion of War, entered into the Lists, as David heretofore into the Valley of
Elah, where he must either Conquer or Die, not a single Man, but an Army: Both
the Israelites and Philistines surveying him in the mean time, with different
Hopes and Censures, whereof the most (as Envy will always have it) are against
Him; Some blame his Youth, some his Confidence, some his want of Arms, and some
(like Goliath) curse him by their Gods: But as these casual forms of popular
breath cannot in themselves affect his Success, so neither must he suffer them
to affect his Thoughts; he must wisely Keep them beneath his concern, while he
composes his behavior to the approbation of God, and rests in his Providence,
whom he considers with awful joy not to be a bare Spectator of what he does;
but a helper and Deliverer, a Horn of Salvation and a Refuge; as that Royal
Champion speaks him from experience in his own affairs. The next step is to
bring his Courage into action; He must set himself to work, to check the Range
of Satan in the World; to awe Men out of ill manners; to oppose Vice Vigorously
and Impartially, without any glozing or fear of the Great, without any
Unthankful Indulgence to Benefactor or Friend: He must awe it out of
Countenance, and beat it off the Stage, with his Looks, Intimations,
Discourses, Interests, Monitions, and Rebukes; and if it bear up head against
all these, He must then separate the Leaper from the Camp, and turn the Sacred
Key against the Refractory Sinner. And he that on this manner is strong, God
shall strengthen his heart: Psalm. 27.14.
As the Psalmist has expressed the Doctrine of this point.

Arist. ad Nicom. l. 3. cap. 8.
But the Philosopher in his Ethics, treating of Courage, has observed, That
Anger, though it be very like Courage, and incites Men to vigor in
undertakings, yet it is a pure Depravation of Courage, and makes it lose both
its Honesty and its Ends; And for this reason it is that the Courage which is
inspired from God is never mixed with Anger, it is always accompanied and
tempered with Love; which is therefore the second Branch of the Episcopal
Effusion. Advices, when without Love, seem only Reproaches, and Rebukes,
Peevishness, and Censures, Tyranny; Like vitiated Ointments they have fumed out
all their healing qualities; and retain those only that fret and exasperate.
And hence it has come to pass in the Church, that when that most awful Judgment
of Excommunication came to be executed in such manner and Circumstances, as
that a great mixture of human Passions appeared in the executing of it; The
Censure lost its awe, and never reached the Consciences of Men; and all the
Terror implored from the Secular Arm, could never make it otherwise, than more
contemptible: Whereas when a sincere Godly Love, and a Paternal Commiseration
appears at the head of such a Censure, it cannot but make the Correction sink
deep into the Conscience, and make Men believe it to be (as it is) a Delivery
unto Satan. And if Timothy will stir up this Divine Gift of Love, he must daily
contemplate the value of all those for whom Christ died; He must espouse them
into the Intimacy of his bosom, his Care, his Affability, his Provision, his
Prayers; Considering with himself what a mighty advantage he has from the
height of his place to recommend and endear his Love; For Love in an Inferior
station may possibly look more mercenary, and so affect less; but Love
condescending from such a height of place, wins and captivates, and makes a Man
look like God, both in Temper and Beneficence; Like God (I say) whose most
amiable and endearing Character to the Sons of Men is this, That He is a Lover
of Souls: Wisd. 11. 26.
And he that thus Loves, Love shall be perfected in him, 1 Ioh. 4.12.
As St. John has expressed the Doctrine of this point.

And yet Courage and Love are but like the Inferior Faculties, the (...),
Psalm. 51.12.
The Principal Spirit is still wanting, and follows in the third Branch of this
Holy Effusion, a sound Mind. Apud septueg. and Vulga.
If we consider the Native sense of the word (...), and how the Greek Authors
do use it to signify, Actively, such a Castigation as does naturally produce a
sound mind, rather than the effect it self produced; it will seem that the
sense of it in this place may be not unhappily expressed by The Discipline of
Wisdom; That Blessing which the Son of Sirach prays for ( Cap. 23. 2.) Where he
cry's, who will set the Discipline of Wisdom over my Heart? That Discipline
that does both castigate and reform, both Purge and Illuminate, both make Good
and make Wise at the same Act: For it clears the Understanding by dispelling
all Mists of the lower Appetite; It renders the mind sound and discreet by
possessing it with awful sentiments of God, and of Duty and of a Future
Account; and it makes a Man fit to Govern in the Church, because it makes him
Free and unbyast by the World: These are the fruits of the Wisdom from above;
and if Timothy will stir up this part of his Gift, He must be Diligent and
Exemplary; he must take care that the Light of his Life, Matt. 5. 13, 14. and
Col 4. 5.
and the Salt, the Grace of his Lips do render his Authority venerable, and
such as cannot easily be despised: He must be Watchful, Sagacious and Prudent;
While his Hands are upon the Helm, his Eyes must be upon the Needle and the
Chart; He must observe the Pointings of Providence, the Opportunities of
Action, the Seasons of Counsel, the differences of Place, the Varieties of
Temper, and the accommodations of Address, that he may ever be gaining some: 1
Cor. 9. 22.
And in the mean time he must keep his Soul steady by the frequent Recourse of
this Thought, That all is Foolishness but the Doing of our Duty. And he that
takes care thus to insist in the Offices of Wisdom, God will make him
consummately wise; For, the Eyes of them that see shall not be dimm; as the
Prophet Isaiah has expressed the Doctrine of this Point.

And now (O Timothy) see, here are the Arts of thy Government; Continue in
These, and thou need no other Policy; God will take all the other care that
is necessary for the establishment of his own Church. Do thou stir up the Gift
of God that is in Thee; Isa. 6. 6.
Do thou quicken and Divine Coal that Touches thee, and thy Coal shall blaze
into a Flame, and thy Flame shall be enobled into a Star, Dan. 12. 3.
a vast Orb of Glory, such as shall Crown the heads of all those happy Men, who
by their Conduct and Example, Turn many unto Righteousness.

FINIS.

