The WAY To PEACE AMONGST All Protestants: Being A LETTER Of RECONCILIATION
Sent by Bp. Ridley to Bp. Hooper. With some Observations upon it.

Licensed, July the 14 1688.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, 1688.

Books lately Printed for Rich. Baldwin.
PVrgatory proved by Miracles: Collected out of Roman Catholic Authors. With
some remarkable Histories relating to British, English, and Irish Saints. With
a Preface concerning the Miracles. 6 d.

The Trial of Philip Stansfield, Son to Sir James Stansfield of New-Milns, for
the murder of his Father, and other Crimes Libelled against him, Feb. 7. 1688.
1 s.

The Revolter; A Tragi-Comedy: Acted between the Hind and Panther, and Religio
Laici, etc. 6 d.

An Historical Relation of several Great and Learned Romanists who did embrace
the Protestant Religion, with the Reasons of their Change, delivered in their
own Words, Collected chiefly from the most Eminent Historians of the Roman
Persuasion: to which is added, a Catalogue of several Great Persons of the
Roman Catholic Religion who has all along oppos'ed the Tenants of the Church
of Rome. 6 d.

A Seasonable Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness and Mischiefs of
Impositions in Matters of Religion, Recommended to Serious Consideration. By
Andrew Marvel Esquire late Member of Parliament. 6 d.

Reflections upon the New Test, and the Reply thereto with a Letter of Sir
Francis Walsingham's, concerning the Penal Laws made in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. 3 d.

A Letter of Advice to a Young Lady, being Motives and Directions to establish
her in the Protestant Religion: Written by a Person of Honor, and made public
for the use of that Sex. 3 d.

A Seasonable Collection of Plain Texts of Scripture (in words at length,
against several Points in the Romish Religion) for the Use of English
Protestants: 2 d.

(...) (...) they may be able to do good to many. Farewell in the Lord my most
dear Brother, and if there be any more in Prison with you for Christ's cause, I
beseech you, as you may, salute them in my Name. To whose Prayers I do most
humbly and heartily commend my self and my fellow Prisoners and Captives in the
Lord, And yet once again and for ever in Christ my most Dear Brother farewell.

N. Ridley.

Some Observations upon the foregoing Letter.
There cannot be a more Blessed Work than to Reconcile Protestants with
Protestants. And a man would think it should be one of the Easiest, because we
are able to say to them as Moses did to the two contending Israelites, Sirs, Ye
are Brethren, why do ye wrong one to another? The meekest Man in all the Earth
took another course with the Egyptian; but as for Brethren, he endeavored all
he could to set them at one again. This is the only Design of this Paper in
laying before you the Example of two Protestant Bishops, who wisely found out
the way to put an happy period to their unhappy Differences: Which are the very
same as have been since taken up by Protestants again, after those two Good Men
had laid them down. In the struglings of Ridley and Hooper there were two
Nations struggling in the Womb, the two great Parties of the Conformists and
Nonconformists: For those two Persons differed about the self-same matters as
we do now; the established Ceremonies, the dress of Religion, certain
By-matters and circumstances of Religion, which Hooper the Nonconformist could
not comply with, And Ridley the Conformist, because they were according to Law,
insisted upon and would not abate. So that in their old Differences, we find
exactly our present distemper: And therefore in their Cure, why should we not
also find our own Remedy? It is an Approved remedy; it cured men who thought
one another Superstitious and Imposing on one side, and stubborn and
intolerably willful on the other side, And yet they came afterward to Believe
one another to be, as they Really were, Upright Men on both sides. We have the
Receipt in these few, but very weighty words. But now my Dear Brother,
forasmuch as I understand by your Works, which I have but superficially seen,
That we thoroughly agree and wholly consent together in those things which are
the Grounds and substantial Points of our Religion, against the which the World
so furiously rages in these our days, Howsoever in time past in certain
By-matters and Circumstances of Religion, your Wisdom and my Simplicity, I
grant, has a little jarred, each of us following the abundance of his own
Sense and Judgment: Now I say, b^ you assured, that even with my whole heart
(God is my witness) in the Bowels of Christ, I Love you in the Truth, and for
the Truths-sake, which abides in us, and as I am persuaded, shall by the grace
of God, abide in us evermore.

1. The first Consideration which arises from these words, is this, That the
Agreement there is amongst Protestants in the main matters of Religion, should
drown and extinguish all lesser Differences. The Substance of Religion which we
all hold ought in reason to have more power to Unite us, than all the
By-matters and Circumstances in the world to Divide us. We have all but one
Rule of Faith and Life, one Standard of Religious Worship and Practice, which
is one and the same English Bible; And why should we not then All be of One
Heart and One Soul? We all believe that there is one God, in opposition to
Polytheism. We believe that this God is to be worshipped in Spirit and in
Truth, in contradiction to Idolatry; without absurdly changing the Glory of the
Incorruptible God into the similitude of a Corruptible Man, or worshipping our
Maker in form of Bread. We all believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
whose Names we are Baptized. We are all taught of God to Hope for everlasting
Happiness through the merits of our only Redeemer, Mediator, and Advocate
Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the Author of eternal Salvation to all those
that Obey him. We are all assured by many Infallible proofs, that he is gone to
Heaven, to prepare a place for all his true Disciples and Followers; And that
the Heavens must contain him till the r^stitution of all things: And that
therefore He is not in any Tabernacles or Boxes here below. We all know
assuredly, That in every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness,
is accepted of him; And that the Church of God is not now limited or confined
to the Jewish, or to any other Nation, but is truly Catholic and Universal.

We all believe the two future states of Heaven and Hell, for the Just and for
the Unjust; And neither our Books nor we know of any other, nor indeed of any
other sorts of Men; Nor do any of us believe one word concerning the
Profitableness of singing for a Soul. In a word, since we are so Unanimous in
these and many other the most important Truths, shall we fall out about
Ceremonies, about Postures and Gestures, about the Hatt and the Knee, about
dignifiing and distinguishing Titles, about Garbs or Garments, about Modes and
Fashions, and things which are very far from the Heart, and many removes from
the Essence of Religion; nay things which are Shadows and mere Nothings when
compared with the Substantial matters, wherein we are Agreed? Nay further, I am
bold to say we are all Agreed in these inferior Matters of Difference, and do
not know it: For instance, we are all agreed, That kneeling at the Sacrament is
no part of our Savior's Institution; That kneeling at the most solemn Prayer
that can be, is a fitting posture; That kneeling to the Sacrament in imitation
of or compliance with the Popish worship of the Host, is absolutely Unlawful:
And yet we squabble, and will not hear one another out, nor understand one
another Meanings; but scuffle in the Dark, when we are all Friends, and all of
a side. In short, all the distance that is betwixt English Protestants, is
occasioned by little Mistakes and misapprehensions about very little matters,
and still they are so much of one mind even as to the matters in Difference,
that if the Conformists thought the Ceremonies Popish, they would immediately
turn Nonconformists; and if the Nonconformists did not app^ehend them to be
Popish, they would never have scrupled them. So that they both of them plainly
mean the same thing.

Hooper scrupled the Ceremonies under the notion of Popish Ceremonies, and
under the same notion Ridley would have hated and rejected them. Ridley and the
other Bishops said in defense of these Ceremonies, That they were small
matters, and that the Fault was in the Abuse of the things and not in the
things themselves, and that Hooper ought not to be so stubborn in so light a
matter, and that his Willfulness therein was not to be suffered. And would not
Hooper himself have passed the same Censure upon his own Refusal, if he had had
just the same thoughts and opinion of the Ceremonies? But he thought, that a
thing in it self indiffe^ent, but having been abused to Superstitious purposes,
could never after be looked upon as indiff^rent and innocent; but it must of
necessity pass under that Notion which common and corrupt Usage had put upon
it, and that it was spoiled and had utterly lost its former Indifferency. For
which reason these Rites and Ceremonies were offensive to his Conscience, as
the King's Grant of Dispensation to him, by the Advice of the Privy Council,
expresses it; But Cranmer and Ridley and the other Bishops were so far
determined by the Laws, that the King's Dispensation, granted to Hooper upon
that occasion, did not take place. Nor indeed was it in their power to admit of
it. For being these Ceremonies were Enacted by Law, and fastened to the
Freehold, and made part of the Establishment by the Universal Consent of the
Nation, nothing but the same Consent could take them away again.

Now therefore the nicety of the Difference betwixt them lay in this, whether
Ceremonies which were once indifferent and had been abused, might be so purged
and freed from those Abuses, as to become indifferent and fit to be used again.
And this is a matter so hard to be decided, that it must be weighed in Gold
Scales, where the very least moment, or even a Man's breath on the one side or
the other, is sufficient to incline the balance. For it is with indifferent
Ceremonies and Usages, as it is with Words that are indifferent. The word
Ballad was once an innocent and inoffensive word, and signified as the word
Song now does; but the word has been abused and applied to the meanest and most
rascally sort of Poetry, and has for a long time been taken in the worser
sense. Suppose therefore that some Men desirous to speak as their Forefathers
did, who called the Book of Canticles the Ballad of Ballads, as reverently as
we now call it the Song of Songs, should say, That if Authority require that
this word be used in its first and best sense, why then we may very lawfully
and reverently use it in that sense again: Because though the word has been
abused and ill applied, yet the Fault is in the abuse of the word, and not in
the word it self. And further, that no man ought to refuse to read that Book
upon this trifling account, because he dislikes the Title of it: Especially
when a public Law has declared, That the self-same is meant by this Title, as
if the Dissenter had had the wording of it himself to his own Mind, and had
called it the Hymn of Hymns. This is the substance of what Cranmer and Ridley
said.

On the other hand, Hooper's Opinion in this supposed Case was, That though our
Forefathers had used that word very Religiously and Reverently, yet it had
since been so corrupted and abused, and had contracted so profane a
Signification, as no Authority could wholly deface, nor could so inoffensively
resto^e the word to be used in Religious Matters any more, but that Sober Men
would always have a Prejudice against it. This was Hooper's very sense. He
looked upon the Reformed Ceremonies as still retaining a Popish Tang. But tho a
Law could not cure his Prejudices, yet that, and the higher Considerations of
doing Service in the Church of God, did quite overruled them: And he wisely
complied with those Ceremonies, which if he had been left to his Choice he
would rather have forborne.

Obj. But now it may here be objected and said, That when the Clergy of the
Church of England saw that good Men and great Men, and the glorious Martyrs of
Jesus Christ, such as Hooper was, were offended with these Ceremonies, they
should have used their utmost endeavors to have gotten them discharged by Law
as they were imposed by Law, and not have left them to remain as a standing
offense, and a perpetual Stumbling Block, to all others of Hooper's mind.

Answ. This I confess would be an Objection very much to the Prejudice of the
Church of England, could it not be truly said, that the Clergy did heartily
endeavor to procure this ease to scrupulous Consciences, though without
success. For all the eminent Bishops of England in Queen Elizabeth's time,
Sandys, Jewel, Horn, Grindall, etc. nay Dr. Cox himself Bishop of Ely, who was
the unhappy occasion of all the Troubles at Franckfort, did all of them labor
in this point, and could not prevail with the Queen to consent to it: As
appears by a heap of their Letters, written to Bullinger at Zurick, which is
still extant. Which being the Remains of those great Men, and so noble a
Monument of the Church of England's Moderation, is very well worth the going
thither to see it. But to conclude, make your best and your worst of
Ceremonies, they are in Ridle^'s words, but Circumstances and By-matters; they
are of as little concern to Religion as those Meats which occasioned
differences in the Apostles times; and they will not bear the Charges of
falling out about them, either on the one side or on the other.

2. Especially in the second place, when Protestants have somewhat else to do:
Or as Ridley's words are, When the World so furiously rages against the
Grounds and substantial points of our Religion, in these our days. Is it a time
for us to trouble our heads with trivial matters, when the sum and substance of
our Religion is in danger, and lies at stake? For have we not lately seen the
Papists laying the Axe to the root of the Tree, and the weekly Representer in
particular for several Weeks successively Ridiculing and making Sport with our
Bible, which is the whole Religion of Protestants? Does he not say that we have
as many Bibles as Heads, that is to say, That the Bible it self, without their
Infallible Blind Guides to interpret it, is wholly Useless to us, and every Man
may as well frame a several Religion of his own Head, without any Bible at all?
Truly if it be so Useless and so Mischievous a Book as that Author has
Represented it, it is not enough to put a stop to the Printing of it, but it
ought also to be Prohibited. Do they not daily make Scandalous attempts and
efforts against the Trinity of Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
whose Names we are Baptized; only because we will not also believe in a Breaden
God Almighty? In a word, Do they not endeavor to wrest all Scripture out of
our Hands, because we will not receive their false and forged Traditions with
the same Reverenc^? Our present Business therefore is to lay a dead hold upon
our Bibles, and to maintain the Grounds and Substantial Points of our Religion,
and to suffer Circumstances and By-matters to take their Chance. Nay, we ought
to be in a readiness to Compound for our Bibles, and rather to throw all
Ceremonies overboard with our own Hands, than to endanger the Protestant
Religion which is infinitely more Valuable. And though I know not of any one
Ceremony enjoined in the Church of England, which is not both Lawful and
Primitive, and of an elder date than Popery; yet because the Slovenly Papists
have spit in them, and by corrupting and abusing them have endeavored to make
them their Own, I hope the Wisdom of the Nation may hereafter suffer them to
be so; Especially since all wise Protestants know very well, that we can Live
without them. And we ought the rather to be of this mind, because

3. In the third place, we see to what Terms of Abatement and Accommodation
that Blessed Martyr Ridley has descended in these following words. Howsoever in
time past in certain By-matters and circumstances of Religion your Wisdom and
my Simplicity I grant has a little jarred, each of us following the abundance
of his own Sense and Judgment. Ridley had sincerely followed his own great
Judgment in this Dispute; but because that Judgment had jarred with the Sense
of as Hearty a Protestant as himself, therefore you see how he undervalues and
disparages it. We take it for granted that Hooper was in the wrong and Ridley
was in the right, especially because a Law had interposed in that behalf; And
yet here it seems, that the two Contending Parties were Hooper's Wisdom and
Ridley's Simplicity. A little of these Good Men's inward humility, self-denial,
and mutual condescension would heal our Breaches and compose our Differences
much better, than the most strict outward Uniformity could. For as the
Levelling project, to make all Men's Estates Equal, was only a Project for a
Day, for on the Morrow all their Estates would have been Unequal again; Whereas
Contentment is that standing Leveller, which makes every man always as rich as
another: In like manner a perfect Uniformity in these Circumstances and
By-matters, if it were possible to be attained, would not last long; because,
as our Church in the Preface to the Common Prayer has wisely observed, Rites
and Ceremonies are in their own nature Alterable and Changeable according to
the variety of Times and Occasions, whereby they are Expedient at one time and
Inexpedient at another, for which reason even the same Persons, and those the
most Constant and the farthest from newfangledness, cannot be always alike
satisfied with them, much more they will be sure to be Liked and Disliked by
several Persons according to their several apprehensions, who must needs differ
about them; But on the other hand, a mutual forbearance, allowance, and
condescension in these By-matters, would supply the place of a perfect
Uniformity to the worlds end.

I must confess, that Ridley says these Diminishing things of himself in the
absence of the Law, and after those Statutes which enacted these Ceremonies
were Repealed, and swallowed up by Popery: For which cause it cannot be
Expected, That the Church of England-Clergy should make such Condescensions at
this time as Ridley did, and acknowledge their Simplicity in adhering to the
Laws. For Laws while they are in Being have as much Reverence due to them, as
is owing to the wisdom of the whole Community by which they were made, and
nothing else but our Preingagements to God himself can excuse us from the
observance of them: And therefore it cannot be required by the Dissenters, in
order to that good Understanding, which I here endeavor and humbly beg there
may be amongst Protestants, that we should arraign Five and twenty Statute Laws
at once under the Infamous Name of Draconica; Especially when by one of the
Draconica, the whole Church of England, and under the Covert of the Church of
England all the Dissenters in England, hold their Bibles^ No; Every wise and
considerate Protestant, though he be not a Nonconformist, would rather lie
under all the penalties of Nonconformity, than go about to weaken or undermine
the Authority of the Laws which secure to all Protestants their Lives, and a
much greater thing than their Lives, I mean the Bible, which I say again is the
whole Religion of all Protestants. As for By-matters, they may very well be
left where the Law for Ages Immemorial has lodged all the Concerns of the
English Church, which is in a Lawful English Parliament; whose necessary Power
in that behalf appears by the very Writ, both of their Summons, and of their
due Election: And in the mean time, notwithstanding our different apprehensions
about them, let us love one another. And, which brings me to the next point,

4ly. Let us mutually express our selves in the following words of the Blessed
Martyr. Now I say be you assured, that even with my whole heart, God is my
Witness, in the bowels of Jesus Christ I love you in the Truth, and for the
Truth's-sake which abides in us, and as I am persuaded shall by the Grace of
God abide in us for evermore. Men that love the Truth for God's sake will love
other Men for the Truth's sake which they all Profess. And I am satisfied that
this was the reason which moved Hooper to seek first to Ridley, and to prevent
him with two kind Letters, before his present Answer was written. For when
Hooper saw Ridley stand up as a Champion for the Protestant Religion, (whom
perhaps formerly in their unhappy Differences he mistook to be Popishly
affected, or not far enough removed from Popery, and too zealous for the rags
of Rome) Then he writes, Then he sends to him, Then he consults him as an
Oracle. And I have often thought, That it must needs produce the same effect in
all the Sincere and Hearty Protestants amongst the Dissenters at this time,
when they see the Clergy of the Church of England, of whom they have had
jealous thoughts lest they were too much Popishly inclined, now approving
themselves the Defenders and Champions of the Protestant Cause: Which they have
Maintained with that clearness and strength, that I doubt not but the downfall
of Rome will hereafter be dated from the time of their writing. Blessed be God,
(must the Dissenters needs say,) That we are so happily Disappointed, and that
the Clergy are not the Men we took them to be, but as Hearty Protestants as our
selves; And from this day forward we will own, and love them as such.

The Priests and Jesuits and their Assistants have not indeed been wanting to
revive and heighten the Dissenters old Jealousies in this kind, by several late
Pamphlets, pretending a wonderful Agreement betwixt the Church of England and
the Church of Rome, And that New Popery, as they are pleased to call it, is as
bad as the Old, Or the Daughter as bad as the Mother; But this is
Transubstantiation-work and goes on but heavily, for Men will not be outfaced
out of their Senses. And therefore they have almost dropped the Cry of Popery, to
set up a louder one of Persecution, and to lay all the Miseries which the
Nonconformists have suffered to our Charge. But if any body take my Right Hand
and therewith bruise and batter my Left, is my Right Hand therefore become a
Persecutor? Is it not really Persecuted as well as the other? And has it not a
fellow feeling and a share of the Misery? And suppose my Left Hand were so
overruled and managed against the Right, would it not be the same thing? And
would not the Design be the same; to mischief, and maim, and disable both
Hands? And after all, would it not be the Addition of a Scorn to this Misery,
to accuse or blame either of my Hands in this Case for hurting its fellow? To
conclude, There is a Charm in the very naming of Hooper and Ridley to reconcile
Nonconformists and Conformists together; for their Differences were alike,
their Misunderstandings of one another were alike, And the Papists in Queen
Mary's time loved those two Protestants and used them just alike. For they were
both of them so long and miserably tormented in the Flames, that they were
forced to mingle with their Prayers to God these doleful outcries to the
People. For God's love (good People) let me have more Fire, says Hooper. For
Christ's sake let the Fire come unto me, says Ridley Our Enemies made no
difference betwixt those that are for Ceremonies and those that are not; And
why should we? Let us rather Bless God for the concurring Testimony which these
Good Men, though of different persuasions in By-matters, have both given to the
Protestant Religion; and let us exceedingly value and prize the free Use of our
Bibles, which was the Purchase of theirs and of the other Martyrs Blood:
According to what Latimer said when he and Ridley were both of them at the
Stake; Be of good Comfort Master Ridley, and play the Man: We shall this day
light such a Candle by God's grace in England, as (I trust) shall Never be put
out. And we ought to Unite and hold close together, that we may shield and
cover this Light from the open mouths and impetuous blasts of those, who seek
to Extinguish it, and to leave us and our Posterity in the old Egyptian
Darkness.

5. For this is the End and the very Use and Advantage we are to make of our
Reconciliation, and of our mutual love and Agreement, as we see by the
following words of this Blessed Martyr. And because the World (as I perceive
Brother) cease not to play his pageant, and busily conspireth against Christ
our Savior with all possible force and power, Exalting high things against the
knowledge of God: Let us join Hands together in Christ, and if we cannot
Overthrow, yet to our Power as much as in us lies let us shake those high
Altitudes, not with Carnal but with Spiritual weapons. The World Conspires, as
Bishop Ridley's word is, against Christ our Savior; Regulars and Seculars,
Jesuits and Dominicans, Pope's-men, Council-men and Blackloists, and the rest
of that Colluvies and Gallimawfrey of Sects of which the Church of Rome is made
up, do lay aside all the Differences of their several Factions, and are
Confederate against God's true Religion: And though none of them are agreed in
other things, yet they are all for Extirpating the pestilent Northern Heresy,
and they all march steadily to the same end. And shall not we all then Unite in
our utmost endeavors to Support that true Faith, which they call Heresy?
Shall we not be as ready to give one another the right hand of Fellowship, and
to join Hands together in Christ and for him, when we see how Unanimou^ They
are in banding together against him? This is the common Concern of us all. For
every Man has a Soul to be saved, one as well as another; Every Man has an
equal share in the Bible; Every Man's stake is the same, and they have all a
like Interest in their Religion; And therefore all the Protestants of England
ought to be as one Man in the Maintenance and Support of their Religion: And
every single Man in his several capacity, and according to his power, ought to
be as zealous for it, as if He alone were to support it; And he should say to
our Savior, and hold to that saying, Though all men forsake thee, yet will no^
I. By this means under God we shall preserve our Religion, and transmit it to
our Posterity at a far cheaper rate, than Ridley and Hooper and the rest of the
Blessed Martyrs conveyed it down to us. By this means we shall disengage our
selves from all needless Disputes about Meats and Drinks and such like things,
in which the Kingdom of God does not consist, and from those Skirmishings which
have detained us too much upon the Frontiers of Religion, without cultivating
and reaping the Fruits of the Holy Land, in that measure as we ought ^^ have
done. By this means our private A^^^ mosities and groundless Quarrels will
cea^^ when we all engage in the Lord's Quar^^^ as Bishop Ridley calls in it
this Letter. I^ word, by this means we shall be freed from Divisions, and those
unhappy Diversio^^ which have been purposely given us, to hi^^der us from
exercising the power of God^^^ness; both in reforming our own Liv^^ and in
putting a stop to that deluge of I^^piety, which has been let into the Nation
in order to make way for Popery: And t^ shall have an opportunity to employ o^
United Endeavors in promoting the G^^spel, to the high Honor of God, and t^
the Edifying of his Church, and to the Sa^^vation of our Souls.

As for the Contents of the latter part (...) this Letter, they are of so nice
and difficu^^ Application, that a Man may be soon thoug^^ to say either too
much or too little of the^ for which reason I shall wholly forbear, a^^ leave
them to the Reader as they are, Th^^ he may make his own Observations.

FINIS.

