THe Reader, comparing Cabinet with Cabinet, the Kings with the Lords Digby's,
will easily observe how the unnatural Enemies to this their Native Country
(imitating their General, The grand Enemy to mankind) have gone about seeking
how they may devour it, by their restless Endeavors to bring in Foreign Ayds
from Holland, Curland, Denmark, Portugal, Ireland, France, and from Rome it
self, of Shipping, Arms, Ammunition, Men, Moneys, Horse and Foot, and that in
no small proportions; 4000. Foot and 1000. Horse expected from France, 10000.
Men from Ireland, and 10000. more from Lorrain; A strange Conjuncture, to
concur in the ends pretended! The King and Pope to defend the Protestant
Religion, Denmark and Lorrain to maintain Laws and Lioerties, Bloody Rebels in
Ireland to uphold the Privileges of Parliament in England: But blessed be God,
who has discovered the Counsels of the Enemy, and thereby has in a great part
opened the eyes, and undeceived not only multitudes of their principal
Adherents at home; but also Foreign Princes and States abroad, and has withal
defeated their Forces and Expectations both abroad and at home. This is Gods
work, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Soli Deo Gloria.
The Lord George Digby's CABINET And Dr GOFF'S Negotiations; Together with His
Majesty's, the Queens, and the Lord JERMIN's, and other LETTERS:

Taken at the Battle at Sherborn in Yorkshire about the 15th of October last.

ALSO OBSERVATIONS upon the said Letters.

ORdered by the COMMONS assembled in Parliament, that The Letters taken at
Sherborn in Yorkshire, with Observations thereupon, be forthwith printed and
published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
dwelling in Fleetstreet at the sign of the Golden Dragon. March: 6. 1646.

AN INTRODVCTION: OR OBSERVATIONS concerning the Letters taken at Sherborn in
Yorkshire, about the 15th of October, 1645.
War is carried on as well by Policy as by Power, by Councels as by Forces;
and therefore the goodness of God appears as well when he discloses the
Councels, as when he discomfits the Forces of an Enemy; when both mercies are
obta^ned, both must be acknowledged; for a thankful heart, with external
exaltations of joy (the issues of it) are Gods due, and man's debt for both. The
great and most memorable Victory at Nazeby, was an instance of both on Gods
part, and the setting then apart a Solemn day of Thanksgiving, with the
publishing the Kings Cabinet Letters then taken (the more to manifest Gods
mercy) were the endeavored returns of a thankful heart on the Parliaments
part. God has again used the same method in his mercies at the Battle near
Sherborn in Yorkshire, defeating the Forces, and delivering up to the
Parliament the Cabinet and Councels of the Lord Digby, principal Secretary to
the King, and a pestilent Traitor to the Kingdom: When God repeats over the
same method in his mercies, he calls (as it were) for the same method in
thankfulness; in answer to which call, a day was devoted for a public
Thanksgiving, and an Order made not long after for publishing the principal
Letters and Papers; Orders are sooner made then executed; a throng of
intervening occasions with some unhappy neglects retarded that till now; but
now at last they appear many of them, with an imperfect sense, especially of
those written with Ciphers; and more especially these of D. Goffs Negotiation;
the cyphered Letters were uncyphered when taken, all except two, and the
ciphers and uncypherings blotted out in many places, why? Digby (who in all
likelihood did it) can best tell; others may guess it to be done, that all the
mystery of iniquity might not be known to all, all are not equally his
Confidents. Where there were Duplicates, use is made of the most perfect copy.
The Reader need no warning to observe in what a forlorn condition they were in
before Sherborn fight (even themselves being Judges) its too too often repeated
over to escape time; for the present, their drooping hopes were (for so in
sense they express it) to shelter themselves under the Mantle of the
approaching Winter (a season not suitable to Action) and thereby faintly
expecting a reprival till the next Spring, and then to be piec'd up again by
Foreign Forces; but God the God of all seasons and of all successes, has given
the Parliament Forces Summer successes even in this last Winter season, and
therein befooled their hopes, as almost all the considerable Encounters since
Sherborn fight do aver: As also the late great Victory in Wales near Cardiff;
and each Garrison and Town taken in since by the Parliament Forces bears
witness, as Lankford Garrison, Tiverton, Carmarthen, Monmouth, Shelford,
Worton, Bolton, Beeston-Castle, Hereford, Skipton-Castle, Dartmouth,
Belvoir-Castle, Chester, and Corf-Castle, Launceston, Ashby-de-la-Zouch,
Cherk-Castle, and St. Maws, most of these of great importance, during which
time the Enemy has taken none, or none worth the naming. Besides these, the
Parliament Army has reduced many other Forts in the West. And the 16 of
February last, God (the God of Hosts) gave a fresh Victory at Torrington in the
County of Devon to the Parliament Army under the Command of their General Sir
Tho: Fairfax; the gallantry and unwearied Activity, orderly Discipline,
fidelity and success of which Army, puts this Age to their admiration, and may
put the next past their belief. By this great success at Torrington, and
others of later date, the tottering Remnant of their fugitive Army was cooped
up into Cornwall (a Corner of the Kingdom) and into a Corner of that Corner; and
is since, by Gods goodness, totally reduced, and with it, the very hearts of
the Country too, who now own the Parliament Forces as their Friends, and
pursue the others as Enemies. Besides, the Gallant service of Colonel Morgan at
Stow in the Would in Glocestershire, in totally Routing of the Army Sir Jacob
Ashley gathered up in Wales to join with Oxford Forces, to make a new Army
against the Parliament; where Sir Jacob and most of his Officers in Commission,
and One thousand six hundred Horse and Foot were taken Prisoners, with Two
thousand Arms, and all their Bag and Baggage.

They who confessed their desperate condition even before the Victory near
Sherborn, what may be thought of them now, after all these subsequent Successes
and Victories? Certainly, God has filled up even to the brim their cup of
Trembling. What Is then their next work? They Will tell you, it is to implore
Foreign Ayds, and to let in Foreign Forces into the Kingdom; and of what
destructive consequence that is, let Him tell whom they hold themselves most
bound to believe, even the King Himself, for Habemus confitentem reum. He in
His Printed Declaration Dated at Newark 9 of March, 1641. speaking to the
Parliament, says, Whatsoever You are advertised from Rome, Venice, Paris, of
the Popes Nuncio solieiting France, Spain, etc. for Foreign Ayds, We are
confident no sober honest man in Our Kingdom (so He calls it, but Adverte Rem
publicam non esse tuam sed se Reipublicae) Seneca.
can believe that We are so desperate or so senseless to entertain such
Designs, as would not only bury this Our Kingdom (Our Kingdom again) in sudden
Destruction and Ruin, but Our Name and Posterity in perpetual scorn and
infamy. If it should be now asked, What Is became of Our Kingdom, Our Name, Our
Posterity? Let the Kings foregoing words, and these following Letters, with
those taken at Nazeby make Answer; for strong Endeavors were and are yet on
foot, not only for raising Foreign Force for England, but whole Foreign
States and Kingdoms are pressed upon to Declare, and to make an Offensive and
Defensive War against the Parliament; and not only those of the same Religion
(to it with the Parliament) but the very Duke of Lorrain himself is Treated
with to come over and Conduct his Army in Person, consisting of Ten thousand
men: And where can a more desperate and Iesuited Prince, or a more declared
Enemy to Protestants be found out? France is also Courted, though it is hoped
without success; only there is a clandestine Collection of Moneys going on
amongst the rabble of their Popish Clergy to supply the King withal; and to
make up the Mess, the Popish Irish Rebels, with their Commander in chief, the
very Romish Antichrist himself is solicited and sought into. And now let the
World judge, what precious Defenders of the Faith, the great Defender of the
Faith has found out, and what Faith is likely to be Defended. No more needs to
be said, let the Letters speak out the rest.

Her Majesty's Letter to George Lord Digby, PARIS, April 7. 1645.
MOnsieur Digby,
Though I received no Letters from you by Pooley, I will not forbear to write
to you, though it were but to reproach you, and to tell you, that I fear that
you are as inconstant to your friends, as men are to their Mistrisses; I do not
speak of you; you know, that I am too well acquainted with you. For my part, I
have only this fault, to be a good Friend, and I believe you know it, therefore
it will not be necessary to assure you thereof. I have seen the Dispatch that
you sent to Iermin concerning Hertogen; I believe that you will rest satisfied,
for I have the same opinion of him that you have, and many of those things that
he has written are lies, and within few days you shall hear that I have
talked with him according to his desert; which I am resolved to do for some
reasons that Iermin will write to you in Cipher, You think it strange that
Wilmot is so well entertained here, which is done according to the Orders which
I have under the Kings hand and yours: It is true, his good carriage here has
merited this good entertainment. Henry Percy and he are not so good friends as
We thought; We have discovered it in some occasions, where there can be no
dissembling. Concerning The: Eliot^ he has behaved himself well here, and has
to earnestly importuned me for his return, that having no Order from the King
to tell him that he should stay, I could not keep him longer here. For my part,
I believe that he is very trusty, I have charged him to impart unto you what I
told him; therefore I shall not write any more, my hand being more lame then
ever, and I more.

Your very good Friend, HENRIETTE MARIE R.

Letters concerning Dr Goffs Negotiation with the Lord George Digby, Lord
Iermin and others.
Dr. Goff to Lord Jermin, April 16.
COncerning the Tin, Sir William Boswel and I must both proceed together for
many Reasons, and the course which is as yet thought best, is to put the whole
quantity into Websters hands and Bainhaqs contracting, That it may be sold at
the highest rate, at the price current of seventy two gilders per Cent. and in
the mean time to advance such sums upon it from time to time as her Majesty
shall have use of, paying the interest until the Tin be sold to pay that sum
borrowed, be it a week, or a Month, or more. I proposed to the Prince of
Orange the immunity from the Customs, who was very willing to give order in it
to Greffier Muys, who has since told me he will do his best; he is a very
serious servant of her Majesty's here, and ought to be gratified whatsoever
becomes of other business. And because I know your intentions in that kind
before, I did believe this business would not be unacceptable to him, and a
good expedient to find some part of a present for him; he has undertaken also
to bring Allen and Hasdouck saf^ly out of Dunkirk, but has for the present
ordered me to write to them to go forth, if they can, within these Ten days,
there being no Holland ship there to trouble them in that time or more: If
there were so much wit and duty in those that govern about Falmouth and Truro,
they should do well to keep any Tin from coming out until this be sold, if
they be but as mischievous to others as to the Queen.

The Queens letters are gone to the Duke of Curland for the assisting of the
Marquis of Montr^sse, I hope to good purpose; but it is necessary to send the
copy of the Queens letter to the King of Denmark, for free passage for his
ships through the Zound; and a letter of Credence in the Queens own hand to
Monsier Vicford, who from time to time may do the K good service by it with
him. But the thing which gives sir W: Boswel and me most pain in this place, is
the fear of the next interest day for the Jewels, May 16. on which it is
necessary to continue the credit begun; but above all to redeem those parcels
which lie so dangerously in Cletchers hands, besides the acquitting our selves
of the multiplied promises made to Monsieur Vicford, for the redemption of his;
it is evident that nothing in the world is of so great importance for the Kings
service, as to find money for the ships for D^rp; but in the next place, these
occasions mentioned must be served, and therefore it is very unfit to defer any
longer the ratifications and procurations which Webster desires^ and how to
transmit them to England, and receive them from thence, I know not, since the
Ambassadors of Holland are come away; if you please to let the King know the
fitness of doing the thing, this week Sir William Boswel and I will prepare
the Instruments, and send them several ways, but the likeliest is by Paris to
you, unless we may address our selves to the Portugal Ambassador, which yet
has not bin done. I shall obey your order in sending Saint Ibals Jewels by
Master D'estrade, though they might be of use here; but if that design be
pursued, as it must be, unless peace can be made, you will as easily send them
back, and more money with them by D'estrade, as together with them the orders
from France for preparing the ships in the King of Frances name. Mr. Hemflet
and the Lady Stanhope are very thankful to you for the business of their son,
hoping that it shall be represented in the form desired, that is, for the title
of Lord Wotton, which will be the greatest contentment to them in the world.

I am, Sir, Goff.

Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. April 17.
THe Prince of Orange was very inquisitive this week after my Letters from
Paris, hoping to be resolved precisely concerning the sum of the Portion, as I
perceived by his discourse; for that point, I gave him this answer, that the
Portion alone could not be of that consideration as to conclude the Marriage
unless it were able to give the King such succors as might probably restore
his affairs, which the sum demanded could not do; and that therefore I was
ordered to assure him, that if the other Articles were accorded, the Treaty
should not break off upon the sum of the Portion: from thence we came off of
the other particulars, and the resolution was this, that the affairs of the
Duke of Lorrain was to be pursued with all vigor, and for that end ships
should be sent from hence to meet at the time perfixt, that when the
Ambassadors are returned, all endeavors shall be used to induce the States to
a League defensive and offensive; and that Mr. D'estrade shall return home
fully instructed in these particulars, that is, to remonstrate the
impossibility (as they call it) of the passage for Holland, and to facilitate
the other to and from Deipe; And for the second, to persawde the sending of an
Ambassador from France hither to that purpose; which yet notwithstanding the
prince of Orange thinks will be very difficult, by reason of the King of
Denmarks war, to which the Hollanders are violently carried; however the
rumors, all endeavors are and shall be used to bring them to our desires, for
which end I proposed that in the mean time we might at least have Justice from
them, and such acts of amity, as by their past Alliance they were bound unto
such as are, First, the liberty of their Ports to our men of war, and the
freedom of them now detained. 2. The liberty to sell our Prizes here as we may
do in Flanders, at least that both sides may sell in their Ports. 3. The
di^missian of Strickland. 4. The permitting of Arms and money to be exported
for the King both from hence and from Dunkirk, with the denial of the same to
the Rebels. 5. An open and Public Declaration of the dislike of the Rebels
late Propositions sent to the King, according as in conscience they are bound
to declare, thereby to preserve this People from the guilt of approving the
rebellion in England; that in so doing they should declare no war against the
Parliament, and it would be a great preparation for the work in hand: this the
Prince of Orange seemed very much to approve of, and has ordered me to prepare
my papers in this kind against the time that their Ambassadors come from
England; and began to ask me concerning the design, and whether I had received
any Orders about it, for that I told him I should be particularly instructed by
the next Post, he likes this very well, and D'estrade shall be instructed about
it; this was all that past since the receipt of yours, besides that for
conclusion the Prince of Orange would know whether if the Duke should fail us,
our Treaty were at an end: I answered, No, for if the states would be brought
to declare for the King, and with shipping, and in other particulars, as should
be presented to them, I did not doubt but the King would quickly subdue the
Rebels, which was the end we pursued in this affair; to which when he replied
with more cheerfulness then has been usual of late, That all endeavors should
be used, I took my leave of him, and do of your -- There Is no danger in
discoursing, as you find, concerning the Portion; for the conditions for the
Princess must be proportionable to it; and if other things be accorded, they
will be solicitous themselves to enlarge the portion; for that end the Princess
of Orange is very civil to me, and desires much the business should go on. I
should be instructed what to say concerning the condition and habitation of the
Princess before her going into England.

Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. April 24.
I Will not doubt but that all my Letters of last week are received; and if so,
your Lordship does perceive the whole Negotiation here, depends upon full
instructions how to proceed in the particular Treaty of the Marriage; wherein
the several circumstances being understood and agreed, it will quickly appear
what the Prince of Orange is at, and willing to do with the States for the
Kings assistance, without the actual performance whereof, it is to be declared,
that the private Articles shall not be signed. For this purpose, if the Copies
of former Treaties cannot be had, it were necessary to set down particularly
what Houses and what Dowry the Queen will prescribe for the Princess; and for
the Portion, the lowest sum that must be admitted of, with the times of
payment. Yet herein it cannot be prejudicial to leave much unto Debate here, it
being resolved, That nothing shall be concluded till the States do fully
declare in defense of the King, whilst their hands are bufie against Denmark
(whither they are now sending sixty men of War, and Six thousand foot) it
cannot be expected that they should be induced to supply the King with any
forces presently, but yet these things following will be in their power, and
may be expected from the Pr: of Oranges Negotiation with them, as soon as their
Ambassadors return: 1. To enter into a League offensive, and defensive with the
King, against all Enemies whatsoever: And though the effect hereof cannot be
the present preparing and sending of Forces by Sea and Land, yet they will be
brought by it, 2. To publish a Declaration of dislike of the Rebels ^ater
Propositions sent to the King^ together with the ill usage of their
Ambassadors. 3. To set at liberty those Ships of ours which are now detained,
and to offer the liberty of their Ports hereafter. 4. To permit the selling of
our prizes in their Ports and for that end, such officers for the King as shall
be necessary. 5. To cause Arms and Powder to be Exported for the King, with
denying the same to the Rebels. 6. To give Letters of reprisal to such of their
own people as have been injured by the Parliament. 7. To permit the King to
hire or buy men of War in these Countries, to set to Sea against the Rebels. 8.
To admit of no Agents from England and Scotland that are not sent by the King,
and to dismiss them that pretend from the Parliament of either: And in
pursuance of these points, if His Majesty pleases to put out of His Protection
all such of His Subjects which dwell or Trade here, as have assisted the
Rebellion, in England, the States may proceed to such Confiscations and
Penalties as they shall think fit, whereby the King may find a considerable
profit, and they be invited to a more vigorous conjunction with him^ and if
this be done for the present ( France concurring in the same particulars) it is
apparent, by Gods blessing, that the King must needs overcome the Rebels, if he
can but keep his Person and the Princes out of their hands, till his friends
that are joined in League with him can send more powerful assistance.

Though the Portion with the Princess were as much as was demanded, and paid
by several parts, as the prince of Orange should be able, it were not possible
by that to serve the King to any effect, unless these things mentioned were
together obtained, whereby London might be impoverished, which is and will be
the fountain of all this mischief: And on the other side, let the Portion be
never so small and ill paid, yet if these things be done, and the King by
virtue of this Marriage enabled to borrow Money, or by any means to appear
stronger at Sea then they, and at Land with the same power he has formerly
done, by Gods blessing, he will be quickly restored, which will give all the
world full satisfaction concerning this Treaty, and make the conditions
Honorable beyond all question. Upon these considerations, I believe your
Lordship may approve what I wrote by Mr. D'estrade, and send some Orders
accordingly for proceeding in the Treaty of the Marriage apart from other
things.

And for them, besides what I am instructed to do already with the Prince of
Orange, it will be very necessary to write to Sir Will: Boswel, that upon the
coming of the Holland Ambassadors from England, he according to his Office be
instant with the States, to perform the duties of their former Alliances with
the King: and that he make such other Propositions to them as he shall judge
fit: But when the Prince of Orange shall find matters succeed well, it will be
necessary that your Lordship in the quality of an Ambassador appear here, to
make a firm and quick conclusion.

In the mean time, it is the opinion of the Prince of Orange that the business
of shipping is without question the sole thing which ought to be intended by
the Queen, and may probably restore the Kings Affairs again, though the Duke of
Lorrains Voyage, and the Prince of Oranges endeavors should fail. When I wrote
from Rotterdam, I was not clearly satisfied in the advantages on the Kings
part, and since that the sickness of Dorp (who is now perfectly recovered
again; and fixedly disposed as he was) kept me from the particular pursuit of
that Argument, wherein your Lordship had just cause to be little encouraged
with what I wrote before; if it be possible to provide money, it will prove an
excellent Design, for the whole execution is to be disposed of by the King as
absolutely^ as if they were English ships, and the Commanders English, the
intention being not for P. and Q. but for honor and the service of the King,
for which purpose Dorp desires to have large and particular instructions; also
some person of trust and courage to be a shipboard with him by whom he might
correspond with the Queen: and that his Majesty would appoint some Ports to
which all prizes might be brought, and there judged, which he desires should be
principally 1. -- and there Officers of trust to be established, which proceed
from his Majesty, as they do here for the States, or at (...) for (...) all
which shall be particularly set down under his own hand, and before conclusion
of the matter be made, be considered by the Prince of Orange who talks of this
particular with pleasure: The condition for himself is very short, but very
great to prescribe nothing, but trust the King and Queen in that point: but for
his Officers, he expects liberal pay and reward, as it shall be deserved: so
that in all respects, this is to be esteemed his Majesty's royal execution;
but that the Commanders and Masters are strangers, and ships hired. And it is
here pronounced by all that have knowledge of their Majesty's affairs, and any
thoughts and endeavors for their restitution, that this is so necessary to be
done, that without it all other good successes will but serve to protract the
war, and not at all to procure peace: for till London be humbled, the Rebel
can never be reduced to reason; but I know arguments in this kind are not so
needful as prayers, that God would send some means to provide the money.

For the Garter which is designed for the young Prince it is very earnestly
desired by them all, and shall be constantly worn by the Prince in that manner
as in England: The Pr. of Orange desires that the King would write himself to
him concerning it, as also to the States, and that it may be conferred after
the same manner as it was to the P. Elector in the field, if it might, before
the beleaguering of any Town begin; but of these things both Sir William
Boswell who hopes to be employed in it, and Master Hemfleet will write at large.

Dr. Goff to the Lord George Digby.
From the Hague, May 1. Stilo vet.
THe Dutch Ambassadors have been here these five days, wherein they have begun
their Report, and behaved themselves so well, that His Majesty cannot wish it
better: That the King may receive fruit of their Report, it has been proposed
to the States, to establish a Committee to hear and examine the particulars,
and to resolve what ought to be done: The States of Holland do not absolutely
refuse to have any such Committee, but require the whole Narration to be made
in public: if so, it is like to vanish into air, and the Prince of Orange will
be able to effect nothing for the King: However, the Ambassador Borrel whose
soul is set upon serving the King, is resolved to attempt something which shall
be very high and bold with the States: to that end, in the discourse he will
make instructions; I shall be able to send the Copy thereof, not only to your
Lordship, but to all the world. It is not possible any creature can be more
industrious then Hemflet is now. Before this time I believe your Lordship has
received Letters from the Queen, the honor of a Baron for his Son by the Lady
Stanhop; Charles Henry de Kirkeouz that he be created Lord Wotton, and called by
that name: This is represented to your Lordship, as the thing in the world most
desired by them both, that so in the issue of the eldest Daughter, the name and
family of Lord Wotton may be continued; for which they have already taken care
to provide an honorable subsistence: Within a few days the Prince of Orange
goes into the field, before which our co^sis will be past, if this Committee be
settled, something of great consequence may be hoped, but if not, it is
necessary that His Majesty think of some new Councels: this ungrateful, and
will never serve Him. My last was sent by Paris: next week your Lordship shall
receive another Letter from me,

Your Lordships most devoted faithful Servant, Steph. Goff.

Lord Jermin to the Lord Digby.
Paris, May 5. 1645. My Lord,
THere is this week come one from you, another from the King, by the way of the
Portugal Ambassador of the 21 and 20 of March, All your Letters that way are
very long, we perceive by them that some of ours go in ten days, therefore
your Messenger may be faulty: I had another from you to day of the fourth of
April, sent me by one G. Martin, you will do well to continue to write by that
way; there is in it only the proposition for the Duke of Yorks going to
Ireland, to which the Queen not being yet well enough to speak of business,
desires you to stay till the next week for Her resolution: She is now recovered
of all but weakness, a little cough and loosnesse do remain, but neither are
of danger or trouble: You say that if the Queen could have been in estate to
have sent the King any money, if Her ship had come in time, that would have
kept Her from the want She spoke of induced by the stop; the credit that would
have been raised by the return of the ship, would certainly have enabled Her to
have sent some: So the thing is true, She might have sent, and yet that did not
necessarily keep Her from wanting; in the mean time She was reduced to pawn
some little things for Her present supply, but you shall hear no more of this
matter: She was promised some other ways of supplying the King, upon which
were also built the assurances you received from Her, in which She has been
delayed beyond expectation, and what will yet be the issue, is not to be known:
Hasdouck She has found means at last to send away, I hope he is before this
arrived, he has good proportions of Arms and Ammunition, I know not yet what.
I send you Doctor Goffs Letters of this week, by which you will see, and by
those of the last what hopes there are of his Negotiation: The next week will
absolutely determine the Duke of Lorrains resolution, the way proposed by the
Prince of Orange, of Treatying the Marriage a part, and all the other matters
by themselves, ought to find no difficulty on our part; for he does not expect
no more then it is reasonable or possible we should, that any thing be
concluded in the Marri^ge until we have our reckoning in the rest: The Queen
does therefore^ desire that the King would send to Her with all the speed he
can, particular instructions for this Treaty of the Marriage, wherein there may
be only such things as according to their fancy in Holland (for so they have
expressed it) pertain to a Treaty of Marriage as demands, of portion, assurance
of jointure, and what houses will be comprised in that jointure, how Her own
house shall be settled, what officers She shall have, and if you please to send
a project of something in this kind, it will be very necessary, and in the
mean time they shall be entertained from hence with assurances that these
things are coming, and that if we can agree in others, there can be no
difficulty in those: The Propositions of the execution which you will find in
Doctor G^ffs Letters, is undoubtedly a great and useful design, and if we
could by this Marriage bring that about, and a Conjunction of France and
Holland with the King, that should be accompanied, but with those advantages
that inevitably ^low out of such a conjunction, it would be a foundation laid
against all possibility of ruining in this cause, and it would give us
certainly time and breath to overcome at last even if the present great helps
of forces from either of them or the means of passing the Duke of Lorrain
should fail: For I must confess by the last dispatch, I am least confident of
his intentions then I was: I make you all this discourse, to the end you should
see that I conceive though the present fruits were expected from this
Negotiation, are not in so good hopes as I thought them heretofore: Yet the
Treaty in these more remote ones is to be continued, and the news of this week
does much encourage me to this opinion; for I find all things in England in
another kind of posture, then a month ago, which I look on with great
comfort: the reputation of our affairs is increased to that point, that if we
decline not, I should not despair, that they might be willing here to proceed
in the conjunction, and ^^at would certainly bring in the States the only
reason why they here are so litt^e disposed to it, is the apprehension of the
Parli^ment ships, believing that the only power able to trouble them in their
Designs, of -- if our Design for our effect in Holland could be gone through
with, that might perchance be the greatest inducement here of any other to
embark them in our affairs; for which purpose, I desire to know your opinion in
one particular: There must go on our part 200+0 Pistols to the setting forth of
this execution: if we should get the money here, I would know whether you would
choose to have it employed to that effect, or sent to you.

We hear nothing yet of our Tin stayed at Falmouth, there is 196 blocks; pray
remember to send an Order to Sir Nicholas Crisp and others who may be concerned
in it, to deliver it to any whom the Queen shall appoint to receive it, if
before she send they can have no good occasion to send it: This Bearer, Sir
William Davenant is infinitely faithful to the Kings cause, he has been lately
in Holland, so that he met there the knowledge of our Treaty, so that it was
neither possible nor needful to conceal it from him; the Treaty of the Marriage
and the Proposition he knows, the Design of the Duke of Lorrain he does not: of
the other two he will speak to you: but charge him with secrefie, for the Queen
does still desire that the business of the Marriage may not be divulged, and
the other is destroyed if yet it should take vent: Pray if Davenant have need
of your favor in any thing, use him very kindly for my sake, and let him know
I conjured you to do so: you see by this I retain an opinion of some credit
with you, though your Letters be cold and less kind then they were wont: I am
still in the same degree. I have been most entirely

Yours.
I hear Th: Elliot is yet at Hanure de Grace, which I am glad of, you will have
had by my former, wherein I sent you my Letter to him, and his Answer, time to
have resolved what to do: in case my Letter should not be come, it is not unfit
to tell you again he received the Kings command to stay, and the best advice I
could give him to obey that command, but did notwithstanding resolve to
continue his journey, and may now be gone for ought I know.

This Letter I have sent by Portugal Ambassador, and I believe will come to
your hands soonest that way, but there is something added concerning Sir
William Davenant.

The Queen has commanded me to let you know, that the desires you would let
Sir John Mo^son know that she has recommended to your care his Interests, and
that you would advance them in all reasonable things, she cannot recollect what
he did in particular, but she desires you to advertise her what it is, and th^^
you preserve your self uningaged till you hear again from her, and in the mean
space you let him know her care.



Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. May 8.
SInce the receipt of yours, I am confirmed in that I wrote last from Grafier
Muis, concerning the resolutions of the Prince of Orange; that though there
have been overtures made from Brandenburgh; yet if the Prince of Wales may be
obtained for his Daughter, they will not be hearkened unto: and it is not
probable any treaty has been begun upon them, How that reserve may have
slackned the adventures for this of the Prince of Wales. For as soon as I had
given in the Extract of my Letters (which was most greedily called for) the
conclusion was, that to gain time, Mr. de Zulecum should draw the project of a
Treaty of Articles of both sides according to the particulars wherein I shall
be instructed within seven days, as your Lordships Letter to him and to me
does promise, and is expected; that before the Prince of Orange his going from
hence (which is like to be within few days) an assurance may be given him that
the Treaty will proceed well; and the effecting their desires depend only upon
the effects of the public, without which, the King and they will have small
comfort of the business. There is now or never something to be done upon this
State, by means of the excellent and clear relations which their Ambassadors do
make both in private and public in the Kings behalf: I have hitherto found as
good succes of this as can be wished, besides that which is already written of
the marriage. I have to let your Lordship know that there shall be a Committee
of the States presently settled for the English affairs; that according to what
shall be related to them by their Ambassadors, resolutions may be taken what
to do; that these Ambassadors are so extremly set to bring the States to the
Kings assistance, that no subjects of England could express greater
concernment, In the Original, I^s Secreuer^nt.
they wild ^ursh (says the Prince of Orange) if they be not able to bring
somewhat to pass; for the Dukes passage, the Prince of Orange says, that for
the sa^ety and convoy that which was promised before shall be performed; for
the Transport ships must be sent from hence as was given in instructions to
D'estrad^ before, and shall be now repeated and enlarged in answer to his
Letter of this week: Concerning that business, the States must not by any
means be acquainted with the business, and therefore the course must be under
pretense of some service for France, to hire the ships of Merchants ^ere, which
the Prince of Orange will give quick order for when it shall be requisite; he
says ^e will write that which shall encourage them in it; and often wished,
that his zeal and affection might be a leading example to others, and that it
should not be wanting: It is much feared the hiring of Holland ships in France
may give such an alarm to the Parliament, that all French Poets will be
presently bese^; besides if there be numbers sufficient, the way were by power
to constrain them at the instant, and not to send beforehand about it, upon
information that the Rebels intend a defensive war only: the Prince of Orange
said he was very glad of ^, for then if the King could preserve himself until
he could by sea do something upon them and their (...) trade, they would be
instantly ruined, and from thence (...) d^^ -- and this was the (...) of that
discourse. This day I visited Bu^ral^ who makes many protestations of purs^^^g
their Majesty's affairs here in such a manner that he considers not what he
suffers by it. I have given him a paper of the things desired of this State,
such as they may do without declaring war against the Rebels of England, and in
justice they are bound to do being allied to the King already, such as with
concurrence with France they are now sought to perform in a new league with his
Majesty, wherein nothing is demanded of them but what within these four years
by their Ambassadors in England they offered his Majesty; he approves of every
particular, and I am assured will labor more effectually then any creature
their Majesty's have of their own; within a very short time will appear the
utmost of our hopes from this place. For if either the Committee should be
refused, the Prince of Orange (as I have some doubt o^ it) or if being settled,
nothing should be resolved by it which may invite France to send their
Ambassadors and join with; them it is evident that new councels must be
sought, and that the King is not to linge^ away his Crown here; only what ever
the event be, some means must be used -- which is no where to be had -- but if
the event of this Committee for England be presently to grant us liberty of
their Ports, to sell prises, to hire ships, to buy arms and ammunition here, to
carry them out of Dunkirke, to grant Letters of reprizill to those Hollanders
that require them against the Parliament, and after these things, by inviting
of France to them to make a league offensive and defensive as we desire: I
suppose it will be seasonable for the Lord Iermin to appear in this place and
conclude the marriage, the conditions whereof will be very honorable what ever
little portion they give, or how great conditions soever they obtain for the
young Prince: for certainly by it the Crown will be restored, and therefore I
hope the whole business shall be referred to their disposal, except only the
conclusion and signi^g which must not be until the effects of the public
Treaty be obtained; all this will yet appear more reasonable if the Duke
proceed in his voyage; but though that vanish, as I fear it will yet, there is
more substance in this triple alliance, if it may be gotten, then in any other
council in the world. I could now wish the Order of the Garter, with the
Herald and Robes and Letters were come: the young Prince is very worthy of all
honor and kindness from their Majesty's, and grows (...) very proper and
lovely person, as does Madamoisell more now then at first: perhaps difficulty
adds beauty, but truly she has a perfect good shape, white skin, excellently
well fashioned, hands, neck and breast, the face is not ill all, but very good
for many proportions there: tomorrow the young Prince and all the Horse take
the field.

Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. Paris, 12 May.
THis Week I had none from you, but the Duplicate of that by Romen, whereof I
made you Answer the last. The Queen had one from the King near it at the same
time. There is come by the way of the W^st two days since, ^ Copy of that
Order for the Tin, that L A T first desired; it arrived ^here so late, that ^he
stay o^casioned the disorder we have so often complained of, it is during
pleasure only, which is well; so that there be no alteration, without
advertising the Queen in time: for if again She should send a ship and money,
and not have the Tin delivered, the same inconveniences would happen again. Sir
Nicholas Crisp advises, that in the end of this month there will be a
proportion for 4000 pounds sterling, which the Queen intends to send for in a
Holland Man of War, and so hereafter for all that shall be to be had; by which,
the Country shall be constantly supplied with money for their Tin; and the
King shall have His profits both of the preemption, and Customs duly paid to
Him; which I desire you to assure the Lord Treasurer of, because I cannot write
to him, it being easy for him to be informed, how many blocks, and of what
weight we received; and I do assure him, he shall have a just account of the
Kings preemption and Customs, and further profit; and that of consideration,
shall also be accounted for: And this I am sure is the best course that this
business in nature is capable of.

I send you Doctor Goffe's dispatch, by which you will see the condition of his
affairs may be our success, with the arrival of their Ambassadors (who
perhaps will have some credit with their Masters) will open a way to more
possibility of drawing them to a Declaration, then has yet appeared, -- for
though things have little answered what was expected; we ought to have a little
more patience, especially there being some hope of getting money: If you
remember when the Duke Despernon lent the King the money in England, the Prince
of Orange was to put that same into the Contoir of Holland; for the Duke to
engage the Prince of Orange unto this, the Queen did secure him by jewels she
left in his hands. Some hope ^here is, by the industry of Sir W. Godolphin who
merits infinitely of the King, that this money may be again lent by the Duke;
if that be brought about, the Duke releasing the Prince of Orange, who is his
security, the Jewels will return to the Queen, and will I hope find the 20000
Pistols, which would be a thing of infinite consequence. The Affairs of the
Duke of Lorrain I fear will fail: Next week undoubtedly we shall have the last
Resolution, if it do, we must endeavor to get here the money that expedition
would have cost them, or part of it, which is fitter to be hoped; for it is not
likely we shall have it all, because in the passing the Duke away, they did
their own business as much as ours, all, the Dukes; this week out of England
is cheerful: I must confess, if we abroad had been fortunate in any degree,
near to that you have been at home, we could not have failed of being suddenly
happy. There is arrived this day a Gentleman of Prince Rupert, to fetch his
brother Edward into England, what the Queen will advise in that particular, I
do not yet know. Here is Colonel Sands that killed Chapter Price, that has
earnestly desired the Queens Letter to the King for his pardon, and with those
Letters would have returned home: the Queen by the Information she has had of
the business, was willing to favor him, but I advised him not to return until
we know how he will be received. Speak of the thing, and do him all the
kindness you can, and let me know what the King will be willing to do at the
Queens entreaty. So wishing you all happiness, I rest

Yours.
The Queen cannot resolve yet concerning the Duke of York's going into Ireland,
next you shall have Her opinion.



Dr. Goff to the Lord Jermin. Paris, May 15.
When Her Majesty shall be well enough to speak of business, I hope your
Lordship will find means to instruct me more particularly concerning the
private Treaty by the return from England, which I do most humbly beseech Her
Majesty to do, for now is the time if ever to operate strongly upon this
country, not only because the Prince of Orange is taking the field, where the
things useful to us cannot be effected: but for that the Ambassadors do so
plentifully declare the Justice of the Kings cause, and necessity of the States
concernment in it, That if the Prince of Orange lose this opportunity for want
of words, or will, there is no reason to bestow more time upon any expectations
from hence; and I assure you, that since your two last Dispatches, there is a
new vigor toward the Kings affairs, both in the Prince of Orange and
Princess, which I could never discern before, she not dissembling that till
now, it did not clearly appear, Whether the Proposition of the Marriage were
real or not. The Prince of Orange has appointed Wednesday and Thursday of this
week for the form of the private Treaty, to be drawn and agreed on, which could
not be if there were any other in hand; however, they may be willing to allow
that of Brandinburgh as a reserve, and for the Public it is a very good way,
though the Committee of States mentioned in my last be not yet obtained, the
States of Holland, pretending that it was unusual to grant any to their own
Ambassadors, however they have done it upon the demand of strangers here: upon
Friday last they continued their Report before the States General (^n corpse)
and after in the like manner before them of Holland for three hours space in
such a method, and with such clearness for the Kings advantage, that no
Subject of his could plead it better; the effect of this has been the
satisfaction of most of them, and the silencing of them that were most
opposite. Burral is since gone to his Town Amsterdam, there to repeat what he
has done; and on Thursday next return^ to pursue the work here, in which it
seems to me by the manner of their proceedings, they intend to perish
themselves, or His Majesty shall prosper. Muys the Secretary is as industrious
as can be desired; but I fear he may think it long ere he find some fruit of
his labors; in all events, that person is to be retained: for whether we
obtain the League or not, it is apparent that ships will be always needful,
an^ the use of their Ports and Arms, and to all which his concurrence is of
great importance. The Princess is now of a temper much different from that she
was larely in, besides great desires for that which concerns themselves most;
there are the same desire^ for His Maj^sties affairs, vehement invectives
against the Rebels, great satisfaction, in the Ambass^dors much
sollicitousnesse; what is now to be done, That the Prince of Orange must do
somewhat before he go into the field, that some course must be taken to bring
the business to a Committee of States, that Sir William Bosw^l, well affected,
is slow, and so accustomed to receive denials, that it were unfit to use him;
that an extraordinary Ambassador from the King Ought to appear, but not yet,
till the business be better prepared, that she will advise both with the
Prince of Orange, and all others best affected to the King; that if I have any
Proposition to make, I should bring it to her: This was the sum of yesterdayes
discourse; yet after all this I must not conceal, That the Ambassadors complain
that the Prince of Orange is much colder then they expected, as Mr. Hemflet
says (if he be a good Author). This is all I have to say of our condition here
this week, which indeed is nothing positive, but that very shortly it will
appear what is to be expected from hence, and that the Prince of Orange and
Princess do now (as it seems to me) apply themselves very seriously to that
end.

An Extract of Dr. Goffs Letter to the Lord JERMIN. May 1.
I Have discovered this last week, a thing which has perhaps given me all the
impediments I have met with, and is without doubt the cause of that sudden and
positive demand, which Hugh made me from the Prince of Orange; it is the
overture of the match with Brandenburg, revived and pursued now these last four
weeks, by an Express from the Marquess, returned last Wednesday in all haste,
with Order to bring the Marquess of Brandenburg to Cleve or thereabouts, by
the end of this month of May; for which purpose, he said he would ride day and
night. This is that you may be assured of, The party himself having discovered
the whole business of Mo^^ieur Hemflet, who with much passion for the Kings
interest told me what he had ^ound; and afterward as it was concerted between
us, made the same relation to the Princess of Orange, and said, that he had it
from me; she was extremely amazed (as he says) how I could get knowledge
thereof; but in conclusion confessed the thing. How far the business has
proceeded, appears not yet, but by what the Prince of Orange, discovered^ last
night with me: I am confident that nothing is done to the prejudice of the
Prince of Wales pretentions, nor shall be, if our demands can be performed by
them with ease, I say with ease; for I cannot promise any violence and h^z^rd
of ruin to effect it; notwithstanding all this, I do hope upon particular
Instructions, to give a better account of the business; however it shall
clearly appear, that there was perfect integrity on Her Majesty's part, and
that the frustration did wholly owe it self to them, not so much for want of
desire (for that is not to be doubted of) but that they did not endeavor to
effect those things which were most reasonable for the King to demand, and
perhaps not impossible for them to do, in the opinion of all that shall come
hereafter to examine what has passed. The Prince of Orange with many
testimonies of his great desire of the honor of it, fell to speak of the
Garter, and in sum, professes how glorious an addition it will be to him, and
his son; and if it may be sent the beginning of this Campaign, that his son who
has the honor to be allied to the King, will think himself as long as he
lives, much honored in wearing that Order, after the manner that it is worn in
England; wherein he was very particular in describing the several marks used,
and gave me an account of his own election to that Order, which was managed
with so much insolency by the Ambassador Carlson, that it is easy to collect,
that was the cause of his not wearing it at first, and because not at first,
never since; he added likewise, That Henry the fourth wore it always; he
advises, that a Letter should be written from the King after the usual manner
under the Signer to the States, wherein His Majesty may be pleased to express
the honor he has done his Son in law: Such a Letter was written concerning
Prince Maurice and himself, and is to be kept by the States. This ought to be
presented by Sir Will. Boswel, if no Ambassador be here. And after that, either
an Herald with the Robes, and the Order, should be sent with Sir W. Boswel into
the field, where it may be done with more triumph (as he says) or in sending
to Sir W. Boswel, an excuse may be made for deferring the Formalities, and the
Order worn presently. I told the Prince, that I hoped after the return of the
Dutch Ambassadors, our Affairs here would be in so good a condition, that it
would be necessary for the Lord Iermine to appear here as Ambassador, not only
to present that, but to conclude all other Affairs, which he said he hoped, and
that now in short time we should see what was to be expected from hence; with
which after many kind promises he ended.

Since my writing this Letter, I have been with the Princess of Orange, where
I find such froideurs and objections (now, that the portion is like to be
accorded) against the whole business, public and private; that I believe,
what I write has taken place, and our business at an end.

Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. May 1.
Since the writing of my other Letter, I have been with Secretary Muys, who
gives great hopes of the States inclining to the King, and advises the Queen
to use all means -- which has been spoken of, that that alone (though the Duke
o^ Lorrain should ^ail) will bring all about that we desire. He confessed the
Treaty of Brand^nburg; but that he knew for certain the mind of the Prince of
Orange, was, if possibly he could, to make the match with the Prince of Wales;
so that however the Prince be wavering, and fearful in regard of the Kings
Affairs, yet the Prince of Orange is resolved to try what may be done, rather
for the Prince of Wales then any other.

Lord Jermine to the Lord Digby. Paris, May 19.
I Wrote to you yesterday by Colonel Fitz-Williams, I conceive you will find
cause to take the business that concerned him into consideration: I have sent
you now a Copy of Dr. Gaffe's dispatch out of Holland, by which you will see
the state of that business reduced to this only hope, that the return of the
Ambassadors out of England, may not only give Prince Orange a disposition to
set on foot that which before he was not confident enough of his own strength
to attempt, but also afford him some hopes of effecting it; of this we shall
see a sudden issue: the other advantages we expect from thence, as the Ships
for the Duke of Lorrain. Supplies of money by the marriage, are in an estate
not much to be relied on; for the business of the Duke, I much fear will fall
away: the money of the marriage will not be considerable enough to conclude ^t;
for that Reason it may be we may single that advantage from the rest, even
without the consideration of the marriage: so that we have no more to do, but
to attend the issue of the hopes of the Declaration, and according to that,
proceed or let fall the whole business, and look after -- as a thing to be
managed according to the means we shall find here, to go through with it. We
shall know next week what to depend upon for the Duke of Lorrain, which
failing, we shall presume our pretensions here for moneys in place of that
which that expedition would have cost them here: The Clergy Assembles next,
week with whom we shall set on foot the liberty the French Queen Regent has
given us to try their inclinations for the support of the Affairs of England
Trasdunk is gone from Dunkirk three weeks since with four Frigots, 6040
Muskets, 2000 Pair of Pistols, 1200 Carabines, Swords, 400 Shovel^, 27000
pounds of Match, and 50000 pounds of Brimstone. I hope he is arrived before
now: His Arms were all embarked before Allen arrived there; so that I cannot
assure you, that Allen will be provided with that proportion which I sent you
word would be sent to Marq. Montrosse. The Queen has sent 400 Barrels of
Powder to Dartmouth; she has advise of the arrival of 200, and hopes the other
will speedily arrive: She could not get the Merchants to undertake the carriage
of them without engaging Her self for them, i^ case they were not paid in
England: The Queen has now received, a^ I wrote before, the Kings Order for
shipping for the Tin from time to time; whereupon l^st week She gave Order for
4000 pounds sterling to be sent to Falmouth, for that proportion which she was
advertised by Sir Nicholas Crisp would be ready there at the end of May, and
has demanded a Ship of the Prince of Orange for that purpose: She had advised
last week, that the ship is accorded so, that it is undoubtedly upon the way.
The Kings Order concerning the Tin, was but during pleasure; therefore, pray
have a care there be no change, without giving the Queen timely advise of i^.
Her Majesty having been served by Sir Nicholas Crisp at Her coming out of
England, with affection and diligence, is desirous to make him some return; and
therefore entreats you to assist him in his Affairs, as he shall present them
to you particularly, for the transportation of some Wools: the proceed of
which, he undertakes to return in Ammunitio^. He is also a suitor to the Queen
for Her Recommendation to the King, to be a Collector of the Customs in the
West, in which he had formerly a promise. Pray advise me in your next, how far
the Queen may reasonably enterpose in that particular. For the proposition
concerning the Duke of York's going into Ireland, the Queen bids me tell you,
that She cannot yet, for any reason She can discern, approve of it. The
business of Her Majesty's Jewels is so pressing upon Her, that unless in the
future She be as fortunate as She has been hitherto, She will undergo great
trouble and inconvenience: That you may perceive this, I send you a short Note
of the parcels engaged in Holland, for which there must be Use duly paid every
six months, or the Jewels must be lost: For these sums for which they are
pawned for, is very inferior to their value. For this Reason it is most
necessary to continue the Tin in the Queens hands, least She should fail of
those other means, that hitherto She has had for the discharge of these
Instructions; if otherwise She finds means to do it, then all the profits of
the Tin will be duly accounted for to the King. Just now your Letter of April
the 11, and the Kings of the 10 are come, to which you can have no Answer this
week; they alwaye^ come to us not under a months time, whereas I perceive you
receive ours in a fortnight. Pray rectify this if you can.

Paris
Lord Iermin, to the Lord Digby. Paris May 26. 1645.
YEsterday I received yours, of the seventeenth of April by the Portugal
Ambassador, by which you may please to observe, that all your Letters by that
way, are still a Month at least a coming, it will be good to inquire where
the stop is made, At the same time I received the Kings of the 3^th of April,
by Sabra^, and I mark that by him, they come still quicker; By both, and by
all other concurring, I see that our affairs in England, if they had received
any competent assistance from abroad, would have been in an excellent
condition, that which I most lament is the Queens inability in the relief of
M. Montrosse, for which I conceived she had provided by ordering Hasdo^ck to
furnish him out of the Proportions he had provided for England. The proportions
designed for him, I have mentioned in my former Letters, but Hasdo^^k would not
obey the Queens directions, but carried all he had provided into England, so
that the Queen remaining without credit, or other means to do that work, it
remains now imperfect until she be furnished with one or the other; Something
she has since attempted, but it is not to be relied on this May, that no
possible things within her power shall be omitted for this purpose, for she
conceives the importance of it, even beyond that which you have represented.
Our Holland news from Scotland which we have often^ do no less then yours,
confirm the necessity and moment of this consideration, I send you
herewithall what I had last week from Dr. Goffe, by which you will perceive
there is since the return of the Ambassador some new hopes of prevailing with
the States for the Declaration against the Rebels, which is a thing of so
great concernment, that we must make it our endeavor not to f^ustrate the
hopes of it by a sudden breaking off the Treaty, and to defend our selves
against the prejudices we sustain by the expectation of the success, for that
cannot be assured enough, to rely on it for great present utilities, and me
thinks it were an hard thing, being thus awaked in the consideration, to
provide against both the inconveniences. The Duke of Lorai^e has again this
last week made so many new Protestatious of his intentions, that the most
positive commands that could be to Sir H^n. de Vic. have not prevailed with him
to break off the Treaty, but his Troops now march, though himself do not
remain at Bruxells, so that it will be impossible for any art to prolong the
business beyond four or five days, but there is no hopes to be allowed to
it. The business here to be done, which shall be carefully attended, are, That
of Holland, the form I have proposed in this Letter, the supply of Marq.
Montrosse with Arms and Ammunition; the West with the same, for the Prince his
new Levyes, and for the supply of the Kings and Prince Ruperts Army, and the
relife of G^rnsey Castle, for the Prince of Wales his Army, Will. Godolphin is
very sollicitous, what he will be able to effect is as doubtful as the Queens
expectation in all the other particulars, Money for the King is also in her
thoughts and pretentions, and now the Clergy is assembled, upon which many of
our hopes have depended, She will with all the instance and care that may be,
have that way attempted. We are at this time strangely sollicitous for you,
for there seems to be a gathering together on both sides near Oxford, like to
produce some notable encounter, which cannot well be followed but with great
event; God make them prosperous, and enable us here to contribute something
more hereunto then our prayers.

I am yours.
Your last concerning The. Elly^tt, where you seem to take notice we had not
here provided according to order, is answered in my former ones, so as I am
confident you are fully satisfied in that point.



Dr. Goffe to the Lord Iermine the 29. of May.
NOw that the Prince of Orange is gone into the Field, your Lordship will have
reason to expect some certain and good conclusion of all the Propositions
which have been offered hitherto, and in sum it is, That the affairs of the
King are now put into a way of consideration. Here I sent you a Copy of those
Articles presented to the Princess of Orange and Master Borrell, a fortnight
since, out of them the Ambassadors have this last week given in a Paper of
their own, believing it impossible to procure the acceptance of them all at
one time. The Prince of Orange, with more warmth and cheerfulness then ever
before, told me upon my return from Rotterdam, that he did not doubt but a
good beginning would be made for my purpose; He had given Sir William Roswell
his task, to propose the liberty of their Havens and hiving of Ships, and the
Ambassadors theirs to urge the necessity of granting of Letters of Reprizall
to the many complaints received in England from their own People, and then he
added; Believe me, by this means they shall be engaged insensible in a war,
Croyes moy, par ce moy ^n ils serent engages in sensiblement dans une guerre;
Both these things have been done^ only the Ambassadors (as you may see by this
enclosed memorial which Reynswood gave me) have thought fit to insist upon the
whole business, pretending out of their recredentialls, that his Majesty
requires answer to these particulars. It has been thought a more probable way
of operating upon this jealous people, to permit the Propositions to proceed
the ordinary way, which is by sending Copies of them to their principalls in
the several Provinces and Towns, then, to make a Close Committee for the
English affairs, but this will prove a very slow remedy for our evils, for
the answers must be had from the several places, and a new Assembly of the
States, (who separate this Whitsontide) before any conclusion can be made, this
is all that could be effected, though they were awakened by a very seasonable
intelligence, that the Houses of Parliament at Westminster intended to send not
only a Remonstrance against the two Ambassadors, but also several envoyes to
their respective Provinces to Treat with them apart^ thereby in ending ^o
divide the Provincial States from the General, and to fo^nent the quarrel
which has been already begun amongst them in that point, for remedy of this,
the Prince of Orange told me they had resolved two things; First, that Letters
should be dispatched to the particular Provinces to declare the danger of
admitting any such Agents, and then an order to Ioachim at London, to declare
that all such Envoyes should be rejected, and for their Remonstrance, it is a
thing much longed for by these Ambassadors, who are prepared to repay them in
that kind with liberal interest. But it falls out very il, that whilst these
things are in agitation here, Sabran has written hither, not concealing his
great dislike of the matter, that France has laid aside their intentions
about Reprizalls, and are contented with the empty promises of the Houses that
reparation shall be made, which by these Ambassadors are presented to the
States as things to be despised, forasmuch as they have been told plainly, that
it was not in their power to perform them, and were advised by the Lords
themselves, to take from them of London and others of their Association five
times as much as they demanded, by which their pious protecting government,
has discovered, how much they consider any particular man's safety and interest
that lives amongst them, it is uncertain what were the best remedy for this,
for if your Lordship should complain of this, before that reprizall were
granted here perhaps in stead of finding amendment in France, some means might
be used underhand to divert these here from good intentions, if there were not
fear of this, it would be of great advantage to the proceedings here, if
Sabran were commanded presently to demand performance of the promises, or else
after a fit time to resume their purpose of reprizalls, this business alone,
if it be obtained, will set ships to Sea against the Rebels before this Summer
be ended, as the Ambassadors say, but the Princess of Orange told me that she
feared France would deceive us, and the Ambassadors imputed all the
timerousnesse of the Prince of Orange to private discouragements the Prince of
Orange receives from France, and do therefore counsel, that the Queen should
now endeavor to get something done by the Queen Regent, and Cardinal
Mazerine at this time, which might give assurance to the States here of their
future concurrence with them, as for example, The public and certain
rejection of A^gier, the granting Letters of Reprizall, or some more imediate
promise of joying with them there, they have not, ^or at the same time that out
of your Letters I declare to the Prince of Orange what hopes the Queen has in
that kind, he tells me, the Letters that he received form Paris are very silent
in the business; your Lordship will by this perceive in what state our
affairs are, and will by the next I hope give me order how to dispose of my
self, for after I have fully informed my self of the state of her Majesty's
debts here, and have settled the business of this present Time, and seen the
Ship under sail fully instructed for England, I cannot imagine what I can do
in this place, separate from the Prince of Orange, for whatsoever is to be
pursued here, will be as cordially done by the Ambassador, and Mui^, Sir
William Boswell attending them, as can be desired. And with the Prince of
Orange, as soon as the Instructions come for the private Treaty of the
Marriage, I shall quickly dispatch that business, and leave the matter in this
condition, that her Majesty has proceeded with most clear intentions, and
that it is their own imbecility, or unwillingnesse (which might admit of a
worse name) that frustrates so great and important a Proposition, both for
themselves and us. I have now received your Lordships full Instructions
concerning the dispatch for England, wherein the Prince of Orange has complied
as well as could be desired. Coulster is judged the fittest man, both for his
appetite to the work and courage. You may presume the ship will be at Callice
by Gods assistance, about the last of May old Style, and then Master Carteret
may imbarque without the toil and expense of a journey hither, if this Letter
come time enough to prevent him, if my last has not done it already, since Sir
William Coulster is employed, you may be confident of a speedy return and
dexterous mannagement of that business, for by his last he has gotten great
experience about the Tynn, so that if I durst venture upon it, I would charge
Mr. Carteret with a journey to England to the King to whom it is necessary by
this ship to make a large and various dispatch, and from the King to receive
again answers to many particulars, as the ratification for Mr. Webster, upon
which depends the whole Jewel business, and the good success of that which
is to be done hereafter; A Commission under the broad Seal to receive the Ruby
Collar with a blanke for what name the Queen will put into it, with a
procuration to pawn it, for that good thing is not like to produce money
amongst Merchants. A Letter to Sir William Boswell from the K. that he obey the
Queens instructions in making such Propositions to this State, as his Majesty
shall ordain him, as likewise some particular Instructions to be sent him from
the King concerning the Leag^e proposed by him, in the mean time till an
extraordinary Ambassador appear here, for without some such Instructions as
he cannot confidently do any thing, so will the States less consider what he
proposes. The Instructions for the private Treaty with the Prince of Orange
concerning Marriage, the Copy of their Ambassadors report, and Propositions,
which B^rrel has promised to give me within six days. The Copy of the Ducth
Commission for ships of war, that mutatis mutandis his Majesty's Commission may
run in that form, and not so strangely as some which are shown here. A
Letter from the King to the Duke of Curland, with instructions to Mr. Vicforl
about him; Some blanke Commissions for ships of war to be left in Sir William
Boswells hands or mine, for that diverse are ready upon their own charges to
put to Sea, if they had them, to the certain ruin of the trade of London.
Letters from his Majesty to the States concerning the Order of the Garter for
Prince William, if they be not already obtained; Besides, that it were fit that
I should give an account to the Lord Digby of all the proceedings here since
the return of the Ambassadors, and in what state the other business is, For
all these uses I conceive Carteret might better employ his time with the King,
then at Truro, since without doubt Sir Nicholas Crispe, and Sir William
Coulster can perfectly do all that is there to be done, and especially since
her Majesty ought as soon as conveniently it may be, to perfect the grant of
the Tynn pre-emptions to have a Pattent for it under the broad Seal, without
which perhaps Merchants will make scruple to contract about it, and for her
Majesty to buy all the Tynn with her own money, it is thought will prove a
thing impossible for her, and if possible, it would not be the way of quickest
and greatest gain. Wherefore all these things being so necessary to be
dispatched to the King, if upon Carterets arriving hither it appears unfit to
employ him, Sir William Boswell is of opinion, some other person ought of
purpose to be sent, which shall be done as well and thristily as can be
contrived. Sir William Boswell does desire your Lordship to pursue this
enclosed Copy of the Kings Letter to him concerning the Garter, wherein the
best way (as he thinks) is prescribed, that it be done without the pomp of an
Herald; which way soever it be done, it will cost money, and there is nothing
more certain then that Sir William Boswell is one of the poorest^ and
worthiest, and most contented servant that the King has, he has a long time
lived here upon borrowing, and his thrifty Lady and he make a little go far;
For his last employment in this kind for the Prince Elector, the King allowed
him one hundred pounds in consideration of the journey he took, which now is
like to be every way as expencefull, the Prince of Orange intending for
Flanders.

I have not seen Muis since your Lordships last Letter, but shall suddenly
obey the order, A Present for Muis.
supposing Master Webster will make no difficulty to hasten the money, one
thousand Crowns, that is as I take it three thousand Guilders.

Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. Paris June. 9. 1645.
YEasterday I received yours of April the twenty ninth from Oxford, whereby I
must needs observe to you, ours are received in half the time that yours are
coming hither, now you are removed from Oxford, I fear it will yet be harder
for you to send to London about all things, the Queen recommends it to you, I
send you here enclosed Doctor Goffs last dispatch, word for word, by that you
will see the estate of that business, Sir H. de vic, is now here, yesterday
arrived, with the Dukes last demands, tomorrow he attends Cardinal M^z. and as
soon as the answer is gotten, and Queen Regents resolution in a supply of
Arms and Ammunition we have now demanded, to which already we have some
promises, advanced, Petit shall be dispatched who is stayed for that end, and
to return to us with some information of the state you are in, where the last
letters speak so variously of that we are in much pain. Arms and Ammunition
I will be again confident we shall speedily get, but for money, I can give no
good hopes of it although the Clergy be now together, from whom we have so many
expectations; Sir Kenel^e Digby is arrived, at Room, has had audience of the
Pope who has given him the best reception that the first visit was capeable
of, that is, the fairest promises in general that can be wished, if he may be
relied on there are good hopes of money there, but you know he is of a sanguine
family and himself yet the melancholliest of it, he has visited some other of
the petty Princes of Italy but they are a frugall generation; Talbott is
coming from Venice without any effect of his voyage; A man the Queen sent
four months ago into Scotland to Marquis Montross^ this day arrived; It
greeves me H^sdonckes did not obey the Queens order for his supply, but now
again that shall be suddenly attempted I hope with better success, yet his
arrival in the West has been very opportune for the designs of the Prince
of Wales there, which I observe to you as a service solely of the Queens, for
nothing but her commands could prevail with him to undertake this supply,
therefore pray give him what help you can to get his money; pray commend my
service to Prince Rupert and make my excuse I write not unto him; by something
I hear I hope you two are good friends which I much rejoice at, and conjure
you to do all you can to the continuance of it if it be so, and to the making
of it so if it be otherwise. I rest yours.

The Queen has written her self to the King.

You will find in Doctor Goffs letter several things desired to be sent from
England all in my judgment most material and therefore to be hostned to him or
Sir William Boswell with the greatest expedition that can be, ^e proposes the
sending of my man, Carteret being already gone to Holland with instructions for
the business of the Tinn, to attend that in England, may perhaps not follow the
Doctors order in coming to you: for these things, therefore I pray you, as
soon as you receive this, let them be dispatched and sent by an express of
yours.

Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. St. Iermin August. 5.1645.
I Wrote to you yesterday by the ordinary; Something I have to add by this
express the Queen sends to visit the King, and to bring her back an account
of his health, and of the state of his affairs, her resolution of sending
Cockeram into Denmark, is without doubt very oportune; for upon the conclusion
of the peace with the Sweedes cannot but be in condition to help us, and if as
it shall be in the first place demanded, he could be prevailed with to give us
such an Army, as might Land in any place, where the King has no Forces,
without fearing who they met, their descent at Searberough or Burlington would
give a new turn to all; but this is a felicity I dare not hope. That which
with more assurance I look upon, which in the second place shall be
solicited, would be of infinite use, That is, a small number of men with some
money Arms and Ammunition, and all to go to Scotland to Marquess Montrosse;
but the men in that case must some of them be horsemen five hundred at least,
and these horse to pass with them: This I conceive would enable Marquess
Montrosse to make his victoryes profitable, as well as miraculous: But in the
mean estate he is, for want of Horse (for of that he complains in his Letter
to me) and of Arms and Ammunition, his advantages have brought almost none to
the King his affairs, for he advances not into the good parts of Scotland, nor
is so considerable to the Army in England, as that they have forborne for fear
of him to leave their Country exposed to him, I cannot send you by this bearer
so great a volume as cock^ram^ instructions would be, but you shall have them
by the next; he shall have order to offer the Islands that Po^ly had order to
offer to the King of Denmarks. The Winter growing on makes me not apprehend,
that all our losses can bring us so soon to an end as this Summer, and the ill
weather will reprive us until either this or some other help be found out. The
Queen is therefore now more industrious then ever, and has found means to
get twenty thousand pistols for -- I once wrote to you of, so that if the
persons that should have undertaken it be still of the same mind, and the
Prince of Orange which we have written to know, That business will go^ forward
and may prove of great use in many considerations; But the importantest aim in
it is the insensible engaging the Hollanders in the War. Sir Kenel^e D^gby
writes hopefully of supplies of money from Rome, but concludes nothing, the
Irish troubling all our solas, until the Peace be made with them, I fear all
Catholic help will be drawn that way: Upon this purpose I must tell you
with what amazement the delays of the peace in Ireland is considered here, and
you leave us so ignorant of the condition of the treaty, that we know not what
to say of it. Pray by the return of this bearer, or the first likely passage,
send me the state of it, their demand, the King of England his offers, and what
you know of the difficulties; If yet it be not concluded, it is not like that
ever it will be, by those that manage it now, And therefore it seems to me
for satisfaction of those that so much press it, of the Irish and to satisfy
this state, who are much of that opinion, and to secure our hopes at Rome and
lastly to put that business into a possibility of being concluded, that the
proposition long since made to the King, of having the treaty made here by the
Queen and Queen Regent, were not unfitly resumed. For I am confident the King
by this means, might have the peace upon better terms, and might limit the
Queen by the same instructions that those that now treat are bound by, and
upon this, one of these fruits would follow, that either -- should have the
peace, or the exorbitancy of their demands would be so apparent to the Queen
Regent, that we should have great advantage by that; The only thing I fear is,
that the King his party in Ireland might possibly not acquiesse, in such a
peace, as would be fit for the King to make, and then he would have the
scandal of it (for it will be a scandalous one, that is unavoidable) without
the benefit of an assistance from Ireland: to conclude if nothing be done in
Ireland, I think it most necessary that the offers of treating be withdrawn
from thence, and that the Queen may be trusted to Treat and conclude with the
Queen Regent here, with such as the Catholics from Ireland shall appoint.
This I write to you to consider of it, by the return of Sir D: Wyit you shall
know more of this particular. This bearer send back immediately and wri^e
without flattering your self or us, the pure and natural state of affairs.
God of Heaven keep you and give us if he please some other punishment for our
faults, then that of our Countries falling into the hands of these Rebels, I
am most entirely yours.

I have given Petit thirty pounds for his Journey.

The Account.
BOrrowed at Rotterdam of the Burgomasters, 400000 More of the Bank in
Rotterdam, 25000 In all from Rotterdam, 425000 Borrowed of the Bank at
Amsterdam by Mr. Sandys, 84500 At the Hague of Eletcher clftcher. 126000 More
of him, 40000 At the Hague of Van. Cyren, by Sir William Boswell, 900 Of
Monsieur Despernon, 2^0000 Of Webster by three Obligations together on the
Pendant Pearls, 100000 Of him more, 43200 Of him more, and borrowed by him
since 70000 Of Monsieur Vicford, 70000 Of Sir Charles Herbert, 20000 Of
Collimore at Antwerpe, 64000 In all -- 1281700. Guilders. With Webster the six
Rubies of the Chain left for about 20000 To Webster 20000 To the Pr. Orange,
300000
LEtters concerning Ireland from the Lord Digby, Marquess of Ormond, Lord
Iermin and others, And Fitz-Williams Treaty with the Queen about the Irish.
Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. Paris May 18. 1645.
THe Queen has written to the King by this bearer, Colonel Fitz-Willams,
with her own hand, it is the first time she has been able to use her Pen,
since her sickness, which now God be thanked is totally gone, she refers the
King to me for several things, I shall begin with that which concerns this
bearer, who is a brave man, and has served in the wars of this Country with
great reputation, he does persuade himself, that if the Peace be made in
Ireland, that he shall be able to raise there for the King, and bring into
England ten or twelve thousand men, upon the conditions that you will find here
enclosed, signed by the Queen, which he desired his Majesty should Sign for
this end, that the King might see it was her opinion that the King upon this
design of his, should sign some others to him, to the same effect, so that
you are to keep the Paper Signed by the Queen, and to propose to the King the
signing of something to the same effect, if he approve of the business, which
the Queen believes the King will find cause to do, being by the opinion of
many others, knowing in the affairs of Ireland induced to believe so, more
then by the confidence of his undertakings, which yet may pass for someground,
he having upon several occasions already, both for the raising and recruiting
of those Troops with which he has served this State, found himself very
willingly followed by his Conutry-men; You will observe part of his demands to
consist of a considerable body of Horse that must meet at the place agreed on
for his landing, Marquess Newcastle being here, and acquainted with this
Proposition, and foreseeing the landing can only be toward the North in
Lancashire, has believed he might not be an improper person for the conduct of
this body of Horse to this conjunction, and believes further, that the stage
for it being among his friends he may serve useful in it, how reasonably this
is imagined cannot be determined here, for it must rest upon the disposition
that the Kings Troops in general will be in, when the resolution for this
particular shall be taken to determine whether M. Newcastle, or any other may
be fit for the charge of Conducting a body of Horse to this conjunction with
the Colonel, in case the King think fit to set forward the business, and
that he be so fortunate as to go through with it, the Queen does approve of,
but not as a thing to be much relied on, for it is a great thing that will
remain to be done on the Colonels part, if the King should be able on his to
comply with all the demands, which the Queen besieves his Majesty in no estate
for, neither does she think they are demanded so much in hopes of having them
performed, as that the promise should give him means in Ireland, the better to
bring about undertakings, but rather, as that which when it shall fail, if it
disappoint no other enterprise of the same kind more like to produce the
effects aimed at in this, which she hopes you will have a care of, can be of no
inconvenience, and therefore advises you to consider it very seriously, and in
what resolution soever shall be taken, that there be a special care had of
giving the person of the Colonel all sorts of satisfaction, as a man fully
deserving it, and zealously affected to the Kings service, if M. New. should be
thought fit to have the charge of any Troops appointed to join with those he
shall bring, he is well contented all should fall under his command, and he to
command under him, if any other he must be chosen, as that the Colonel may
command him as General, this is as much as need be said to you of this matter.
Pray do me the favor to let the Colonel know I have recommended him to you,
and use him very kindly; I have this night received several Letters form
Holland, which I shall send you by an express within few days, for we grow
very near concluding of all our expectation there, what will be the issue
though as near as we are, no man can tell, and the knowledge of it is no more
of moment in that point, which heretofore was to be considered in it, how much
influence it was to have in the swaying toward an accommodation, or to the
continuance of the War, for it seems the Lot is cast as to that matter, and
if we save not our selves with our swords, there is little other hope of doing
it, the knowledge of it would be of use in another respect, for if the issue
were to be a Declaration of the States, to which would follow that of France^
there would be in that such a reserve of help, and so solid foundation of
strength to carry through with this War, as there would be less necessity of
exposing the fortune of it to frequent hazards, the game might be more securely
played, whereas if now we saw our selves totally without hopes of this support,
may be that would demand more sudden and less seeure trials then else we
should have cause to attempt; For this cause it is a great affliction to me,
that I cannot so soon as I would give you that which might be some guide to
your Counsels, pray believe it is not my fault, since I am not without the
apprehension of the use you might make of it, as you see, and that upon my
word, I am not negligent in it, which I desire you to represent to the King.
The business of the Duke of Lorraine is not in the same state which the rest
are, our hopes of money here, or break with the Duke; The passing over of
them, if it be obtained, will be of so great expense here, that we cannot with
any appearance of suceesse press them for any more supplies of money for Arms
and Ammunition, All I can say is yet gone, is Hasdan^k^ proportions consisting
of 6040. Muskets, 2000. pair of Pistols, 1200. Carabines, 130 Swords, 400.
shovels, 27000. pounds of Match, 50000 pounds of Brimstone, this Brimstone will
I hope enable you in England to make good store of Powder, for Mills,
Saltpeter, Coal, and men that know how to make, may every where be had, 400,
Barrels of Powder I have sent to Dartmouth, having undertaken to pay for it
here, if it be not paid for there, for fear presently there should be want; I
have news of the arrival of 200. of the barrells, and am confident the others
will be very shortly there, and I shall give Callimore such helps for his
effecting last undertakings, that I am confident you shall receive good
quantities of Powder from him^ I shall write to you to morrow by the Ordinary,
and presently after by an Express, therefore now I will hold you no longer.

There is a young Gentleman, one Captain Carteret, a Iersie man, taken
prisoner lately, pray do me the favor to speak he may be examined, he was
lately taken, as I remember near Warwick.

I have spoken to the Colonel to say something to you in a business that
concerns you and me.

I remain Yours.

Instructions to our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Daniel O Neile, Groom of
our Bedchamber. 27. June, 1645.
You are forthwith to repair unto our Ports of Dartmouth, and Falmouth where
you are to confer with Sir Nicholas Crispe, Knight; and with Captain
Hansdonck, or any other owners (...) Shipe or Friggots in our service. You are
to let them know, that whereas by a Clause in their several Commissions, they
are obliged, upon extraordinary occasions of our service to employ their
Frigots for six weekestime, according to our special Commands, we giving them
just payment and satisfaction for the time of their Ships, during the time that
they are so employed by us, we having now at this time such an occasion for
them, as does highly import the good of our affairs, we (...) require them to
have in readiness to expect our Orders, all such Ships or Frigots as can
within a fortnight or three weeks time be set to Sea, for a month or six
weeks service; and that for the present they do send immediately with you
over into Ireland, unto such Ports as you shall direct, all such Ships and
Frigotts as are now fitted and ready there into Ireland, to expect and obey
such Orders as they shall receive from the Marquess of Ormond, We assuring
the owners of the said Vessels, that they shall not only receive full
satisfaction for the time that they shall be withdrawn from their own
employments by this our Command, but that we shall carry the same in mind as
the most acceptable and important service, that they can possible do us. And
we do further Command you, that in case you shall find that more of the said
Frigots then one cannot within very few days be ready, that then you make use
of the nimblest Vessel you can there find, and that whilst the others are
preparing, you forthwith transport your self with all diligence unto the
Marquess of Ormond, there to pursue such further directions as we here give
you, having first advertised us by expresses, what we may rely upon, and when,
concerning the shipping aforesaid expected for our service.

You are likewise to represent unto the Marquess of Ormond the great
Importance to the good of our affairs, that w^^ (...) speedily supplied from
our Kingdom of Ireland, with some good members of fo^t that we^ should be very
glad you could fram^ such a body there so be sent over as might be worthy by
his (...) coming to command it, in which case when we hear from him, we shall
give him our further directions^ but for the present, that no time must be lost
in sending over what numbers can be spared of our old English (...) there: as
well as what may be procured of the Irish together with the best Anti^lerie, as
well for Battery as the field, that the said Marq. of Ormond can assist us
withal.

You are to acquaint the said Marquess of Ormond with the deligence used here
to procure shipping for their Transportation, and what may be relied on of that
kind from hence.

You are to employ your self in soliciting what ayd^s of all kinds may
possible be had from the Irish, according as you shall be instructed by the
Marquess of Ormond, And what by his appointment you shall promise or engage in
our name by way of invitation or encouragement to our service unto any in that
Kingdom, we shall be careful to make good but in this and all things else of
your negotiation there, you are strictly and punctually to govern your self
by such directions as you shall receive from the said Marquess of Ormond and
no otherwise. Of all this, and what we may expect from thence; and when, you
are to give the speediest and punctuallest accounts you can unto our principal
Secretary of States attending.

To the Lord George Digby. 16. July 1645.
My Lord,
I Do not think it very necessary to put my letter wholly in Cipher, having so
secure a Bears as Sir Nicholas Byron; yet have (I suppose) so Cypherd it, as
not to be understood but by your self, at my coming here I find all things
contrary to what your Lordship expected, and much more to the Articles past
between the Queen and me. For in those, free use of Religion a free
Parliament, and the penal Laws to be taken off; This were granted: But there
is only of these a free Parliament granted, and incapacityes taken of, withal
an Article proposed by the Marquess of Ormond and the Council, that no
propositions shall be hereafter made by the Irish Parliament, but such as they
shall now propose at the making of the peace if they can agree, by which I find
the Irish adds many trivialls, which else they would leave out. I have had
some with Marquess Ormond, who tells me ^e never had order from the King to
grant to the Irish either the penal laws to be taken off, or that they should
keep any of the Churches, now in their possession: O^ contraire the restitution
of them is desired back, being the only principal points insisted on by the
Irish. Truly my Lord, had you told me of this before my coming from you, I
could have told you, that in all probability, there would be no peace, having
heard much of the Irish resolutions before ere my coming out of France, and
declared the same unto the Queen, which caused her to condescend that the three
demanded points as by the Articles signed by the Queen to (...) you may see. I
also find by Marquess^ Ormond that if the King instead of referring all things
touching peace to the Marquess of Ormond, do not order the granting of the
said demanded points, viz. free exercise of Religion, a free Parliament, all
penaltyes to be taken off, with such other points, as are already condescended
unto, That the Marquess of Ormond is resolved never to condescend to the
demands of the Irish, and by the Irish, that they are resolved to have them or
perish. I proposed to the Marquess of Ormond the condition the King was in,
and how necessary it was for him to have from the Irish incontinant army from
hence, and how the absolute ruin and destruction of the Irish depended on the
least loss the King should sustain in England for want of army; I said as
much to the Irish, Both have promised me a breife of the obstacles, on perusal
of which I shall quickly discover whether the Irish have, or not, a just
pretense to except against such offers as has been made by the Marquess of
Ormond, on the behalf of the King, and if found satisfactory, I am very
confident you will speedily have what you expect, and the Character the King
the Queen, etc. gave of me will render him to you very serviceable and to etc.
but if things go cross I conceive it were not amiss (if the King intends as
the Queen did) to send what here is mentioned to the Marquis of Ormond, and in
case things be concluded ere its coming, that it may lie dormant else to be put
in use. I have enquired of the particular affairs spoken of, and find all
faiseable: But for the present, there is nothing to be said. If you think fit,
I pray recommend this to him who recommended me to your Lordship. Be also
pleased to present my most humble service to Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice,
and be mindful and desire them according to Prince Ruperts promise, to be so
also of me; touching Titbery, I doubt also by means of it and the helps
offered to me i^ that country to reduce the best part of the M^r^lands for the
King, however affairs goes, I beseech your Lordship to let the King know, that
I will live and dye faithful to him, and to believe that my endeavors shall
ever be, to find occasions to let your Lordship see that I am.

16. of July. 1645. My Lord, The most humble and solely devoted of your
Lordships servant. Fitz-Williams.
The Scots have entered into Connaught destroyed Women and Children, as well as
what men they met, finding no opposition: But Lord Taste is gone with sufficent
force this week to repulse them, the Irish Commissioners are come to Dublin:
and all hope for what is wished. Marquess Ormond is as willing of what was
desired for my Father, as I was, and tells me he has sent to the King for his
Commission of being Privy Counselor, and I shall entreat your Lordship, that
it may be sent by the first of your Lordships packets.



From the Lord Digby to the Lord Iermin.
SInce the writing of my other of this same date in my brother secretaryes
Cipher, I have received yours of the 28. of July in my new Cipher, which over
joys me; and it is as a prediction of good fortune to us, that the Queen
bears our disasters with that moderation. You do now find that clearly true,
which was my opinion before, that our ill successes would sooner warm that
State to our assistance then our good, it being their interest to balance
things here. For Gods sake hasten powder and match in plenty to the Northern
Coast, and what muskets and pistolls you can; but ammunition in the first
place, let them be directed to Burlington or Whitby; for S^arborough is lost,
but yet with some caution as to enquire before they put in, least by any
accident the enemy should have Garrison those places before we come thither.

We are advertised from London that there are some letters intercepted from the
Queen to the King with blanks to be sigued by the King authorizing the Queen
to engage Ireland to the Queen Regent for some aids; I^ any such there be, it
is very unlucky not only for the ill use may be made of it here, but as it may
be resented by my Lord of Ormond, who having committed to him the management of
the affairs of Ireland^ and having discharged that trust so faithfully and
prudently, may think himself injured in such Negociations by the by. God
keep you, and fail not to love him who is entirely.

Yours.
Bridgenorth. Aug. 9.
From the Lord George Digby to the Lord Iermin.
My dear^ Lord,
IT is a great comfort to us to hear by this express, that her Majesty
preserves her health, notwithstanding that trouble of mind which our
misfortunes must needs have given her, and that in stead of despairing, her
Majesty and you do rather improve your diligence to procure us aids, God send
that your hopes may succeed, for my part, I think there is more probability in
that of Denmark for man, now the peace is concluded with the Swedes, and for
money, from Room, then any other way, the business of Ireland has hung long in
suspense, although the King has long since given my Lord of Ormond power to
conclude Peace there, upon the very utmost concession that can possibly be
yielded unto, without causing a revolt, not only of all his party here, but
also such a one of his Army, and all his Protestant subjects there, as would
make it impossible for the Irish to afford us any aids, they would have so
much to do within themselves against those that would not submit to Peace,
upon such terms, the truth of it is, the Irish have proceeded hitherto, as if
they had no good intention; having not been contented with the offers of more,
then their Agents did prosesse to expect, and insisted upon those demands, the
granting of which they could not. but see would be absolutely destructive to
his Majesty, that is the granting unto them the Protestant Churches in such
parishes, where the number of Catholics was greater, that is in effect all
through Ireland. And whereas you write, that perhaps my Lord of Ormond is not
the fit person to conclude that business, but that the mannagement of it
should be remitted to the Queen, I am much afeard, that the expectation of that
in the Irish, has much retarded the hoped for issue of the Treaty, but God be
thanked we received men; Now the certain news that the Peace there is
concluded, and that an Express from my Lord of Ormond is upon his way from
Chester, with all the particulars, the utmost extent of my Lord of Ormonds
power to grant was, the suspention of Poy^ings act, as to the passing of such
Bills as should be first agreed on; The repeal of the penal Laws, and the
allowing the Papists some Chapels in private places for the exercise of their
Religion, but you may not take notice that he had so large a power, for happily
he may have obtained a Peace upon a better bargain, thus much for that
business; his Majesty approves very well of the course proposed by you for
such aids as may be obtained from Denmark, but above all things, let the
matter of money be labored in, for without some competent stock of that
against the next Spring, it will be impossible for us ever to have a resourse
again. My former Letters will have acquainted you with our progress since our
retreat from Wales, and the reasons of it, and I make no doubt but you will be
satisfied, that the Kings business has been as well conducted in that
retreat from Wales and since, as the desperateness of our condition could
admit of, and that in fine, we are likely to have gained the only thing we
could hope for, which was to preserve his Majesty's person safe, till the
season of the year should secure him in any of his principal Garrisons from
the danger of a Siege; It Is true, I could have wished that the Rebels had given
us some leisure, either in the North, or at Huntington, where we have done them
some mischief, and gained some reputation, and not obliged us to go to Oxford
yet this fortnight, but pressing us as they have done, and do, it is not ^o be
avoided, but I hope it is not possible, that they can any ways endanger Oxford
before the Winter relieve it; You write to me to tell you freely our condition
without flattering you or my self, you will find in my Letters of late,
especially by Porter, that I have not been guilty of that fault, nor shall I
now, but the freedom which I shall at this time use in stating to you the
greatest mystery of our misfortunes, I desire may be received by you, as the
breathings out of my soul unto my dearest friend by way of prediction. It is
most true, that as desperate as our condition seems, I have no apprehension,
but that having got thus far in the year, we shall be safe till the next,
from any further great mischiefs, and that probably by helps from Denmark and
Ireland, and moneys from you, our quarters being well managed for the
preservation and recruite of our remaining Forces, we may possibly have a fresh
and hopeful resourse the next Spring; these hopes I am confident the condition
of our business it self will bear, would the humors of our own party bear
the patience; But alas, my Lord, we must not expect it, there is such an
universal weariness of the war, despair of a possibility for the King to
recover, and so much of private Interests grown from these upon every body,
that I protest to God, I do not know four persons living besides my self and
you, that have not already given clear demonstrations, that they will purchase
their own and (as they flatter themselves) the kingdoms quiet at any price, to
the King, to the Church, to the faithfullest of his party, and to deal freely
with you, I do not think it will be in the Kings power to hinder himself
from being forced to accept such Conditions as the Rebels will give him, and
that the next news you will hear, after we have been one Month at Oxford
will be, that I and those few others, who may be thought by our Counsels to
fortify the King in firmness to his principalls, shall be forced, or torn
from him; and you will find the prime Instruments, to impose the necessity upon
the King of submitting to what they and most of the Kings party at Oxford shall
think fit. Truly I have great confidence in the Kings virtue and steddines,
and I am much improved in it by this enclosed Letter which he wrote in his great
distress in Wales, upon occasion of declaring unto him there was nothing left
for him to do but to seek conditions, I protest to God I knew nothing either of
the letter or the occasion til a good while after it was sent, but having then
gained a sight of it I got leave to communicate a copy of it only to the
Queen, and to your self. My dear Lord, I shall add no more at this time but
only to conjure you, first to believe that if I have any truth or honor in me,
I have not the least unfriendly thought in the world toward any mentioned or
poynted at in this Letter more then purely in relation to the Kings service,
and in the next place that though I stand single against all the world, I shall
not vary a tittle from those foundations of justice and right to the honor and
interest of my gracious Master and Mistress which I have professed my self
built upon, and that I will in spite of the world carry to my grave the honor
of a servant entirely faithful and unbiast, and of being worthy that happy
relation to you of your best friend. And faithfullest friend. Ascot August 7.
1645.

Denbigh this 26. of September. 1645.
My Lord,
I Have received your Excellencies dispatch by Si^ Nicholas By (...) and h^s
Majesty commands me to return you his full (...) no^ all you procedings in the
(...) of Ireland, of which h^s ^ajesty is very mpaiently desir^s t^ he^re the
issu ^his affairs dpending so highly upon it, being by the strange delivery up
of Brist^ll by Prince Rupert after so many other misfortune brought to so low a
condition as were it not for the ^arqu^ss of Men^rosse suc^esse, and hopes of
assistance ou^, o^ Ireland we should almost despair, his Majesty conc^ives that
the reducement of Scotland to his obedience will have two ^or^ble effects o^
advantage in order to Ireland, the on, of making the Sco^ts there (...) to the
peace, the other of affording s^fe transpo^tation and landing in Scotland to
such ^orces as may he had from Ireland, which it would be almost impossible to
transport with any ^afe^^y into England. I have wr^tten to my Lord Marqu^sse of
Montrosse upon both t^ere subjects, your Excellen^ie ^ill be P^eased to
corr^s^ond with him and to agree upon pa^ti^ulars, since we must s^tt up all
rests to make a strong Wa^re upon the R^bells this ^inter in which their London
forces will be ^ardly kept from their homes and if we give them leisure till
^he next spring they will swarme^ against us; As for what conc^^es your
Excellencies own ^erson his Majesty persists i^ his earnesft desire to have
you here, for in good faith without flattery we care likely to (...) more want
of such a general then of an army, and Prince Ruperts^en (...) power, has
made way for you Excellency to be hear in such condition^ may be for your
honor, where you will he sure to have this comf^t of high value in his majesty
to your person, and of an entire affection to (...) in all those that have the
honor to b^neere him, and in no man living mo^e (...)

Your Excellencies most humble servant,

to the Marquess of Ormond.
This enclosed relation of our condition will let you see the danger of
Chester, which is somewhat more then is there expressed through want of ^owder;
your Excellency is conjured to hasten over some supply thither of Ammunition,
and if possible of men, you know the great importance of that place in relation
to Ireland.

The Act transmitted hither, which your Excellency mentions, was unfortunately
taken by the Rebels, as it was carrying to Oxford, be pleased to direct how it
may be supplied.



Fitz Williams Propositions about the Treaty with the Queen, to bring Irish
into England.
Colonel Fitz Williams humbly prays, and propounds as follows.
THat your sacred Majesty will vouchsafe to pr^vaile with his Majesty to
condescend to the just demands of his Irish subjects the Confederate
Catholics in Ireland, at least in private, that upon the consideration
thereof, Colonel Fitz-Williams humbly propounds and undertakes with the
approbation of M. Hartogan now employed Agent for the said Confederate
^atholiques is Ireland, to bring an Army of 10000. men or more, of the kings
subjects in his kingdom of Ireland, for the kings service into England.

That Colonel Fitz-Williams undertakes for the sum of 10000 pounds sterling,
to lev^, ship, and arm the s^id ten thousand men, and so proportionably for
more or less and that the said moneys may be paid into such hands as may be
safe for your Majesty, as well as ready for the said Coll. when it shall
appear the said Army, shall be in readiness to be transported into England.

That upon the landing the said men, there shall be advanced to the Colonel, one
months pay for all the Army according to the master for the present support of
the Army. That Coll. Fitz-Williams may be Commander in chief thereof, and
dispose of all the officers, and only be commanded by the King Prince,
and...... and qualified with such benefits, as have bin formerly granted unto
your Majesty's Generals That have commanded bodies apart from the Kings own
Army, as the Earl of Kingston and others whereby the better to enable him in the
Levies as we^l as in the General conduct of the business. And that in respect
the Order gives no power to the Irish: therefore that the said Forces shall not
by any order what soever be divided, at least that the Colonel may be supplied
with a body of... two housand, to be ready at the place of landing. That the
Coll. may be provided with Arms and Ammunition or with money requisite for
himself to provide necessary proportions for to bring with him: That the Army
shall be paid as other Armies of the King.

Having taken these Propositions into consideration, we have thought fit to
testify our approbation and agreement thereunto under our Sign Manual,
assuring what has been desired of us therein shall be forthwith effectually
endeavored, and not doubting to the satisfaction of the Confederate
Catholics of Ireland and of the said Colonel, so that we may justly expect
an agreeable compliance, and performance accordingly from all parties in their
several concernments.

Henriette Marie.

Several Letters between the Lord Iermine and the Lord Digby, concerning
Provisions of Men and Arms, to send Forain Forces into England, and to the
Earl of M^^tr^sse in SCOTLAND.
Lord Jermin to the Lord Digby.
St. Germain 11. August.
I Write this only not to omit one week, for until the next occasion I can say
nothing from hence; for without prophesying it is impossible to tell what will
be the event of some things that are promised; now that which takes away my
pain, is, that vain expeetations were never less dangerous; for if we had
none in the world, I see no way open to Treat, in the condition we are in,
though yours of the 6 of July be very cheerful: the Q. of England is in
perfect health; the Q. Regent came last night at 9 a clock to Supper to her,
and returned to Part at a 11. Card Maz. will be here to morrow, he is full of
professions of desire to serve the Queen importantly, which now I observe, for
that they are renewed on his part, since the necessities on ours. This is all I
have to say: I am yours.

Lord Jermin to the Lord G^o. Digby.
St. Germain, 14. Aug.
I Have received yours of the 30 of June, and since the news of a defeat the
Lord Gering has had in the West; that, and the advance of the Scotch, makes us
fear we are in very ill estate, but the Game must not be given over: on the
contrary now is the time to redouble all kind of industry, and that will be
the Queen^ rule; (...) hast^n^ what she can supplies of Powder and Arms to the
West. swed^^ provisions are Embarked, but he himself I think will be ^ear
another way, if he will be persuaded, for I have now sent back for him hit her.
The Peace is made between the K. of (...) and the Swed^^ which will put the K.
of (...) in a condition to help us: perhaps he may be able to send us an
Army, which now that all the Rebels Forces are drawn West and Southward,
(landing in the North) might give a new turn to all: So that in the first place
he is to solicit that business. If no such Force can be obtained, he is to
solicit for as many as he can get, those Horse, and some Foot, with Arms and
Ammunition, and land them all in Scotland: for it appears that all the M. of
Montrosses Victories will be but fruitless, until he be helped with more men
out of Ireland, or some other Part; and himself in his Letter to me, says,
That men were his greatest want. The Queen sends Petit to you tomorrow. I have
no more to say; I am yours.

Lord Jermin to the Lord Geo. Digby.
St. Germain, 22 August.
THe expectations here of relieving the King are so uncertain, that I dare not
yet say any thing of them; and besides, in effect they are not to be relied on.
I write now, being I would omit no week, the news from England is so
desperately ill, that there scarce seems to be any resource left, but from
abroad. I will not believe it possible there can be so great an error
committed, as to leave any way unattempted for the Irish Peace, and men from
thence. Cocker a^ is gone to Denmark instructed amply, and I dare boldly assure
you, with all that can be useful to him. France and Holland are daily tried,
our duties are done, though little fruit appears of it. All the Provisions for
the West that could be procured are gone, and to M. Montrosse, to the value of
10000 pounds sterling: next week I shall write more largely. God keep you. I
am entirely yours.

The Lord Jermin to the Lord Geo. Digby.
St. Germain, Aug. 25.
WE have received nothing this week from you, but find by other advertisements
the King is still in Wales recruiting his Army: I see no danger of perishing
before the Winter comes into our Relief, at least, if our own Party be not
totally forsaken of their hearts and hands; for if there remain amongst them
either understanding or courage, they will perceive how ill a bargain they
must make with their Enemies at this time, if they fall into their hands by any
way whatsoever. I am now most confident if we hold out till next Spring,
between this and that we shall find powerful Forain succors. The design of --
of which I have often written to you, may now in my judgment be reckoned upon,
for we have the Money ready, the persons of the same mind, and all the
difficulties raised that be in the way^ and the business in as good advance as
was possible; since we got the money, there is good reason to expect that
within tow Months (they are promised sooner) we shall have --. This in it self
may prove a great thing, but it is considered how it looks upon the condition
of our Affairs, that are very unlike to receive but by ^ Forain assistance,
which reasonably is not to be helped without securing their passage, nothing
sure can appear so necessary for us: therefore pray take great care that there
be no delay in the dispatch of all things belonging to it, when there shall be
recourse to you in that behalf. I omit to tell you more particulars of this
business, both in what estate it is, and how it has been retarded; but weekly
now you shall be advertised. I hear there is some stop in the Treaty between
Denmark and the Swedes, so that I fear will frustrate Cockerams negotiation,
of which else I should hope very well. The Arms that went form hence to the M.
of Montrosse, are arrived at Hamborough, and I hope are re-imbarqued from
thence, Cockeram would have them go that way: we have no news yet of those
sent to him from Holland; what we are to expect from hence as toward a
considerable succor (I mean of a body of men) is to be attended until the end
of their Campaign; for I confess I am so far abused in the business, as to
believe it is equally hard to say we shall obtain no such thing, as to assure
it now; for without doubt there is no desire here to see the Monarchy of
England devolve into another Government, and there is as little doubt that
there are strong inclinations for the persons of the King and Queen, and desire
to contribute to their re-establishment; the humbling of the House of Austria,
the beating them during the war, or making a glorious peace, I confess are
passions that prevail more, and it is no wonder, in the mean time we receive
great courtesies. The Queen is most civilly and kindly used in all; one thing,
her Pens^on duly paid, 12000 Pistolls they give lately, for the Arms for the
M. Montrosse, and the Powder should be sent into the west; 10000 more they have
now given for the Ship^, which design is infinitely approved by them; and I
doubt not but they will give the other 10000, that the setting them forth will
come to; if they should fail, it will be otherwise provided. The Queen of
England has given us a sharp alarm of another distemper like her last, but the
fear is vanished almost after three fits, but being young in apprehension of
one third, she dares not write her self. I am entirely yours.

Pray send me word whether the Barony passed to Mr. Hemflet be an English
Barony, and to descend upon his Son by my Lady Stanhop; if not, you are to move
the King for the, Barony of W^^ton for that son: this is a business in which
the Queen was engaged in Holland, upon the important services she received from
Hemflett, and she will be very earnest with the King to have done. Pray send an
answer to this.

Let the business of the Fleet be kept with all secrecy.

Several Letters from his Majesty and the Lord Digby, to her Majesty.
The Lord Geo. Digbies Letter to her Majesty.
Madam,
WE live here in great disquiet, till we hear how your Majesty has digested
our late misfortune, God be thanked we have lost already the sharp sense of
it. We have had many little successes since, and are likely to find our selves
now within one fortnight in a posture fit to have a day, for all which
certainly the Rebels will give us in the West, whither they have drawn all
they have, even the Scots themselves; force us to fight probably they cannot
till we are ready for them: and I believe as we shall order the matter, they
will be likely to waste for want of Provisions, whilst we increase in numbers
from VValis. I have writ to my Lord Iermin at large of the state of our
Affairs here, of which I reckon the Clubmen not to be the least comfortable
part: And this bearer Mr. P. Rogers passing through the West; where every day
may beget great alterations to the better, will bring your Majesty the
freshest intelligence from thence, he is a modest and discreet young man, and
certainly will deserve your Majesty's encouragement. I believe by this time
your M^j^sty hears much noise from London of the Papers taken in the Kings
Cabinet, it was unfortunately and heedlesly lost, to leave so precious things
in a VVagon; I thank God I lost none of mine; it will certainly be fit for your
Majesty to consider, and to give your advise how we should behave our selves
now, as to the avowing of those Forain Treaties, which can be no longer a
secret, especially that of the Prince of Orange, in case our late disaster has
not cooled his affection to the alliance; it will also be necessary the true
Copies of all those Letters which have past between the King and your Majesty,
be transmitted hither with all possible speed, for it will be impossible to
answer and allay those scandalls which they will raise from them without that
help, but with it, if the King has writ nothing but what I have had the honor
to be trusted with, I am confident there is nothing in them but will hear a
very fair construction.

I am commanded by the King to repeat unto your Majesty, although I writ it
formerly at large unto my Lord Iermin, that in what concerned Sir Io.
Greenvills being made of the Princes Bedchamber, the King would not have let
the Prince have his will in it, although the young Man be the most meriting in
England, had not the Princes engagements been so public, as that it could not
have been refused him without such an affront to his Highness in that place,
as must needs have drawn great dishonor upon him, and great inconvenience to
his Majesty's service. I must not conclude without humbly acknowledging your
Majesty's great Justice in your contempt of those scandalls which his Majesty's
enemies have endeavored to cast upon me; unto which I shall only say thus
much more, that I have been so pure a Virgin in point of my integrity to His
and your Majesty, that I thank God, no body yet ever durst ask me a question
as to my own Interests. And as for any private negotiation, you may be sure I
shall never proceed in any, but with your Majesty's preceding approbation, be
it upon terms never so just, nor shall I though with your consent, ever vary
from those principles which you have by you in a paper drawn by me, and
presented to you, when you were pleased to engage certain persons in the
highest trust of the Kings and your service; this confidence I beg of you as to
the public, and another in what concerns matter of advantages and favors of
my Master, that as for my self and nearest friends, I will never accept of any
but by your Majesty's kindness and generosity as well as the Kings; so for any
other, I will never have the share in the procurement, but according to what I
shall understand more then conjecturally to be most aggreable (...) your
Majesty's pleasure. Madam, whilst you have this relyance upon my entire
dedication of my self to your Majesty, no worldly accident can make unhappy,

Regland July 10, 1645. Madam, Your Majesty's most humble, and most faithful
Creature. O

SIR,
Mischief will never cease to be active, for some amongst you concurring with
others here, are endeavoring to serve Lord ^^ring such another dog trick, as
they did hope to have put upon your Lordship not long finee: but may their
success be such as formerly it was, I hope the work and merit of that man is
so well known to those in whose power it is only to prejudice him, that it
shall not be in such as these to work his ruin, which will be but a preamble
(if I can presage any thing) to your general destruction. In my last, I did
intimate somewhat concerning Irish; I did it not out of any ill will, God knows,
I bear to them, but out of my zeal to his Majesty: I wish it may not be true,
for indeed I fear it. A strong Argument is but lately suggested unto my
reason, the Rebels have granted 2000 then to the assistance of Spain in
Flanders; all the world may see that by this action they must needs displease
both the French, Portugalls, Holland States; into which fires they would not
thrust themselves you may be certain, had they not strong assurances of some
present benefit, greater in consequence to their affairs in hand, then all the
other can be prejudicial to it; and seeing the lowness of the Spanish
condition, and the symptom of ruin on all sides attending chat Crown, it is
easily resolved what they build upon. And that Spain does assure them for this
assistance they will take of the Irish from his Majesty in this time of
exigence, which it is possible they may effect, considering the present Pope is
Spanish, and has an Ambassador in Ireland, who bears the greatest stroke in
those affairs; and who, if you will do any thing effectual, there must
chiefly be wrought upon. I wonder at the (...) of those with the King, that sit
at the Helm, and yet tolerate and countenance (if not reward) so many persons
whom they cannot but palpably see marchcounter to his Majesty's prosperity. It
is not now a time to dally, Courtship must be laid aside, and the surest course
be taken to preserve that which is already brought into such a desperate
condition. I have not been silent heretofore concerning Pr. R. Pr. R^p^^.
and I cannot choose but smilingly consider the posture you are in, I mean your
Grandees when they are all overtop't and stamped upon already by one; I have not
forgot the time I saw him --. We have had a strong report concerning D. Hamb.
escape from Pendennis, as also of the revolt of that place; which because I was
conscious of some practices on foot to that purpose, I was half prepared to
believe, till this day I was certified that it was yet a fiction, which though
I am glad on, I cannot omit to tell you that it seems to me (I pray God it
prove not so to others) inco^sistent with policy to permit so guilty a person
in a possibility of surviving his punishment and redoubling his former villainy;
for it is most certain, there is none can equally prejudice his Majesty if he
escape, and the -- is not unpossible to be wrought upon, for to my knowledge ^e
favors deeply of the Puritan: And by the way, pray give me leave to tell you
it is not the least disadvantage amongst many others to his Majesty in the
prosperity of his affairs, and affections of his people to give private
Governors such absolute and almost uncontrollable indefinite power over the
rest of their fellow Subjects within their jurisdiction, which they exercise
with so much o^^nipotence and indiscr^^t Regality, for the most part to their
own ends and profit, that it is a miracle if this be continued, if the people
retain any sense of loyaley and duty to his Majesty who permits it. Many did
suppose, and those none of the weakestmen, that upon the late Defeat, his
Majesty would seriously take to heart the many great and irregular Errors
hitherto admitted; and in order to his future recovery, have made a through
reformation: which last, till it be done, the first can never be expected.
Above all, for the manage of War recourse is to be had to the Council of the
ablest and best resolved men, and they Courted in stead of such Non^das as have
for the most part hitherto been looked upon: If you desire me to point at any,
Sir Ken. Digby will do it for me: Sir Ken. Digby.
In his late published Treatise, he will tell your Lordship that 120. 64. 2.
12. 25. 8. 70. is a generous and knowing man, a complete soldier both in
Theory and Practice. And I will tell you, there is not a more sincere,
honorable and fast friend, or one more easily obliged. In fine, I have erred
much in that conversation which formerly I have had with him, if there be three
in Europe greater Masters of the Art of War, and fitter for a General
Commander, or at least to moderate a Council of War, in matters of action, I
mean, and the manner of execution; as for Design, I do believe him not so
excellent. There is a whisper of Lord Astly his employment, which indeed does
much recreate me, and make me hope such men will now be looked upon. Sir John
Digbies death afflicts me greatly, and grieves me more to consider how sadly
it will fall upon you. The Match with the Pr. of Orange which I hear talked
of, if it were seriously effected, might possibly for the present add
something to the exigence of the condition, though little to the Honor of our
Nation. But I believe there is so much juggling in Holland, that they are
nothing less then in earnest in desiring to do you good; and considering his
Majesty's lowne^^ will not adventure to Match, if it must be an engagement to
involve them in your quarrel; to which God grant a happy issue, for indeed I
fe^re it. I send you here enclosed some Predictions which 2000 sent me from
378. 100. I must confess, though they create no faith, they add somewhat to
my doubts; wherefore I cannot ch^fe (...) communicate them with you, that you
may pass your (...) them, and till me freely what you think; for (...) are
both ancient and authentic. The Parliament sent an extraordinary reward to
Strickland in Holland, it seems he has done them good service there. The Danes
have concluded a Peace with the Swedes, and given him Norway, with two Danish
Counties for performance of Covenants. In Malta the Spanish Knights set upon
the Portugalls, who being assisted by the French, massacred all the Spanish,
Bo^^brook in Flanders is surrendered to the French, and they go to besiege
Bergen (...)ocks. There is news in Town the Iri^^ have taken Youghall, and are
gone to Cork. Montreull is newly arrived here from France, and is going for
Scotland, the Plot is to unite France and Scotland as formerly, and as some
say, to disjoyn the Scots and English, as now they are ^oyned. The first I
believe, and as for the second, I cannot think it is desired, however
pretended by the French, who have already devoured this Kingdom in their
hopes. 2000 bids me tell you, till his Majesty is in a more hopeful posture,
(...) will adventure to do nothing. Savil is still playing blind-man-buffe,
and when we have served our ends of him, it is like, we shall make a Pageant of
his greatness. I have no more now to wish unto you, then that this may come
safe, to assure you that I will never desist to honor you, but still remain

August 8. 1645. For ever yours. D

401. (That is Walsingham.)
My Lord,
JUst now I received yours of the 10. by Parsons, and because I expect back
from London this evening, do now prepare against his coming, determining so
dispatch him immediately for the Court. In my last I signified that (...) a
month after the date, brought yours of the (...) of July, with the first order
in behalf of my Co^en (...), to which the Governor has given an absolute
de^iall, contemning both the authority of his Majesty and Commissioners, and
said to diverse he weighed it not a straw, with more to that effect: two days
since, when Sir John went to solicit the Lords to releeve him one way or
other, Colonel ^lague was accidentally present, and said, Both the Lords and
Governors might be highly ashamed to let such a man suffer; adding, that had he
known of his wants, he would one way or other have supplied him, and now
offered if their Lordships would please to assign any place for him, he would
take care of it, and bring it in; the Governor Interposed and said, all places
were disposed of, endeavoring what lay in film to hinder it; what will be the
issue I know not; but I am certain in the interim he is brought to g(...)
want. In my last, I signified what constructions was already made here of your
going to the North to your Lordships disadvantage; the report of going into
Ireland was never plied so as now; your voyage into Scotland is breathed out by
the Lord Portland, who every day exalts his malice to a higher key; it was his
brother, who; together with P. R. gave birth to the first; and himself who
gives life and authority to both. In good earnest, if some timely course be not
taken, you will find him a dangerous man, his absence is no less necessary,
then those that are in France already; this any Lady commanded seriously to
recommend unto you, that person when he has brought the Faction here to a
maturity, is resolved to go to the West, what the consequence of that will
be, I need not intimate; his brother deserves strict observation and notice,
for he gives continual notice of what happens at Court, worthy the knowledge
of the Junto here; and is as it were the Spy upon you there. Here has been a
solemn expectation of P. R. these 3 days, and great jollity God knows amongst
the Cumberlanders; but why they expect still, I know not. Something is
lamenting here concerning Ireland, and P. R. but what it is, I dare not yet
affirm, because I have hold only of the skirts of it, and have not made a full
discovery, it is I think either about his going, or at least ^ending some body
to comply with them. The Junto had a meeting last night, where it was resolved
good use might be made now against you with the Irish, upon occasion of your
late Letter, if it be well followed and the best use made of it, and that P. R.
may upon that ^ooting take new occasion to ingratiate with them; whe^^fore it
was resolved either he or some friend should by Letters endeavor to operate on
some person of repute there, some think it is Coll^nel Pr^^^^, if him, they
lose their labor, he will not be jugled withal. Thrice within this few days
here has been a Woman from Broon with the Governor: I can by no means learn
the bo^^esse, though I much distrust it, but there is no remedy. I had almost
forgot to tell your Lordship that the men here have resolved lately to get into
Mr. Ashburnhams bosom by one means or other; for the Junto holds him a very
necessary person for their ends, and therefore must be laid hold of; but one of
them affirms him to be a slippery piec^, and dangerous to build upon. From
London I have nothing till C. come, who if he bring any thing of moment, I will
add it. I have sent your Lordship a Copy of my Letter directed lately to the
Lord Herber^, ver^atim, as I sent it by London, as the speediest and surest
way: Mr. Brasile mentioned in it, is a very able honest man, and of authority
and repute amongst the Irish, the two mentioned in the latter end, are
Marquess A^trim, and the Lord St. Albans. Here are strong reports the Irish
are landed, which if true, they are honest, we are happy. My Lady commands me
to put your Lordship in mind of Mr. Sutton, whom the Lady Cob^am has so often
recommended unto your Lordship. I must not omit Monsieur Du Boys who is now
coming toward you, he has been long sick here, if you please to countenance
or employ him, you will find him faithful, grateful, and very useful, as
dare assure you, my Lord,

August 16. Your Lordships humble Servant 401.

POSTSCRIPT.
I have sent you the last of the Independents, which will show you how
necessary a supply is. C. is not yet come, I know not what to think, to London
he would go, and what stays him there I cannot imagine, wherefore I am forced
to send by this. Sherborne still holds out, I really believe without any great
danger, not withstanding some course Reports.

August 21.
His Majesty's Letter to the Queen.
Dear heart,
BY Sobrans conveyance (whom I dispatched Sunday last) I hope before this can
come to thee, thou will receive three Letters from me; who although he
condemns the Rebels procedings as much as any, yet he declares in his Masters
name a positive Neutrality, so that either he complies not with his
instructions, or France is not so much our friend as we hope for. I rather
think the latter; yet I doubt not but thy dexterity will cure that coldness
of friendship; which in my opinion will be the easier done, if thou make the
chief Treat^e for our assistance, betwixt thee and the Q. R. in a familiar
oblieging way; and withal showing all possible respect and trust to those
Ministers whom she most esteems; it being impossible but they must rather
applaud, then dislike thy familiarity with their Mistress, and by it thou
may prevent any tricks they may put upon thee. As for the affairs here, we
are in so good state, that I am confident the Rebels (though all their
strengths are now united) cannot affront us; and when my Nephew Rupert comes to
me (whom I certainly expect in few days) I hope to be able to choose fresh
Winter Quarters, but where, I am not yet resolved, for which occasion and
opportunity must direct me.

FINIS.

